CITY CODE
of
MARLOW, OKLAHOMA
2004
Code current through: Ord. 436, passed 12-16-2019
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
One West Fourth Street  *  3rd Floor  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
___________________________
This code of the City of Marlow, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and
including ordinance 436, passed December 16, 2019.  Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Cincinnati, Ohio
 
PENDING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO 437
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MARLOW, STEPHENS
COUNTY, STATE OF OKLAHOMA, AMENDING THE CITY OF MARLOW CODE OF ORDINANCES, TO
CREATE A NEW TITLE 11, SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS,  TO INCLUDE ARTICLE 11-
1 THROUGH 11-32 ESTABLISHING SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS;
PROVIDING FOR  REPEALER; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
IF BY SEPARATE VOTE THE CITY COUNCIL DETERMINES THAT AN EMERGENCY EXISTS
NECESSITATING THAT THIS ORDINANCE BE DECLARED TO BE EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY UPON
ITS ADOPTION.
 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MARLOW, STEPHENS
COUNTY, OKLAHOMA:
 
SECTION I.      That a new Chapter of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Marlow, to be codified as Title 11, Articles 11-1 through 11-32, is hereby
added and shall henceforth read as follows:
 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
 
11-1      TITLE
11-2      PURPOSES
11-3      DEFINITIONS
11-4      AUTHORITY AND DELEGATION
11-5      APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-6      EXEMPTIONS FROM PLAT APPROVAL
11-7      LOT COMBINATIONS
11-8      BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS
11-9      DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR BLOCKS
11-10      DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR LOTS
11-11      EASEMENTS
11-12      SURVEY MONUMENTS FOR ALL LOTS REQUIRED
11-13   PRELIMINARY PLAT 
11-14      CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
11-15      FINAL PLAT 
11-16      DEDICATIONS OF STREETS AND PUBLIC LANDS
11-17      SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES
11-18      LIMITATIONS ON MINOR SUBDIVISIONS 
11-19      STANDARDS FOR CONFIGURING NEW STREETS
11-20      REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS
11-21      CURB CUTS AND ACCESS SPECIFICATIONS
11-22      STREET LIGHTING
11-23      STREET SIGNS
11-24      CURBS AND GUTTERS
11-25      SIDEWALKS
11-26      PRIVATE STREETS
11-27      DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
11-28      WATER
11-29      SEWER
11-30      UTILITIES   
11-31      OVERSIZING OF IMPROVEMENTS AND UTILITIES
11-32      ADMINISTRATION
 
11-1     TITLE
 
This ordinance shall be known and may be referred to as the Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Marlow.
 
 
11-2     PURPOSES 
 
This ordinance is adopted for the following purposes:
 
Promote the orderly, planned, efficient, and economic development of the City.
Ensure that lands subdivided are of such character that they can be used for
building purposes without danger to the health or safety of residents, and to
secure safety from fire, flood, or other menace.
Prevent the pollution of air, land, streams, and ponds, as well as encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the City, and
preserve the topography and beauty of the community and the value of land.
Ensure the proper provision of improvements such as drainage, utilities, water,
sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, playgrounds,
recreational facilities, and transportation facilities.
Provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the
land.
Establish procedures for the subdivision and re-subdivision of land in order to
further the orderly development of land.
Provide for the proper monuments of subdivided land and proper legal
descriptions.
Help eliminate the costly maintenance problems that develop when streets and
lots are established without proper consideration given to various public
purposes.
Facilitate and inform lot purchasers who generally lack the specialized
knowledge needed to evaluate subdivision improvements and design.
 
11-3     DEFINITIONS
 
Access:  A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property.
 
Access easement:  An easement devoted to vehicular access which affords a
principal means of access to abutting property or properties, but which is not
necessarily open to the general public and which is not necessarily improved to
standards of the City. 
 
Agricultural facility:  Includes, but is not limited to, any land, building,
structure, pond, impoundment, appurtenance, machinery, or equipment which is
used for the commercial production or processing of crops, livestock, animals,
poultry, honeybees, honeybee products, livestock products, poultry products,
timber, forest products, or products which are used in commercial aquaculture.
Such term does not include any farm labor camp or facilities for migrant farm
workers.
 
Agricultural operation: Those practices involving the establishment,
cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation
and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and
poultry management practices; the construction of farm buildings; The plowing,
tilling, or preparation of soil at an agricultural facility; The planting,
growing, fertilizing, harvesting, or otherwise maintaining of crops; The
application of pesticides, herbicides, or other chemicals, compounds, or
substances to crops, weeds, or soil in connection with the production of crops,
timber, livestock, animals, or poultry; The breeding, hatching, raising,
producing, feeding, keeping of livestock, hogs, equines, chickens, turkeys,
poultry or other fowl normally raised for food, mules, cattle, sheep, goats,
dogs, rabbits, or similar farm animals for commercial purposes, but not the
regular slaughtering, or processing of such animals; The production and keeping
of honeybees, the production of honeybee products; The production, of eggs or
egg products; The manufacturing of feed for poultry or livestock; The rotation
of crops, including without limitation timber production; Commercial
aquaculture; and the application of existing, changed, or new technology,
practices, processes, or procedures to any agricultural operation. 
Agricultural operation does not include a roadside stand or agricultural
processing.
Alley: A strip of land dedicated to public use providing vehicular and
pedestrian access to the rear of properties which abut and are served by a road
or street.
 
Block: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely surrounded by
public streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or other
well defined and fixed boundaries.  (See Figure).
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1762.jpg]
 
Comprehensive plan: Any plan adopted by the Mayor and City Council of the City
of Marlow, or portion of such plan or plans.  This definition shall be
construed liberally to include the major thoroughfare plan, master parks and
recreation plan, or any other study, document, or written recommendation
pertaining to subjects normally within the subject matter of a Comprehensive
Plan or General Plan.
 
Conservation: The management of natural resources to prevent waste,
destruction, or degradation.
 
Conservation subdivision: A subdivision where open space is the central
organizing element of the subdivision design and that identifies and
permanently protects all primary and all or some of the secondary conservation
areas within the boundaries of the subdivision.  (Also known as a Cluster
Subdivision)
 
Contiguous common parcels: Parcels adjoining or touching other land at a common
point and having a common owner, regardless of whether or not portions of the
parcels have separate tax lot numbers, or were purchased in different land
lots, or were purchased at different times.
 
Cross-section:  A profile of the ground surface perpendicular to the centerline
of a road, stream, or other feature.
 
Cul-de-sac: A dead-end street of limited length having a primary function of
serving adjoining land, and constructed with a turnaround at its
end.             
 
Cul-de-sac, temporary: A nonpermanent vehicular turn around located at the
termination of a street or alley.
 
Curb radius:  The curved edge of a road at road intersections.
 
Deceleration lane: An added roadway lane, of a specified distance and which may
include a taper, as approved by the City Administrator that permits vehicles to
slow down and leave the main vehicle stream.
 
Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general
and public use or purpose, reserving to himself no other rights than such as
are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which
the property has been devoted.
 
Dedication plat: A plat that indicates property to be dedicated for public
right-of-way or land for public use.
 
Detention:  The temporary restraining of storm water on-site.
 
Detention pond: A pond or pool used for the temporary storage of storm water
runoff and which provides for the controlled release of such storm water.
 
Development: Any manmade change on improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, buildings, structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation, drilling, or permanent storage of materials or
equipment.
 
Development plan: Any plan containing substantial information required to be
filed by this ordinance, which shows how the property to be affected by the
development will be changed and improved in a specific manner, including the
installation of roads and utilities and the erection of buildings and
structures, among other specific requirements.
 
Drainage structure:  A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material
such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from
one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release
point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.
 
 
 
 
 
Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner
to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
(See Figure)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Excavation:  A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been
removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground
surface to excavated surface. Also known as "cut."
 
Fill:  A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been
added; the depth above the original ground.
 
Final plat: The final drawing of a subdivision and, as applicable, dedication,
prepared for filing for record with the Stephens County Clerk, and containing
all elements and requirements set forth in this ordinance.
 
Fire flow:  The flow of water required to extinguish the largest probable fire
served by a water facility.
 
Gated community:  Residential areas containing lots and that restrict access to
roads and spaces.  Gates can include guard houses, electronic arms operated by
card, codes, or remote control devices.  Visitors must stop to be verified for
entry.
 
Grade, natural:  The existing grade or elevation of the ground surface that
exists or existed prior to man-made alterations, such as grading, grubbing,
filling, or excavating.
 
Gradient:  The rate of vertical change between two distance points, determined
by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance (i.e., rise over
run).
 
Grading:  Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition;
this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any
combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
 
Greenway:  A linear park or open space conservation area that provides
recreational opportunities, pedestrian and/or bicycle paths, and/or
conservation of open spaces or natural areas. 
 
Half street: A portion of the ultimate width of a road or street where the
remaining portion of the road or street shall be provided at a future date.
 
Home owners association: An organization formed for the maintenance and
operation of the common areas of a development, where membership in the
association is automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or lot within the
development, with the ability to legally assess each owner of a dwelling unit
or lot and which has authority to place a lien against all dwelling units and
lots within the development. 
 
Impact:  The effect of any direct man-made actions or indirect repercussions of
man-made actions on existing physical, social, or economic conditions.
 
Improvements:  The physical addition and changes to land that may be necessary
to produce usable, desirable and acceptable lots or building sites.
 
Intra-family land transfer:  A division of land within one or more specified
land use districts that creates at least one additional lot but not more than
four additional lots, each of which is not less than one acre nor more than
five acres in size, where each and every lot within the subdivision is conveyed
to the children, spouse and children, surviving heirs, in-laws, or immediate
relatives of the property owner, or some combination thereof, and where no more
than one (1) lot in the subdivision is deeded to any one individual.  Each lot
created in an intra-family land transfer is conveyed by final plat, and each
lot meets the requirements of this ordinance for access, lot size, and lot
width.  This definition shall not include or authorize any land subdivision
that involves or will involve the creation of lots for sale or otherwise
involves a property transfer for money, tangible or intangible personal
property, real property exchanges, or other conveyances for consideration.
 
Letter of credit: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a
subdivider secures an instrument from a bank or other institution or from a
person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by
the City.  The instrument pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements
in case of default by the subdivider.
 
Lot: A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by
description (such as on a subdivision plat of record or a survey map or plat)
or described by metes and bounds, and intended for use, transfer of ownership,
or for building development.  The word "lot" shall not include any portion of a
dedicated right-of-way. 
 
Lot area:  The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive
of public road right-of-ways or private road or access easements, where they
exist.
 
Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection.
 
Lot, depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
 
Lot, double frontage: A lot other than a corner lot that has frontage upon two
or more streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property.
 
 
 
_OLE269A031A27E41134B-img
 
Lot, flag: A tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion
fronting on a street is less than the required minimum width required for
construction of a building or structure on that lot. Such lots have elongated
access from the road and a conventionally proportioned building site at the
rear of the lot.
 
Lot, through:  See “Lot, double frontage.
 
Lot frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way
of any street.
 
Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision approved in accordance with
land subdivision requirements, a plat of which has been lawfully recorded in
the records of the Clerk of Stephens County; or a parcel of land, the deed of
which was lawfully recorded in the same office prior to submission of any
documentation to the City for consideration.
 
Lot width: The shortest distance between side lot lines measured at the
regulatory/required front building line, or in the absence of a front building
line regulation, the distance between side lot lines measured at the front line
of the building located or intended to be located on the lot.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1772.jpg]
 
Metes and bounds:  A system of describing and identifying land by distances or
measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point
of reference, such as a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting
roads.
 
Model home: A principal residential building, temporarily open to viewing by
prospective homebuyers, on property containing or proposed to contain a
residential subdivision, and which may also be used temporarily as real estate
sales office for lots in the residential subdivision.
 
Natural conditions: The flora, fauna, soil and water conditions that would
develop on a specific tract of land if all human interference were to be
removed. The tract of land must have been undisturbed for a sufficient period
of time for natural processes to dominate the tract.  This period of time will
vary among environments.
 
Off-site:  Beyond the boundaries of the property in question.
 
On-site:  Within the boundaries of the property in question.
 
Open space: Any combination of primary conservation areas and secondary
conservation areas, as defined, that together form a permanent, undivided or
relatively undivided, undeveloped area.  As much as 25 percent of the open
space may be devoted to active recreational facilities, as defined.  Easements
for electric transmission lines or any other above ground improvement shall not
be considered open space.  Stormwater management features, such as lakes,
ponds, and ways, may be considered open space at the discretion of the City
Administrator, provided that such areas are designed and maintained in a manner
that contributes to open space and the aesthetics of the subdivision.
 
Open space, public: An area within a development or subdivision designed and
intended for the use and enjoyment of all residents or for the use and
enjoyment of the public in general.
 
Original tract: A unit of land which the owner holds under single or unified
ownership, or which the owner holds controlling interest on the effective date
of this ordinance, where all land abutting said tract is separately owned by
others, not related to or associated by business partnership with the owner.
 
Package treatment plant: A sewage treatment facility, usually privately
operated, typically having a treatment capacity of less than one million
gallons per day.  In most cases, a package treatment plant is considered a
temporary means of wastewater treatment until connection to a public sanitary
sewerage system is available.
 
Pavement width:  The width of a given lane, road, or other road pavement,
measured from back-of-curb to back-of-curb, or to the edge of pavement where no
curbs are required or exist.
 
Pedestrian way: A public right-of-way or private easement across a block or
within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which may, in addition to
providing pedestrian access, be used for the installation of utility lines.
 
Performance bond: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee in the form of a
bond, secured by the subdivider from a bonding company, in an amount specified
by the City Administrator to cover the costs of required improvements, and
payable to the City.  The City may call in the performance bond in the event
the subdivider defaults on required improvements.
 
Performance guarantee:  Any financial deposit or other security that may be
accepted by the City as a guarantee that improvements required as part of an
application for subdivision or land development are satisfactorily completed in
conformance with approved plans. 
 
Person: A natural human being, estate, association, firm, partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity.
 
Potable water:  Water that is suitable for human consumption, human contact, or
in the preparation of foods for human consumption.
 
Preliminary plat: A tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision. A
preliminary plat is the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general
layout of a land subdivision.
 
Planned unit development: A form of development usually characterized by a
unified site design for a number of housing units, clustered buildings, common
open space, and a mix of building types and land uses in a slightly more dense
setting than allowable on separate lots.
 
Professional engineer: An engineer duly registered or otherwise authorized by
the State of Oklahoma to practice in the field of civil engineering.
 
Protective covenants: Contracts made between private parties as to the manner
in which land may be used, with the view toward protecting and preserving the
physical and economic integrity of any given area.
 
Recreation, active: Leisure activities that are facility oriented, such as
swimming pools, tennis courts, and ball fields.
 
Recreation, passive: Leisure activities that are natural resource oriented,
such as hiking trails, conservation areas, and nature preserves.
 
Registered land surveyor: A surveyor duly registered or otherwise authorized by
the State of Oklahoma to practice in the field of land surveying.
 
Reservation:The designation by plat or deed of a certain area reserved for
possible future public purposes.  A reservation does not transfer title of the
reserved area to the public unless the local governing body accepts the area
for public purposes.
 
Resubdivision:  The act of changing an existing lot created by a plat and
recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Stephens County, Oklahoma.
 
Reserve strip: A strip of land across the end of, or along the edge of, a
street, alley, or lot for the purpose of controlling access which is reserved
or held until future street extension or widening.
 
Retaining wall:  A wall or similar structure used at a grade change to hold
soil on the up-hillside from slumping, sliding, or falling.
 
Retention:  The permanent maintenance of storm water on-site.
 
Retention pond:  A pond or pool used for the permanent storage of storm water
runoff.
 
Right-of-way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a
road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar use; Generally, the right of
one to pass over the property of another.   
 
Right-of-way, public:  That area, distinguished from an easement or private
road right-of-way, which is owned in fee-simple title by the local governing
body or other government, for the present or future use of roads, roads and
highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and
structures.
 
Right-of-way, private:  That area, distinguished from an access easement or
public right-of-way, dedicated to property owners of the subdivision involved
or to other individuals, and which affords permanent access to abutting
property or properties. A private right-of-way is distinguishable from a public
road right-of-way in that maintenance and ownership of the road and accessory
improvements is by private individuals or a private association rather than the
local governing body or another governmental entity.
 
Riprap:  Rocks, rubble, or stones, irregularly shaped and at least six inches
in diameter, used for erosion control and soil stabilization.
 
Septic tank: An approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage
from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of
sewerage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or
other management system.
 
Sewer: An artificial and usually subterranean conduit designed to carry off
sewage and/or water.  The term includes any pipe, manhole, connection, or other
appurtenances thereto, located in a public right-of-way or easement that is
designed to transport sewage and/or water.
 
Sewer, sanitary:  A sewer that carries sewage and residential, commercial or
industrial waste.
 
Sewer, storm:  A sewer that carries storm, surface, and ground water drainage
but excludes sewage and residential, commercial, and industrial wastes.
 
Sidewalk: A hard-surfaced pedestrian access area adjacent to or within the
right-of-way of a public road.
 
Site plan: A drawing of a multi-family residential, institutional, office,
commercial, or industrial development, showing the general layout of a proposed
development including among other features the location of buildings, parking
areas, and buffers and landscaping.  The site plan is the basis for the
approval or disapproval of the general layout of a development in the case of a
multiple-family residential, institutional, office, commercial, or industrial
development.
 
Sight visibility triangle: The areas at the corners of an intersection of two
roads, or at the intersection of a road and any driveway, which may vary based
on type of road involved, that are to be kept free of vegetation, trees,
shrubs, ground covers, berms, fences, buildings, structures, or other materials
or objects that may impair or impede a person's ability to observe other
persons or traffic on the adjacent intersecting roadway and/or driveway.
 
Street, Half:  Any street platted twenty five feet (25') or more in width,
where, at the time of the approval of the plat, it is the intent of the city
council that said street dedication shall constitute only a part of the total
street right of way width.
 
Street, Major:  A street or road which provides for through traffic movements
of light and heavy vehicles between or around areas and across the city. 
Access to abutting property may be provided and street or road design speeds
shall exceed 30 mph.

Street, Minor:  Those streets which are used primarily for access to the
abutting property.
 
Street, Opened:  A street shall be deemed to be opened if it is either of the
following:
1.  Available for public uses and maintained by the city; or
2.  Was constructed to city standards and specifications.
 
Street, Private: A 20-feet (minimum) access easement designed and built to City
of Marlow standards and specifications dedicated perpetually for use by
residences/lots.  The city shall be responsible for neither maintenance nor
city services within the easement, and such shall be stated on the plat of
record.
 
Street, Public:  Right-of-way dedicated to the City of Marlow held or owned by
the City for public street purposes.
 
Street, Stub:  A dead-end street at adjoining property lines intended for
future extension to serve the development of adjoining areas.
 
Street, Unopened:  A street or any part thereof shall be deemed to be unopened
if it is not cleared, graded and available for public use.
 
Subdivider: Any person, as defined by this ordinance, who undertakes the
subdivision of land, and any person having such a proprietary interest in land
to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide
such land under this ordinance, or the authorized agent of such person.
 
Subdivision: A division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building
development, whether immediate or future, including all division of land
involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. The
word “subdivision” includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the
context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the actual land or
area which is subdivided.
 
Subdivision, minor: A subdivision of four or fewer lots, which does not involve
the construction of a new public or private street.  Because minor subdivisions
do not involve the construction of a new public or private street, they are
processed administratively by the City Administrator as final plat applications
that do not require preliminary plat approval.  Any improvements to an existing
public street abutting the tract proposed for minor subdivision, or the
installation of utilities along said existing public road, as may be required
to comply with this ordinance, shall be done according to plans and permit
requirements of this ordinance, but said requirements shall not subject the
minor subdivision to the requirements for a major subdivision as specified in
this ordinance.
 
Subdivision, major: The division of a tract or parcel of land into four or more
lots which may or may not involve the construction of a new public or private
street; or any subdivision that involves the construction of a new public or
private street.  Because major subdivisions involve construction of a new
public or private street or the upgrade of an existing private access way to
City standards, construction plans and development permits are required, and
major subdivisions are therefore processed in multiple steps including
preliminary plat approval (unless specifically exempted), approval of
construction plans and issuance of development permits, and final plat
approval. 
 
Trail:  A way designed for and used by equestrians, pedestrians, and/or
cyclists using non-motorized bicycles.
 
Tree:  Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant usually having a single trunk
diameter of three (3) inches or more which normally attains a mature height of
a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.
 
Tree, flowering ornamental:  A tree that produces seasonal flowers and blossoms
and is used primarily for aesthetic or ornamental purposes (e.g., flowering
dogwood; eastern redbud).
 
Tree, hardwood:  Any leaf-bearing (not needle-bearing) tree that is not
coniferous (cone bearing).  This definition is based on the colloquialism, and
does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree.
 
Tree, shade:  A broadleaf tree having an average height at maturity of at least
20 feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding trees with
pyramidal, conical, or columnar crowns) and a dense canopy, so as to provide
shade to structures or parking areas in the summer months.
 
Undergrounding:  The placement of utility lines below ground, with the removal
of above-ground poles, wires and structures as applicable.
 
Utility: Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer
pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel or gas pipelines, telephone lines,
roads, cable telephone line, fiber optic cable, driveways, bridges, river/lake
access facilities, storm water systems and drainage ways, and railroads or
other utilities identified by the City.  As appropriate to the context, the
term “utility” may also include all persons, companies, or governmental
agencies supplying the same.
 
Vacation: The termination of, or termination of interest in, an easement,
right-of-way, or public dedication of land. 
 
Variance: A grant of relief from the strict requirements of this ordinance
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this ordinance or a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of
this ordinance as applied to specific property when, because of particular
physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property,
compliance would result in practical difficulty.
 
Vicinity map:  A map, not necessarily to scale, showing the general location of
the proposed subdivision or land development in relation to major roads,
government boundaries, and/or natural features. 
 
Well:  A hole or shaft excavated, bored, drilled, dug, or driven to tap an
underground supply of water.
 
11-4  AUTHORITY AND DELEGATION
 
11-4.1  Authority.  These subdivision regulations and minimum standards for
land development are pursuant to the authority granted in 19 Oklahoma Statutes
sections 866.12 and 866.13, and 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 41-101.
 
11-4.2  Delegation of Powers to Planning Commission.  The Planning Commission
is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, and
disapprove preliminary plats of major subdivisions, and to grant variances from
the requirements of this ordinance.
 
11-4.3  Delegation of Powers to City Administrator.  The City Administrator is
vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove final plats of minor subdivisions and minor re-subdivisions, lot
combination plats, lot line adjustments, dedication plats, construction plans
and final plats of major subdivisions when preliminary plat approval has been
obtained from the Planning Commission.  The City Administrator shall also be
authorized to review major subdivisions and major re-subdivisions for
conformity to the requirements of this ordinance, and to make reports and
recommendations to the Planning Commission on major subdivisions and major re-
subdivisions, and to administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance.
 
11-4.4  Delegation of Powers to City Engineer.  The City Engineer is vested
with the authority to require and approve land development improvements and to
require improvement guarantees for public improvements as specified in this
ordinance.
 
11-5  APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
11-5.1  Applicability.  This ordinance shall apply to all real property within
the corporate limits of the City of Marlow. 
 
11-5.2  Land is One Tract Until Subdivided. Until property proposed for
subdivision has received final plat approval and been properly recorded, the
land involving the subdivision shall be considered as one tract, or as
otherwise legally recorded.
 
11-5.3  Subdivision of Land.  No person shall sell, advertise, or offer to
sell, by deed, map, plat or other instrument, any parcel of land not subdivided
under the requirements of this ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any person
to transfer or sell land by reference to, or by exhibition of, or by other use
of, a plat of a land subdivision that has not been approved and recorded in
accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.  The description of such
land by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer shall not exempt the
transaction.  No plat of land subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in
the Office of the Clerk of Stephens County, and it shall be unlawful to record
such a plat of land subdivision, unless and until it shall have been approved
in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
 
11-5.4  Development or Improvement of Land.  No person shall disturb or develop
land or engage in development except in accordance with this ordinance. It
shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to disturb or develop any land until
construction plans submitted and development permit, if required, has been
approved by the City Administrator in accordance with this ordinance.  No
person shall begin construction of any improvement on any lot prior to the
approval of a preliminary plat, if required by this ordinance, nor prior to
approval of a development plan for said improvement as required by this
ordinance. The City Administrator shall not authorize or permit the clearance
of trees and vegetative materials, except for grubbing, outside approved
construction limits.
 
11-5.6  Preliminary Plat and Plans Required Prior to Construction.  No person
shall commence construction of any improvements on any lot, prior to the
approval of a preliminary plat if required by this ordinance, nor prior to
approval of construction plans and engineering plans for said improvements are
approved as required by this ordinance.
 
11-5.7  Building and Other Permits.  No building permit or certificate of
occupancy, if required by the local government, shall be issued for a building,
structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance
applications be approved, on any parcel of land regulated by this ordinance
that has not been approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
 
11-5.8  Public Streets and Lands.  No land dedicated as a public street or for
other public purpose shall be opened, extended, or accepted as a public street
or for other public land unless such improvements are constructed in accordance
with the specifications of this ordinance and said land and/or improvements are
formally approved and accepted as public improvements by the Mayor and City
Council in accordance with procedures established in this ordinance.
 
   11-5.9  Appeals.  Any person aggrieved by an interpretation or decision of
the City Administrator or other official responsible for the administration of
this ordinance may file an appeal to the Board of Appeals in accordance with
Section 7-2 of this code.
 
   11-5.10  Special Review of Subdivisions along State Routes.  No subdivision
plat containing land that abuts a state route shall be approved until such plat
has been submitted for review and comment by the Oklahoma Department of
Transportation.  When the City receives such a plat, it shall submit two copies
of the proposed subdivision plat to the Oklahoma Department of Transportation
if such proposed subdivision includes or abuts on any part of the state highway
system. The Oklahoma Department of Transportation, within 30 days of receipt of
the plat, shall recommend approval and note its recommendation on the copy to
be returned to the City Administrator or recommend rejection. Failure of the
Oklahoma Department of Transportation to act within this 30 day period shall
constitute approval. If the plat is recommended for rejection, the reasons for
rejection and requirements for approval shall be given the City Administrator
in writing.  A recommendation for rejection shall be binding on the City
Administrator and the Planning Commission unless the Planning Commission, by
official action recorded in its minutes, overrules the recommendation for
rejection.
 
11-6  EXEMPTIONS FROM PLAT APPROVAL
 
The following types of land subdivisions, transfers, and sales are specifically
exempted from the plat approval requirements of this ordinance; provided,
however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements
and improvement requirements of this ordinance. 
 
The creation and sale of cemetery plots.
The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or
deeds.
The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or
the division of property into leaseholds for commercial, industrial, or
institutional use.
The creation of leaseholds for the agricultural use of property where the use
does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or
for other purposes not directly related to agricultural use of the land or
crops or livestock raised thereon.
Any division of land to heirs through a judicial estate proceeding, or any
division of land pursuant to a judicial partition, or any division of land
occurring from the foreclosure of a deed of trust; provided, however, that such
exemption shall not require the City to issue permits if the resulting lots or
parcels fail to meet any applicable regulations of the local jurisdiction
concerning lot size, lot width, and other dimensional requirements.
Intra-family land transfers and mortgage lots, as defined by this ordinance.
 
11-7  LOT COMBINATIONS
 
An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots
located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that
have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through a
final plat revision process which conforms to the requirements of this
ordinance.  In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a
boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination
shall be required to be approved by the City Administrator and recorded as a
final plat.  Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that
of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the
replat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. (See
Figure).
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1775.jpg]
 
11-8  BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS
One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted
lots located within the same subdivision, or one or more lot lines between
abutting lots or parcels may be adjusted through a final plat revision process
that requires the approval of the City Administrator and recording of a plat
meeting the specifications of a final plat.  In the case no final plat applies
to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots
involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by
the City Administrator and recorded.  Such plat showing said boundary line
adjustment shall be titled with the same name as that of the original
subdivision and shall include thereon that the replat is for the purpose of
adjusting the lot lines between specific lots.  (See Figure)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1778.jpg]
 
 
 
 
11-9  DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR BLOCKS
 
11-9.1  Block Length.  Intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals
so as to provide adequate cross traffic.  Blocks in residential subdivisions
should not exceed 1,800 feet nor be less than 600 feet in length, except where
topography or other conditions justify a departure from these standards.  The
Planning Commission may require pedestrian ways and/or easements through the
block be located near the center in blocks longer than 800 feet.
   
   11-9.2  Block Width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to
allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth.  Blocks intended for business or
industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for
their respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and
deliveries.  (See Figure).
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1781.jpg]
 
11-10   DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR LOTS
 
11-10.1  Natural Features and Assets.  In the subdividing of land, appropriate
consideration must be given to all natural features, such as tree growth,
watercourses, historic sites or similar conditions which, if preserved, will
add attractiveness to the proposed development and safety from hazards.
 
11-10.2  Access and Minimum Lot Frontage.  Each lot shall have access to a
public street and a minimum of 60 feet of lot frontage on a public street;
provided, however, that the local governing body may permit one or more lots to
be accessed by private streets, as more fully specified in this ordinance;
provided further, that in the case of a lot accessed by a circular cul-de-sac,
the minimum lot frontage may be reduced to 30 feet.
   
   11-10.3  Adequate Buildable Area Required.  Land subject to flooding,
improper drainage or erosion, or that is unsuitable for residential or other
use for topographical or other reasons, shall not be platted for residential
use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health,
safety, or of property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are
corrected.  Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to
flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or building setback
lines required by the local governing body.  (See Figure).
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1784.jpg]
 
11-10.4  Lot Remnants Not Permitted.  All remnants of lots below any required
minimum lot size that may be required, left over after subdividing of a larger
tract, must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as
unusable parcels.  The City Administrator may permit a lot remnant for a
specific purpose such as a detention pond, provided that access and design is
appropriate and the lot remnant is restricted to specific non-building use.
 
11-10.5  Service Areas. Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to
provide service areas and off-street parking suitable to the use intended.
 
11-10.6  Lot Area.  The minimum lot area shall not be less than that
established by the land use intensity district in which the subdivision is
located, or any other such ordinance provisions, if applicable.
 
11-10.7  Lot Width.  No portion of a lot shall be narrower than 60 feet, with
the exception of cul-de-sac lots at the street frontage, nor shall any lot have
a lot width less than that established by the land use intensity district in
which the subdivision is located, if applicable.
 
11-10.8  Lot Depth.  Lots shall have a depth of not less than 100 feet, unless
circumstances make these limitations impracticable.
 
11-10.9  Flag lots.
Intent.  Flag lots, as defined in this ordinance, are strongly discouraged. 
However, subdivisions designed with one or more flag lots may be approved where
conditions of hardship make standard design or frontage impossible or
impractical due to the configuration of the lot to be subdivided. 
Denial if reasonable alternative exists.  The City Administrator in the case of
minor subdivisions and the Planning Commission in the case of other
subdivisions shall have due cause to deny any plat that proposes any flag lot,
when a reasonable alternative to such lot pattern is available.
Panhandle (flag pole) length restriction.  If permitted, no flag lot shall be
allowed to be platted that has a “panhandle” portion (i.e., portion that does
not meet the required lot width) that is more than 400 feet in length. 
Prohibition of abutting flag lots.  If permitted, no flag lot shall abut
another flag lot in any subdivision.
 
11-10.10  Side Lot Lines.  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at
right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
 
11-10.11  Corner Lots.  Corner lots shall have adequate width to meet the front
building setback requirements, if applicable, from all rights-of-way.
 
11-10.12  Double Frontage Lots.  Double frontage or “through” lots should be
avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development
from arterials or overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation.
Double frontage lots with frontage on a major arterial street shall have
additional depth in order to allow space for screen planting along the lot line
abutting a major arterial street.
 
11-11 EASEMENTS
 
Where a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream traverses a subdivision,
there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage easement of adequate width. 
Easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities as approved by the City
Administrator.  Where easements, and subsequent maintenance access, are needed
for utility locations, the subdivider shall provide them to the appropriate
utility provider. Where easements are needed for public water and/or sanitary
sewer lines, they shall be provided as determined appropriate by the City
Administrator.  All easements required pursuant to this section shall be shown
on the preliminary plat, if required, and final plat. 
 
11-12  SURVEY MONUMENTS FOR ALL LOTS REQUIRED
 
For all subdivisions, an Oklahoma registered land surveyor shall install
permanent survey monuments at all property corners and land lot lines, prior to
final plat approval.  Lot corners shall be marked with metal rods not less than
1/2" in diameter and 18" in length and driven so as to be stabilized in the
ground. Permanent survey monuments shall also be installed in accordance with
the State of Oklahoma Statutes Regulating Professional Engineering and Land
Surveying.
 
11-13  PRELIMINARY PLAT 
 
   11-13.1  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure compliance with
the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions and land
developments through the submittal of a preliminary plat of all major
subdivisions for review and approval by the Planning Commission.
   
   11-13.2  When Required. All major subdivisions, as defined, shall require
the submission of a preliminary plat to the City Administrator for review and
approval by the Planning Commission. Prior to the issuance of any permit for
land disturbance or development, or the installation of any improvements, the
Planning Commission must approve the preliminary plat, if required. 
   
   11-13.3  Preliminary Plat Application and Specifications.  Preliminary plat
applications shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 1,
and preliminary plats shall meet the minimum plat specifications shown in Table
2.
   
   11-13.4  Procedures.  Upon receipt of a completed preliminary plat
application, the City Administrator shall schedule the application for the next
public meeting before the Planning Commission and forward all pertinent
materials in the application to the Planning Commission for review.  An
application for preliminary plat approval must be submitted as least 14 days
before the regular meeting date of the Planning Commission to be considered on
that agenda. The Planning Commission shall have 45 days from the date the
public meeting is held to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the
preliminary plat application.  The basis of the Planning Commission’s review of
and action on a preliminary plat shall be whether the preliminary plat meets
the purposes and requirements of this ordinance, and all other ordinances that
relate to the proposed development.
   Upon approval, the preliminary plat shall be forwarded to the City Council
for final approval. If denied, the applicant shall have a period of no more
than 60 days to submit a preliminary plat based on the findings of the Planning
Commission per the timing specifications, herein.
 
11-13.5  Disposition. City Council approval of a preliminary plat shall be
valid for a period of one year, after which time a complete construction plans
application must be submitted.  If a completed application for construction
plans is not submitted during that time, preliminary plat approval shall expire
and be null and void. 
 
11-13.6  Amendments to Approved Preliminary Plats.  The City Administrator is
authorized to approve minor amendments to preliminary plats.  Any proposed
amendment to a preliminary plat that is determined by the City Administrator to
constitute a public interest shall be deemed a major amendment.  For all
amendments to preliminary plats determined to be major amendments, Planning
Commission approval shall be required.  The Planning Commission shall approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the proposed major amendment to a preliminary
plat.  Procedures for considering a major amendment to a preliminary plat shall
be the same as required for an initial application for preliminary plat
approval.
 
11-14  CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT 
 
11-14.1  Application.  Upon approval of a preliminary plat, or if no
preliminary plat is required, the subdivider or land developer may apply for
construction plan approval and approval of a development permit.  In the case
of a minor subdivision, or in cases where a preliminary plat is not required by
this article, the subdivider or land developer may apply for approval of
construction plans; provided, however, that in the case of a minor subdivision
or land development the applicant for construction plan approval should hold a
pre-application conference with the City Administrator to ensure that plans
meet the intent and specific provisions of this ordinance and other applicable
regulations.  The construction plan approval and development permitting process
is administrative.  Applications for construction plan approval and development
permit shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 1 and Table
2.  No application for construction plans shall be accepted for processing nor
development permit approved by the City Administrator until a preliminary plat,
if required, has been approved by the Planning Commission and the proposed
construction plans are found by the City Administrator to be in substantial
conformity with said approval and any conditions of such approval.
 
11-14.2  Decision Criteria.  The only basis upon which the City Administrator
may deny a construction plan or development permit is the failure of the
application to meet the requirements of this ordinance or any other applicable
local regulations or the failure of the construction plans and application to
meet the requirements of preliminary plat approval specified by the Planning
Commission.
 
11-14.3  Certificate of Approval.  All copies of the construction plans shall
be noted by inscription on the plan noting such approval by the City
Administrator.  Construction plan approval shall expire and be null and void
after a period of one year, unless activity toward improvements on the land has
been initiated, or unless the City Administrator approves an extension of time.
 
11-14.4  Engineered Drawings.  Engineering drawings for public streets,
including cross sections and centerline profiles, and public and private water,
sewer, drainage, and utility systems, certified by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Oklahoma, or if authorized under state law, a
registered land surveyor, or professional landscape architect, shall be
required to be submitted for review and approval, and such plans must meet the
requirements of this ordinance and the specifications of the City
Administrator.  Prior to approval and recording of a final plat, or prior to
the approval of any certificate of occupancy, if required, a registered
engineer for the subdivider/developer shall submit one copy of all finished,
as-built plans of improvements, demonstrating that said improvements, as
installed, meet the requirements of this ordinance and certifying that the
plans accurately reflect actual construction and installation.  The City
Administrator shall maintain all as-built street and utility plans for future
use by the City.
 
11-14.5  Permits for Construction in Public Right-Of-Way.  Permits from the
City Administrator shall be required for construction in any public right-of-
way.  Permits will not be issued until such time that plans have been submitted
and approved by the City Administrator. 
 
11-14.6  Improvements to Abutting Land.  For subdivisions and land developments
that abut and access an abutting public street, the subdivider or land
developer shall install curb and gutter, sidewalk, other road improvements,
and, if required, a deceleration lane, according to standards and
specifications of this ordinance and the City Administrator, along all abutting
public streets.  When a subdivision or land development uses an unpaved public
right-of-way for access, the subdivider or land developer shall improve that
right-of-way to a pavement width consistent with City road design standards. 
Said improvements shall be from the subdivision or land development entrance to
the paved City road which the City Administrator determines will be the primary
direction of travel for residents of the subdivision or occupants of the land
development.
 
11-15  FINAL PLAT 
 
11-15.1  When Required. All major subdivisions, resubdivisions, minor
subdivisions, and dedications shall require final plat approval. The final plat
approval process is administrative.  Applications shall be made in accordance
with requirements shown in Table 1. 
Table 1
Application Requirements
 
 
                                    MAJOR SUBDIVISION
REQUIREMENT       MINOR SUBDIVISION Preliminary Plat Construction Final
                                                     Plans        Plat
Pre-application   Recommended       Required
review with staff
Application form                    Required         Required     Required
completed
Letter requesting
approval with
name, address,                      Required
and phone of
applicant
Number of copies  4                 8                8            10
of plat
Filing fee per    Required          Required         Required     Required
schedule
Description of
type of water
supply and        Required          Required         Required     Required
sewerage system
and utilities to
be provided
Soil test for
each lot proposed
for on-site       Required          Required         Required     Required
septic tank and
drainfield
Data on existing                    Required
conditions
Hydrological or
other engineering Per City Engineer                  Required
study
Subdivision
entrance monument                                    Required
and landscaping
elevation/plan
Warranty deed for
the dedication of                                                 Required
streets and other
public places
Written approval
from electric
utility company
regarding                                                         Required
installation of
service points
and street lights
As-built drawings
of public                                                         Required
improvements
Subdivision
improvement                                                       Required
guarantee
Certificate of    Required                                        Required
title
Plat Certificates Required                                        Required
 
 
11-15.2   Criteria for Approval. The City Administrator may grant final plat
approval if the following conditions, as applicable, are met. 
 
The Planning Commission and City Council has previously approved a preliminary
plat of the proposed subdivision, if required (not required for minor
subdivision).
Where new improvements are involved in the subdivision, construction plans have
been approved by the City Administrator, all improvements have been installed
and inspected by the City Administrator, and subdivision improvement guarantees
as required by this ordinance have been submitted.
The final plat meets all applicable requirements of this ordinance.
A complete final plat application has been submitted, including all supporting
materials required by this ordinance for final plats.
 
The City Administrator shall consider final plats and applications that meet
the above-referenced conditions a ministerial action of approval.  Denial of a
final plat shall be permitted only upon specific findings that one or more of
the above-referenced criteria have not been met. 
Table 2
Plat and Plan Requirements
 
 
REQUIRED INFORMATION
(Required to be on                           Construction           Final
the plat              Preliminary Plat       Plans                  Plat
or construction
plans)
Scale (minimum)       1"=100 feet            1"=100 feet            1"=100 feet
Sheet size (maximum)  24" x 36"              24" x 36"              18" x 22"
North arrow and
graphic engineering   Required               Required               Required
scale
Reference to north
point (magnetic, true                                               Required
north, or grid north)
Proposed name of
subdivision or        Required               Required               Required
project and phases,
if any
Vicinity map          Required               Required               Required
Total acreage of the
property being        Required               Required               Required
subdivided
Name, address, and
telephone of owner of Required               Required               Required
record
Name, address and
telephone of          Required               Required               Required
subdivider
Name, address and
telephone of preparer Required               Required               Required
of plat
Date of plat drawing
and revision date(s), Required               Required               Required
if any
Exact boundaries of
the tract to be
subdivided by
bearings and          Required               Required               Required
distances, tied to
one or more
benchmarks
Names of owners of
record of all         Required               Required               Required
abutting land
Municipal, County and
land lot lines inside Required               Required               Required
the property or
within 500 feet.
Existing buildings
and structures on or
encroaching on the    Required               Required               Not Shown
tract to be
subdivided
Existing streets,
utilities and         Required               Required               Required
easements on and
adjacent to the tract
Environmental
conditions (streams,
wetlands, watershed
protection districts, Required               Required               Required
flood hazard areas,
river corridor
boundaries, etc.)
Block boundaries
lettered and each lot
numbered              Required                                      Required
consecutively
counterclockwise
without repetition
Dimensions and
acreage of all lots   Approximate            Approximate            Exact
 
REQUIRED INFORMATION
(Required to be on                           Construction           Final
the plat              Preliminary Plat       Plans                  Plat
or construction
plans)
Locations of streets,
alleys, lots, open
spaces, and any       Required               Required               Required
public use
reservations and/or
common areas
Right-of-way widths
and pavement widths   Required               Required               Required
for existing and
proposed streets
Locations, widths and                        Required               Required
purposes of easements
Street centerlines
showing angles of
deflection, angles of
intersection, radii,
and lengths of                               Required               Required
tangents and arcs,
and degree of
curvature and curve
data
Acreage to be
dedicated to the                                                    Required
public
Street names          Recommended            Required               Required
Street mailing                                                      Required
address for each lot
Topography            Per City Administrator Per City Administrator Not Shown
Minimum front
building setback      Required               Required               Required
lines for all lots
Location and
description of all                                                  Required
monuments
Certificate of
ownership and                                                       Required
dedication
Plat recording and                                                  Required
signature block
Plat Certificates:
survey, owner, health                                               Required
department (see text)
Signature block for
City Council, City
Clerk, and City       Required                                      Required
Administrator
approval
Land surveyor's
stamp, certificate,
signature, including                         Required               Required
field survey and
closure statement
Statement of and
reference to private                         Recommended            Required
covenants
Schedule of
construction for all
proposed projects
with particular       Required               Required
attention to
development planned
for the first year
 
 
11-15.3  Approval Certificate.  Upon approval of the final plat, a certificate,
stamped directly on the plat, shall state:
 
"Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma,
and all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was
given preliminary approval by the Marlow City Council on
______________________, 20______, and final approval by the City Administrator
and it is entitled to recordation in the Clerk's Office, Stephens County.
 
________________________________
City Administrator”
 
   11-15.4  Additional Plat Certificates.  In addition to information required
by Table 1 to be supplied on a final plat, each final plat shall contain the
following certificates.
 
Surveyor’s Certificate.  A certificate by a surveyor directly on the final plat
as follows:
 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared
from an actual survey of the property by me or persons under my supervision;
that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future," and
that their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all
engineering requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of City of Marlow,
Oklahoma, have been fully complied with.
 
      By:___________________________________________
      Registered Oklahoma Land Surveyor No.:__________”
 
Owner’s Certificate.  A certificate by the owner directly on the final plat,
signed in an appropriate manner as follows:
 
"The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto,
in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made
from an actual survey, and that all State, City and County taxes or other
assessments now due on this land have been paid.  Said owner donates and
dedicates to the public for use forever the public street right-of-ways as
shown on this plat.
            ___________________________________________
            Owner
Signed, sealed and delivered
in the presence of:
___________________________________
Witness
___________________________________
Notary Public"
 
 
 
Health Department Approval Certificate. 
 
“This final plat has been approved by the Stephens County Health Department as
being consistent with applicable state and local environmental health
requirements.
 
      ____________________________________
      Director, Stephens County Health Department”
 
   11-15.4  Distribution of Recorded Final Plat.  The final plat is a source of
essential information to tax officials, public safety officials, and utility
officials, among others.  The City Administrator shall be responsible for
ensuring that each agency listed in this subsection receives a copy of the
final recorded plat with assigned addresses:
 
The City Clerk
The County Tax Assessor
The County Health Department
The County 911 Coordinator
The City Public Works Department
 
At the discretion of the City Administrator, additional agencies or persons may
be added to the above list. 
 
11-16   DEDICATIONS OF STREETS AND PUBLIC LANDS
 
Upon completion of public improvement construction, the subdivider or land
developer shall notify the City Administrator and request an inspection. The
City Administrator shall inspect all public improvements and shall notify the
subdivider or land developer by mail of non-acceptance or preliminary
acceptance.  If the public improvements are not acceptable, the reason for non-
acceptance shall be stated and corrective measures shall be outlined in a
letter of notification.  Upon notification, the subdivider or land developer
shall correct all deficiencies identified in the non-acceptance letter within
the time limit established by the City Administrator. Once deficiencies are
corrected, the subdivider or land developer shall again request inspection in
writing.  Acceptance of public improvements shall be forwarded to the City
Council by the City Administrator following approval. 
 
Subdivision streets and right-of-ways and other lands to be dedicated to the
public shall be accepted and dedicated by the City only upon the delivery to
the City Council of the general warranty deed conveying fee simple title of
such right-of-ways and lands.  The warranty deed shall be accompanied by an
attorney's certificate of title and a tax transfer form addressed to the City
Council certifying that the grantor in such deed is vested with marketable fee
simple title to the property conveyed thereby, free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances, and further that the individual executing such deed has full
authority to do so.  Acceptance of such dedication shall be accomplished by
Resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
 
11-17   SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES
 
In order to protect the City and prospective purchasers of and residents in a
subdivision, the subdivider/developer shall provide to the City financial
security to guarantee the installation of public improvements. The subdivider's
or developer's financial guarantee may be any of the following: 
 
An escrow of funds with the City;
An escrow with a bank or savings and loan association upon which the City can
draw;
An irrevocable letter of commitment or credit upon which the City can draw;
A performance bond for the benefit of the City upon which the City can collect,
or a certificate of deposit with assignment letter; and
Any other form of guarantee approved by the Mayor and City Council that will
satisfy the objectives of this section.  The guarantee shall be in an amount to
secure the full costs, as determined by the City, of constructing or installing
the improvements and utilities required. 
 
11-18   LIMITATIONS ON MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
 
   11-18.1  Purpose.  Minor subdivisions provide certain advantages, such as a
shorter application process and less public scrutiny, that tend to favor their
use over the filing of major subdivision applications. Given these advantages,
the prospect exists that subdividers may seek to divide a parcel via
consecutive and/or contiguous minor subdivisions instead of filing for a major
subdivision.  It is the intent of the Mayor and City Council to prohibit the
practice of “chain” subdivisions where the same land owner subdivides land and
then files minor subdivision applications on common contiguous parcels, which
collectively total more than four lots.  It is also the intent of the Mayor and
City Council to prohibit minor subdivisions adjacent to each other within a
three-year time period, in cases where part of an original tract of land is now
owned by another person or entity and was transferred or sold to another owner
with the apparent intent to circumvent the major subdivision process. The City
Administrator is granted authority to deem a minor subdivision as a “chain”
subdivision for the purposes of this section.
   11-18.2  Common Contiguous Parcels Shown on Minor Subdivision Plats.
Contiguous common parcels, as defined by this ordinance, shall be referenced on
all applications for minor subdivisions, and contiguous common parcels shall be
considered part of any application for minor subdivision, for purposes of
determining whether or not the division of land proposed is a major subdivision
or a minor subdivision.  Common contiguous parcels shall not be counted as lots
in the case of a minor subdivision.
   11-18.3  Limitations.  Land within a minor subdivision, including all
contiguous parcels owned by the subdivider, shall not be further divided for a
period of three years unless a preliminary plat application is filed and
approved as a major subdivision pursuant to the requirements of this
ordinance.  If property proposed to be subdivided was part of an original
tract, and if the property proposed to be subdivided abuts land that has been
divided as a minor subdivision in the last three years, then minor subdivision
of said property shall be prohibited.  This provision shall not be construed to
prohibit the approval of two contiguous minor subdivisions under separate
ownership; however, this provision is intended to be construed so that one
property owner does not develop a minor subdivision on part of an original
tract and transfer or sell another part of the original tract for the purposes
of minor subdivision within a three year period.  It is the intent that land
abutting a minor subdivision that was owned by the subdivider of the abutting
minor subdivision shall not be subdivided as a minor subdivision for a period
of three years, regardless of ownership.
 
11-19   STANDARDS FOR CONFIGURING NEW STREETS
 
   11-19.1 Purpose and Intent.  The entire community enjoys the benefits of an
interconnected network of streets and roads.  It is the intention of the
locality that new street alignments in new developments reflect the traditional
style exhibited throughout older, established neighborhoods.  Interconnected
streets afford easier, safer access for emergency vehicles, school buses, and
sanitation trucks while distributing traffic more evenly and avoiding excess
traffic on certain central residential streets.  Street patterns that result in
isolated pockets of development with relatively little interconnectivity are
strongly discouraged. 
 
11-19.2  Street Alignment, Intersections and Jogs.  Streets shall be aligned to
join with planned or existing streets.  Under normal conditions, streets shall
be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles (90
degrees), but in no case shall such a street intersection be less than 75
degrees.  Where street offsets or jogs cannot be avoided, offset "T"
intersections shall be separated by a minimum centerline offset of 150 feet in
agricultural and residential districts and 300 feet in all other districts. 
(See Figure).
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1789.jpg]
 
11-19.3  Continuation of Existing Streets and Connections.  Existing streets,
and their rights-of-way, shall be continued at the same or greater width, but
in no case less than the required width.  The Planning Commission may require
that a major subdivision provide one or more future connections to adjoining
subdivisions or unsubdivided tracts.
 
11-19.4  Street Plans for Future Phases of the Tract.  Where the plat or site
plan proposed to be subdivided or developed includes only part of the tract
owned or intended for subdivision or development by the subdivider or land
developer, a tentative plan of a future street system for the portion not
slated for immediate subdivision consideration may be required by the City
Administrator and if required shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider
or land developer.
 
11-19.5  Dead-End Streets and Cul-De-Sacs.  Streets that dead-end shall
terminate in a cul-de-sac. The maximum length of such streets shall be no less
than 800 feet and recommended at 1,200 feet.  Streets that are planned to
continue at some future date shall provide a temporary cul-de-sac as required
by the City Administrator.
 
11-19.6  Marginal Access Streets.  Whenever a major subdivision is proposed
abutting the right-of-way of a U.S. or State highway, a marginal access street
approximately parallel and adjacent to such right-of-way may be required by the
Planning Commission at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of land
between such marginal access street and highway right-of-way.  The Planning
Commission may also require a 20-foot no-access easement and planting strip
along the major arterial street to ensure that lots fronting on said street do
not have access thereto.  (See Figure).
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1792.jpg]
 
11-19.7  Alleys and Service Access.  Alleys shall be provided and must be
paved.  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided were possible; but if unavoidable,
they shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities.  Service access
shall be provided to commercial and industrial developments for off-street
loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed.
 
11-20   REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS
 
11-20.1  Bridges.  Bridges on public rights-of-way shall meet American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials standards, including
all amendments.
 
11-20.2  Grading and Stabilization of Street Rights-Of-Ways.  When a new public
street is proposed, all trees, brush, stumps, rocks, or other debris shall be
cleared from the street right-of-way, except in cases where trees are required
to be preserved by the City Administrator.  All streets shall be graded to
lines, grades and cross sections approved on plans.  All unsurfaced, disturbed
portions of street rights-of-way shall be stabilized by seeding, fertilizing,
and mulching or by another equally effective method.
 
11-20.3  Radius at Street Intersections. The right-of-way radius at street
intersections shall be a minimum of 15 feet, with larger radii for streets
serving nonresidential development, as approved by the City Administrator.  The
minimum pavement (curb) radius at street intersections shall be 25 feet.
 
11-20.4  Street Grades. No street grade shall be less than one percent.  No
street grade for an arterial or collector street shall exceed eight percent. 
No other local street grade shall exceed 12 percent, unless the City
Administrator finds that due to topographic conditions, a steeper grade is
necessary, in which case the street grade shall not exceed 15 percent.  Grades
between 12 percent and 15 percent shall not exceed a length of 150 feet.
 
11-20.5  Minimum Street Right-Of-Way and Pavement Widths.  Street right-of-way
and pavement widths shall at minimum meet the following:
 
 
 
STREET TYPE                MINIMUM RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH  MINIMUM PAVEMENT WIDTH
                           (FEET)                      (FEET)
Major arterial street      100                         48
Collector street           60                          36
Local street with curb and                             24
gutter                     50                          (back of curb to back of
                                                       curb)
Local street without curb  60                          24
and gutter
Cul-de-sac turn around     50                          40
radius                                                 (back of curb)
Alley                      20                          16
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1796.jpg]
Residential Street with Curb and Gutter
(Cross Section Detail)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1799.jpg]
Local Street
(Rural Cross-Section)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1802.jpg]
Cul-de Sac Detail
 
 
11-20.6  Street Horizontal Alignment and Reverse Curves.  Street horizontal
alignments and reverse curves shall at minimum meet the following:
 
 
                           MINIMUM HORIZONTAL RADII OF MINIMUM TANGENTS BETWEEN
STREET TYPE                CENTER LINE CURVATURE       REVERSE CURVES (FEET)
                           (FEET)
Major arterial street      1,250                       250
Collector street           500                         100
Local street with curb and 100                         50
gutter
Local street without curb  100                         50
and gutter
Dead-end street            100                         50
 
11-21   CURB CUTS AND ACCESS SPECIFICATIONS
 
   11-21.1  Entrance Improvement Specifications.  Roadway entrances and
improvements, including necessary acceleration and/or deceleration lane(s) and
right/left turn lanes, shall be designed, installed, and maintained as approved
by the State Department of Transportation, as applicable, or the City
Administrator, in accordance with applicable State or City specifications.  All
entrances or exits of any street or driveway, public or private, from or to any
state highway shall be approved by the State Department of Transportation and
the City Administrator prior to the construction of such entrances or exits and
prior to the issuance of any land use permit or building permit for any
improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. All entrances or exits of
any street or driveway, public or private, from or to any City street shall be
approved by the City Administrator prior to the construction of such entrances
or exits and prior to the issuance of any land use permit or building permit
for any improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. 
   
   11-21.2  Curb Cut Specifications.  No curb cut or access driveway shall be
permitted to be located closer than 100 feet to the nearest existing or
proposed right-of-way of an intersecting roadway.  Curb cuts or access
driveways shall be no narrower than 25 feet from back of curb to back of curb. 
Strict adherence to these requirements may not be practical in all instances as
determined by the City Administrator.  The City Administrator may limit the
maximum width of a curb cut and/or the number of curb cuts to a parcel as
necessary when it is deemed to be of benefit to the safety and welfare of the
public.
 
The following factors may be considered during the review and approval of a
specific location of an entrance: the location of existing or planned median
breaks; separation requirements between the entrance and major intersections;
separation requirements between other entrances; the need to provide shared
access with other sites; the need to align with previously approved or
constructed access points on the opposite side of the street; and the minimum
number of entrances needed to move traffic onto and off the site safely and
efficiently.
 
   11-21.3  Access Along and Near Divided Highways.  Where a divided highway
exists or is planned, the following access standards shall be met:
 
 
Minimum Access Separation Requirements                         Distance (Feet)
Curb cut of driveway from street intersection with divided     600
highway
Parallel frontage road from right-of-way of divided highway    450
Curb cut or driveway on a local road from right-of-way of      200
divided highway
Curb cut or driveway on a local road from state highway        200
Curb cut or driveway on parallel frontage road from local road 150
 
11-21.4  Interparcel Connections.  New development that contains or is intended
to contain more than one building or use on site shall provide connections so
that automobile trips between and among such buildings or uses can be
accomplished without using the highway or major street.  Where possible and
practical, new developments and substantial improvements to existing
developments shall provide for pedestrian and automobile access connections
between adjacent properties under different ownership when the uses of the
properties are of such compatibility that patrons may frequent both buildings
or uses in the same vehicle trip. 
 
11-22   STREET LIGHTING
 
Street lights may be provided in accordance with City specifications by the
developers of a subdivision prior to the approval of a final plat.  Fixtures
and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the City and by the
utility company that will be responsible for the maintenance of the
facilities.  The fixtures shall be mounted no more than thirty (30) feet above
the ground and shall have appropriate arm length or power to place light over
the street.  Post top luminaries may be permitted when approved by the City
Administrator.  Fixtures shall be located no more than five hundred (500) feet
apart, unless approved by the City Administrator, and, when provided, at least
one light shall be located at each public or private street intersection within
the subdivision or land development.
 
The developer shall pay all costs for poles, fixtures and any other related
items or materials necessary for the installation of street lights, as well as
arrange an agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all
installations.  Maintenance and operation costs of street lights will be
assumed by the City no earlier than two years after lights have been installed.
 
11-23   STREET SIGNS
 
Signs for street names, directions of travel, traffic control, and hazards
shall be provided as directed by the City Administrator.  Street signs on
exterior/boundary streets shall be installed by the City with the developer
paying a proportionate share determined by the City.  Street signs for interior
streets of a subdivision or land development shall be installed at the
subdivider or developer’s expense by the subdivider or developer, conform to
similar signs in adjacent areas and throughout the city, and be subject to the
approval of the City Administrator.
 
Unless otherwise provided in standards and specifications adopted by the City,
street signs shall meet the following specifications.  Signs shall be
constructed of aluminum sheets with reflective backgrounds.  Information on the
street name signs shall be readable from both sides of the sign.  Signs shall
be installed on a steel post.  The vertical distance from the road elevation to
the bottom of the sign face shall be seven feet with a minimum burial depth of
three feet.
 
11-24   CURBS AND GUTTERS
 
Curbs and gutters shall be installed, if required by the City Administrator, in
accordance with standards and specifications of the City.  Subdivisions
consisting totally of lots intended for single-family residential use
containing a minimum of two acres shall not require curbs and gutters.  All
commercial and industrial subdivisions and land developments must have curbs
and gutters, regardless of the size of the lots.  When property fronting on an
existing City street is subdivided or developed, and the subdivision or land
development uses said existing street for access, then curb and gutter shall be
required along said street along the entire property frontage of said street. 
 
Curbs shall be concrete which shall be class A 3000 psi strength at 28 days. 
The typical curb minimum section shall be six inches by 24 inches by 12 inches
(see Figure). 
 
_OLE9245AE1A27E4113417-img
Vertical Curb Detail
 
All streets and roads not required to include curbs and gutters shall be
graded, paved, and drained to meet all construction and drainage standards for
ditches, slopes, and grassing according to specifications established by the
City.
 
11-25   SIDEWALKS
 
11-25.1  When Required.  Sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan, unless the City Administrator determines that no public
need exists for sidewalks in a certain location.  Sidewalks shall be required
when land developments and subdivisions are located within one-mile of a public
school.  Sidewalks are required to be installed along one side of the street
internal to a major subdivision, except in cases where the median lot size of
the major subdivision is two acres or more.
 
11-25.2  Location.  Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated non-
pavement right-of-way of roads and shall parallel the street pavement as much
as possible; provided, however, the City Administrator may permit sidewalks to
be designed and constructed so that they meander around permanent obstructions
or deviate from a linear pattern for design purposes.
 
11-25.3  Specifications.  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet wide.  A
median strip of grassed or landscaped areas at least two feet wide shall
separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs in residential areas.
 
11-26   PRIVATE STREETS
 
11-26.1  Private Streets Permitted. Private streets may, upon application, be
permitted by the Mayor and City Council within major subdivisions, subject to
the requirements of this section.  Applications for approval of private streets
shall be considered by the Mayor and City Council at the time of preliminary
plat approval by the Planning Commission.  Following a recommendation by the
Planning Commission to authorize private streets in a major subdivision, the
Mayor and City Council shall consider the application and may impose conditions
on the approval of private streets to ensure various public purposes and to
mitigate potential problems with private streets. No final plat involving a
private street shall be approved unless said final plat conforms to the
requirements of this section.
 
11-26.2  Construction Plans Required.  It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, or corporation to construct a new private street or alter an existing
private street or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining approval
of construction plans from the City Administrator and a development permit
issued in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
 
11-26.3  Standards.  All private streets shall be constructed to all standards
for public streets as required by this ordinance for public streets, applicable
construction specifications of the City, and as approved by the City
Administrator.
 
11-26.4  Street Names And Signs.  Private streets shall be named, subject to
the approval of the City Administrator.  The subdivider of land involving a
private street shall install street signs with content containing the street
name and the designation “private,” as approved by the City Administrator. The
sign signifying the private street may be required by the City to be a
different color than that of street signs provided for public streets, in order
to distinguish maintenance responsibilities in the field. 
 
11-26.5  Easements.  Easements for private streets shall be designated on final
plats as general-purpose public access and utility easements, along with the
name of said private street.  Said easement shall at minimum be of the same
width as that required for the right-of-way of a public street by the major
thoroughfare plan and the City for the type of public street (local, collector,
etc.) most closely resembling the proposed private street.  Easements for
private streets shall not be included in any calculation of minimum lot size or
density limitations established by local land use regulations.  In the cases of
private streets, the general-purpose public access and utility easement for the
private street shall either;
 
Be shown in a manner on the final plat such that each lot fronting the private
street extends to the centerline of the private street.  No lot shall be
permitted to be divided by the general purpose public access and utility
easement required and established for a private street; or
Shall be drawn as its own discrete parcel to be dedicated to a private
homeowners association (i.e., not shown to be a part of any lot).
 
11-26.6  Maintenance. The City shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild,
or otherwise improve streets, signs, drainage improvements or any other
appurtenances within general purpose public access and utility easements
established for private streets.  A private maintenance covenant recorded with
the Clerk of Stephens County shall be required for any private street and other
improvements within general-purpose public access and utility easements
established for private streets.  The covenant shall set out the distribution
of expenses, remedies for non-compliance with the terms of the agreement,
rights to the use of easements, and other pertinent considerations.  The
Covenant shall specifically include the following terms.
 
The Covenant shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate
to defray costs of ordinary maintenance and procedures for approval of
additional needed assessments. The Covenant shall also specify that the funds
from such assessments will be held by a homeowners or property owners
association in cases of a subdivision of seven or more lots fronting on a
private street.
The Covenant shall include a periodic maintenance schedule.
The Covenant for maintenance shall be enforceable by any property owner served
by the private street.
The Covenant shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair
costs equitably to property owners served by the private street.
The Covenant shall run with the land.
The Mayor and City Council may, at its discretion, as a condition of approving
private streets, require a performance bond and/or maintenance bond be
submitted by the subdivider and held by a homeowners or property owners
association, or the Commission may require that the subdivider pay an amount of
money as recommended by the City Administrator into an escrow account or other
suitable account for the maintenance and repair of private streets and
stormwater management improvements, to be drawn from by the homeowners or
property owners association as maintenance and repair needs may arise.
 
   11-26.7  Specifications For Final Plats Involving Private Streets.  The City
Administrator shall not approve for recording any final plat involving a
private street unless and until it shall contain the following on the face of
the plat:
 
Deed book and page reference to the recorded covenant required by this section;
“WARNING, City of Marlow has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or
otherwise service the private streets, drainage improvements, and other
appurtenances contained within the general public purpose access and utility
easement or easements for private streets shown on this plat.”;
“Grant of Easement. The general purpose public access and utility easement(s)
shown on this plat for private street(s) is hereby granted and said grant of
rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the
City, and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for
the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to,
electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable
television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim
interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and
egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such lines. 
 
____________________________
 
Signature of Property Owner”; and,
(The following certificate of dedication shall be required, unless the Mayor
and City Council waives the dedication requirement.) 
 
“Certificate of Dedication.  All water and sewer lines installed within the
general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for
private street(s) are hereby dedicated to the City of Marlow.
 
_____________________________
 
Signature of Property Owner.”
   
11-26.8  Requirement for Purchaser’s Acknowledgement of Private
Responsibilities.  Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real
estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in the city,
the subdivider or seller of said lot shall execute a notarized purchaser’s
acknowledgement of private street construction and drainage maintenance
responsibilities as set forth below.  A copy of the purchaser’s acknowledgement
shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a
condition of a building permit for a principal building on said lot:
 
“Purchaser’s Acknowledgement of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance
Responsibility
 
(I) / (We) have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the lot that
is the subject of this real estate transaction ______________  (insert address
or attach legal description).  (I) / (We) understand that the Declaration of
Covenant applies to the lot that (I am) / (we are) purchasing and requires (me)
/ (us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the
construction and maintenance of any private street and drainage facilities
serving the lot which (I am) / (we are) purchasing, and that owners of other
lots in this plat may sue for and recover those costs which this covenant
requires (me) / (us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my) / (our)
refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorneys fees.  (I) / (We) further
understand that the City has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and
improvement of the private street, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances
within the general purpose public access and utility easement for the private
road serving the lot in question.  (I) / (We) understand that a copy of this
purchaser’s acknowledgement shall be required as a condition of the issuance of
a building permit for a principal building on the lot (I am) / (we are)
purchasing.
 
__________________________
Purchaser
 
_____________________________
Purchaser”
11-27   DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
 
11-27.1  General Requirements.  An adequate drainage system, separate and
independent of any sanitary sewer system and including any necessary ditches,
pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be
provided for the proper drainage of all surface water for all subdivisions and
land developments.  Sizing and location of all drainage structures shall be the
responsibility of a registered professional engineer or land surveyor.  The
City may require the use of on-site control methods such as retention or
detention to mitigate the stormwater and drainage impacts of the proposed
subdivisions and land developments.  The Planning Commission shall not approve
any preliminary plat of subdivision that does not make adequate provision for
storm and flood water runoff channels or basins as determined by the City
Administrator.  No building permit shall be issued for any building within a
subdivision or development permit issued for the development of land, if there
is not present throughout the subdivision or to the land development an
adequate system of drainage and stormwater management.
 
11-27.2  Method of Design and Capacity.  Storm sewers, where required, shall be
designed by the Rational Method, or other methods as approved by the City, and
a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with required plans. 
Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire
upstream drainage area within the site and shall be designed to prevent
increases in downstream flooding. Capacity for a 10-year storm or rain shall be
provided for all street drainage structures such as catch basin, inlets cross
drains, etc.  Capacity for a 100-year frequency storm event shall be provided
for all main drainage structures such as retention basins, principal storm
sewers, and all types of flood protection works.
 
11-27.3  Location.  Drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-
way where feasible, and shall be constructed in accordance with standards and
specifications of the City.  Catch basins shall be located at low points of
streets.  Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical
the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual,
unobstructed easements at least fifteen (15) feet in width for drainage
facilities shall be provided across property outside the road right-of-way and
with satisfactory access to the road.
 
11-27.4  Discharge. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of
storm drainage water from each lot or land development site to adjacent lots,
land development sites, or vacant properties.  Storm water shall not be
discharged directly to perennial streams.  It shall be directed toward natural
drainages.  If water must be discharged to a stream, the water quality flowing
into the stream must meet or exceed the water quality in the receiving waters. 
The water quantity flowing into the stream must be evaluated to ensure the
stream channel can accommodate the increased flows and not disrupt or degrade
the ecology of the water body.
 
11-27.5  Grading and Site Drainage.  Lots or land development sites shall be
laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and
drainage for individual lots or land development sites shall be coordinated
with the general storm drainage pattern for the area.  Buildings and parking
lots shall be appropriately drained so as to prevent damage to abutting
properties or public streets.  All disturbed or graded ground areas of a
building site not used for buildings or open storage areas shall be
appropriately stabilized and grassed or covered with plants or landscaping
materials.
 
11-27.6  Cross-Drainpipes.  Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of
a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for
installation of a culvert or other structure, the design of which shall be
approved by the City.  Cross-drains shall be provided to accommodate all
natural waterflow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width
roadways and the required slopes.  Cross drainpipes shall have head walls of an
approved type on inlet and outlet ends of the pipe. Pipe installed within the
right-of-way shall be reinforced concrete pipe.  All storm drainpipes shall be
minimum 18 inches in diameter.  Storm sewer slopes shall be equal to or greater
than one percent.
 
11-27.7  Drop Inlets.  Drop inlets shall be generally three-foot by three-foot
boxes with two-foot by three-foot grates unless otherwise specified by the
City.
   
   11-27.8  Easements.  Where an irrigation ditch or channel, natural creek,
stream or other drainage way crosses a subdivision or land development, the
subdivider or developer shall provide an easement sufficient for drainage and
maintenance.  Easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities as
approved by the City.  When a subdivision or land development is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel, or intermittent stream, a stormwater or
drainage easement of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided.
 
 
11-28   WATER
 
11-28.1  Generally.  All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be
connected to a water system capable of providing water for health and emergency
purposes, including adequate fire protection.  No permit shall be issued for
any building within a subdivision or for the development of land, if there is
not present throughout the subdivision or to the land development an adequate
water supply.
 
11-28.2  Water Main Requirements.  When a public water main is accessible, the
developer shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants,
according to specifications of the City.  All water mains shall normally be at
least six inches in diameter except that pipe of lesser size may be used if
properly looped and adequate water pressure is maintained in accordance with
standards established by the construction codes set forth in Section 9-1-1. 
Pipe of less than four inches shall not be used except in unusual cases.  Water
lines shall be installed at least 30 inches below grade.  Water mains within
subdivisions and land developments must be provided with connections to each
lot in the subdivision and each land development, except as otherwise
specifically provided. 
 
11-28.3  Wells.  If a County and/or municipal water supply is not available to
the subdivision or land development at the time of constructing improvements
for a subdivision or land development, then the subdivider or developer shall
provide an adequate alternative water source and an adequate water storage
facility.  In subdivisions or land developments with a residential density of
one unit per acre or less and when a public water system is not available as
determined by the County/City, individual wells may be used in a manner so that
an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the
subdivision or to the land development.  When individual wells are proposed to
be used for water supply, water samples shall be submitted to the County Health
Department for its approval, and individual wells shall be approved by the
County Health Department.  Approvals shall be submitted to the City
Administrator prior to final subdivision plat approval.
 
11-28.4  Community Water System.  If a County and/or municipal water supply is
not available to the subdivision or land development at the time of
constructing improvements for a subdivision or land development, then the
subdivider or developer shall provide an adequate alternative water source and
an adequate water storage facility. Any community water system, if permitted,
shall provide a minimum flow of 400 gallons per day per each lot platted,
whether or not each lot is to be immediately developed; shall be sanitary; and
shall have a minimum pressure of 30 pounds per square inch at each lot in the
subdivision or each land development to be served.  For all common non-public
water supply systems, acceptable management, maintenance, and distribution
policies and procedures shall be established. These policies and procedures
shall be required to guarantee the provision of adequate supplies to each
perspective lot owner on a continuing, ongoing basis, and to provide acceptable
means for repairs and unforeseen events. The community water system plan shall
be approved by the Stephens County Health Department and a letter of approval
from the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality shall accompany the final
plat or land development application.
 
11-28.5 Fire Hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be required for all nonresidential
land developments and all subdivisions except those permitted to be served by
individual on-site wells.  Fire hydrants with appropriate water pressure at
appropriate intervals throughout the subdivision or land development shall be
provided by the subdivider or land developer as required by the City Fire
Department.  Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1,000 feet apart and
within 500 feet of any principal dwelling. Hydrants, fittings, valves and fire
department connections shall be approved by the Fire Department. Fire
department connections shall be not less than 18 inches or more than 36 inches
above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such
connections shall be uniform with that used by the Fire Department. To
eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants,
together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements
shall be installed before any final paving of a street within the right-of-way
shared by such underground utilities.
 
11-29   SEWER
11-29.1  Generally.  All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served
by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment.  Each subdivision
and land development shall be served by adequate sewage disposal facilities. No
permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or for the
development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or to
the land development an adequate system of wastewater collection and treatment.
 
11-29.2  Connection to Public Sewerage System.  When a public sanitary sewerage
system is reasonably accessible, as determined by the City, the subdivider or
land developer shall connect with it and provide sewers accessible to each lot
in the subdivision or to each land development. If a public sanitary sewer is
reasonably accessible, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain upon any
such property an individual sewage disposal system.  When a public sanitary
sewerage system is not immediately accessible but is anticipated by the City to
be available within a period of three years, the applicant shall install
sanitary sewer lines, laterals, and mains from the street curb to a point in
the subdivision or land development boundary so that a future connection with
the public sewer main can be made.  The City Administrator may condition the
approval of a subdivision or land development on the agreement to connect to
the public sewerage system upon its availability.  Sanitary sewers shall be
located within street or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates
otherwise.  No public sewer shall be less than eight inches in diameter. 
Manholes shall be installed in sanitary sewers with a maximum distance between
two manholes of 400 feet, unless otherwise specified by standards of the City. 
Sanitary sewer slopes shall be equal to or greater than 0.7 percent for eight
inch lines.  All sewer lines shall be designed with slopes to obtain a minimum
velocity of two feet per second.  Minimum 20-foot wide easements shall be
provided for all sanitary sewer lines.
 
11-29.3  Alternative Provision.  If sanitary sewer is not available at the time
of the development of the subdivision or land development, and if sanitary
sewer is not anticipated to be available within a period of three years to
serve the subdivision or land development in question, then on-site septic
tanks, an oxidation pond, or another approved method of treatment of sanitary
sewerage shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider or land
developer in conformity with the requirements of the County Health Department
and according to specifications adopted by the City.
 
11-29.4  Septic Tanks.  Where individual onsite wastewater disposal systems are
allowed and proposed, individual lot sizes and shapes must exhibit appropriate
regard for the peculiar health, drainage, and maintenance characteristics on
the site.  A minimum setback of 100 feet shall be observed between any well and
any septic tank on the same lot.  Additionally, detailed soil tests may be
required in order to verify the ability of the lots to safely contain and
dispose of septic system effluent.  All septic tanks and onsite wastewater
disposal systems are subject to the approval of the Stephens County Health
Department.
 
11-30   UTILITIES
 
All utility facilities, with the exception of electric power, shall be located
underground throughout the subdivision or land development.  Whenever existing
utility facilities (other than major distribution lines) are located above
ground, except when existing with public roads rights-of-ways, they shall be
removed and placed underground.  Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be
provided for utilities, private and public, and such easements shall be at
least 20 feet wide.  When topographical or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities along the rear lot lines of a
subdivision, lot, or land development site, perpetual unobstructed easements at
least 10 feet in width shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory
access. In all cases where overhead or underground electric power lines are
located, a minimum 20-foot easement is required.
 
11-31   OVERSIZING OF IMPROVEMENTS AND UTILITIES
 
The subdivider or land developer shall construct such oversized improvements
and utilities that the City determines are necessary, provided that the
subdivider or land developer shall not be obligated for the additional cost of
improvements and utilities that are not uniquely required for that development,
and provided the subdivider agrees to a proposal by the City to share in the
cost arrangements for over-sizing improvements and utilities.  A formula may be
developed by the City to provide for a sharing of the cost of other
improvements needed to serve the subdivision or land development when certain
of the improvements are necessary to serve future subdivisions or developments
in the vicinity.
 
11-32   ADMINISTRATION
   11-32.1  Fees.  The fees for various applications required by this Ordinance
shall be as set by separate resolution of the local governing body.
 
   11-32.2  Additional Specifications.  The City Administrator is hereby
authorized to prepare and recommend standard drawings and constructions
specifications for private and public improvements not specified in this
ordinance.  Upon their adoption by the local governing body, they shall become
mandatory.
   
   11-32.3  Variances.  Upon application, a variance to the terms of this
ordinance may be granted, subject to the requirements of Section 11-10 of this
ordinance. Application for any variance must be made prior to the preliminary
plat is approved.
   
   11-32.4  Inspections.  The City Administrator shall be authorized to inspect
premises proposed for subdivision or land development, including any
improvements within such subdivision or land development, to determine
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and other laws and
regulations of City.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any person
authorized to conduct inspections who presents appropriate credentials for
same, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such person
while in the process of carrying out his official duties.  The City
Administrator is authorized to establish procedures for inspection of land
development activity at various intervals in the development process, including
without limitation inspection procedures for erosion control, the initiating of
grading or land-disturbing activity, installation of on-site sewage disposal
systems or sanitary sewer, installation of storm drainage pipe, detention, or
other storm water facilities, and installation of street curbing and gutter,
road sub-grade, base, or paving.
   
   11-32.5  Enforcement, Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.  Enforcement,
violations, remedies and penalties shall be as specified in Section 11-9 of
this ordinance.
   
   11-32.6  Amendment.  The Mayor and City Council may amend this ordinance in
a manner consistent with Oklahoma law.  Before enacting such amendment to this
ordinance, the Planning Commission shall provide a recommendation on the
proposed amendment.  The Mayor and City Council shall hold a public hearing
thereon, notice of which shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior to
such hearing in the City’s legal organ or a newspaper of general circulation in
the County.
 
SECTION II.     Repealer.     All ordinances or parts thereof which are
inconsistent with this Ordinance are repealed upon the effective date of this
Ordinance.   
 
SECTION III.     Severability.    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase or portion of this ordinance is, for any reason, held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall
not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
 
SECTION IV.      Emergency.   
 
WHEREAS, it being immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace,
health, safety and welfare of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma, and the inhabitants
thereof that the provisions of this Ordinance be put into full force and
effect, an emergency is hereby declared to exist by reason whereof this
ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage as
provided by law.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the City Council of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma, this
_________day of __________, 2020.
 
 
                                       
                     Mayor Brian Davis
 
ATTEST:
 
 
                  
Betty Mackey, City Clerk
 
( S E A L )
CITY CHARTER
CHARTER FOR THE CITY OF MARLOW, OKLAHOMA
   Adopted June 23, 1971
   As Amended
PREAMBLE
We, the people of the City of Marlow, exercising the powers of home rule
granted to us by the constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma, in order
to provide for more efficient, adequate, and economical government, do hereby
ordain, ratify and establish this Charter of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma.
ARTICLE 1. INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS
Section 1-1. Incorporation.
The City of Marlow, Oklahoma, within the corporate limits as now established or
as hereafter may be established, shall continue to be a municipal body politic
and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the "City of Marlow". It shall
succeed to and possess all the property, rights, privileges, franchises,
powers, and immunities now belonging to the corporation known as the City of
Marlow, and shall be liable for all debts and other obligations for which the
corporation is legally bound at the time this Charter goes into full effect.
Section 1-2. Powers Of The City.
   (a)   The City shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges,
franchises, and immunities granted to Cities by the State Constitution and Law,
and all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers
granted. Except as prohibited by the State Constitution or Law, the City shall
have all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises and
immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.
   (b)   The City shall have power to adopt a corporate seal and to alter it at
pleasure, to sue and to be sued and to make contracts. It shall have power to
acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any City purpose
including public utilities, works and ways, in fee simple or any lesser
interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, condemnation or other
legal means; and to hold, maintain, improve, enlarge, manage, control, operate,
lease, sell, convey, or otherwise dispose of, such property as its interests
may require, including public utilities, works and ways. It shall have power to
incur indebtedness and to issue bonds within the limitations prescribed by the
State Constitution. It shall have power to accept and administer Federal and
State Grants-in-Aid and to do everything necessary to accomplish the purpose or
purposes for which such grants may be made. It shall have power to ordain and
to enforce local legislation for the proper organization and functioning of the
City Government, for the preservation and enforcement of good government and
order, for the protection of health, life, morals and property, for the
prevention, summary abatement, and removal of nuisances, and otherwise for the
promotion of the common welfare. It shall have power to grant, extend and renew
franchises in accordance with the State Constitution.
   (c)   The enumeration or mention of particular powers by this Charter shall
not be deemed to be exclusive or limiting; and in addition to the powers
enumerated or mentioned herein or implied hereby, the City shall have all
powers which, under the State Constitution and law, it would be competent for
this Charter specifically to enumerate or mention.
   (d)   Provisions of State law relating to matters which may be regulated by
cities operating under charters, shall be in effect only insofar as they are
applicable and are not superseded by this Charter or by Ordinance.
ARTICLE 2. THE COUNCIL
Section 2-1. Councilmen: Number, Qualifications.
There shall be a council of five members, which shall consist of the Mayor as
councilman at large and one councilman from each of the four wards of the City
as the wards are constituted in this Charter or as they may hereafter be
constituted by Ordinance. Only qualified electors of the City who are at least
twenty-five years of age, who are not in litigation with the City nor in
arrears for city taxes when elected, and who have been for one year next
preceding the date of election bona fide residents and property taxpayers of
the City or territory annexed to the City, shall be qualified for the offices
of Mayor and councilmen. Councilmen from the wards shall also be residents of
their respective wards. If the Mayor or any other councilman is convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude, his office shall become vacant immediately
when the case is finally determined.
Section 2-2. Mayor And Vice Mayor.
   (a)   The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the council. He shall be
recognized as head of the City Government for all ceremonial purposes and by
the Governor for purposes of military law. As a councilman, he shall have all
powers, rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of a councilman,
including the right to vote on questions. He shall have such other powers and
duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or by Ordinance.
   (b)   At the first meeting after the time prescribed for the beginning of
the terms of newly elected councilmen, or as soon thereafter as practicable,
the council shall elect from its membership a vice mayor, who shall serve as
such until the next such first meeting. The vice mayor shall act as Mayor
during the absence or disability of the Mayor, or, if a vacancy occurs in the
office of Mayor, until another Mayor is elected by the council for completion
of the unexpired term and qualifies. If the office of vice mayor becomes
vacant, the council shall elect from its membership another vice mayor for
completion of the unexpired term.
Section 2-3. Councilmen: Compensation.
Neither the Mayor nor any other councilman may receive any compensation as
Mayor or councilman nor for any other service rendered the City, but may be
reimbursed for expenses incurred in the discharge of their official duties.
Section 2-4. Council: Powers.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all powers of the City, including
the determination of all matters of policy, shall be vested in the council. The
council shall have power, subject to the State Constitution, law, and this
Charter:
      (1)   By ordinance to enact municipal legislation.
      (2)   To raise revenue and to approve and change the budget; and to
regulate bond elections, the issuance of bonds, sinking funds, the refunding of
indebtedness, salaries and wages, and all other fiscal affairs of the city.
      (3)   To inquire into the conduct of any office, department, or agency of
the city government, and investigate municipal affairs.
      (4)   To appoint or elect, all other officers and employees of the city,
or to prescribe the method thereof.
      (5)   To regulate elections, the initiative and referendum, and recall.
      (6)   To create, change, and abolish all offices, departments, and
agencies of the city government other than the offices, departments, and
agencies created by this Charter, and to prescribe their powers and duties; and
to assign additional powers and duties to offices, departments, and agencies
created by this Charter.
Section 2-5. City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall keep the journal of proceedings of the council, and shall
enroll in a book or books kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions
passed by it; shall be custodian of such documents, records, and archives as
may be provided by applicable law or ordinance; shall be custodian of the seal
of the city; and shall attest, and affix the seal to, documents when required
in accordance with applicable law or ordinance.
Section 2-6. Council: Meetings.
The council shall hold at least one regular meeting every month, at such time
as it may prescribe by ordinance or otherwise. The Mayor or any three
councilmen may call special meetings. All meetings of the council shall be open
to the public, and the journal of its proceedings shall be open to public
inspection.
Section 2-7. Councilmen: Absences to Terminate Membership.
If the Mayor or any other councilmen shall be absent from more than one-half of
all the meetings of the council, regular and special, held within any period of
four consecutive calendar months, he shall thereupon cease to hold office.
Section 2-8. Councilmen: Removal.
The Mayor or any other councilman may be removed from office for any cause
specified by applicable state law for the removal of officers, and by the
method or methods prescribed thereby, and by recall as provided in this
Charter.
Section 2-9. Council: Vacancies.
The council, by majority vote of its remaining members, shall fill vacancies in
its own membership, including the office of Mayor, for the unexpired terms or
until successors are elected as provided in this section. If a vacancy occurs
before the beginning of a regular filing period for candidates for councilmen,
and the unexpired term extends beyond the time when the terms of councilmen
elected that year begin, then a Mayor or a councilman for that place, as the
case may be, shall be elected at the elections of that year to serve the rest
of the unexpired term beginning at the time the terms of councilmen elected
that year begin.
Section 2-10. Council: Quorum, Rules, Yeas And Nays.
A majority of all of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum, but
a smaller number may adjourn from day to day or from time to time. The council
may determine its own rules. On the demand of any member, the vote on any
question shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the journal.
Section 2-11. Ordinances: Enacting Clause.
The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall be, "Be it
ordained by the council of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma", and of all ordinances
proposed by the voters under their power of initiative, "Be it ordained by the
People of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma".
Section 2-12. Ordinances: Passage, When In Effect.
Every proposed ordinance shall be read, and a vote of a majority of all the
councilmen shall be required for its passage. The vote on final passage of
every ordinance shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the journal.
The Mayor shall have no power of veto. Within ten days after its passage, every
ordinance except an emergency ordinance, shall be published in full or by
number, title, and brief gist in a newspaper of general circulation within the
city. Every ordinance except an emergency ordinance, so published, shall become
effective thirty days after its final passage unless it specifies a later time;
provided that a franchise for a public utility shall not go into effect until
the ordinance granting it has been published in full in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city and has been approved at an election by a vote of a
majority of the qualified electors voting on the question.
Section 2-13. Ordinances: Emergency.
An emergency ordinance is an ordinance which in the judgment of the council is
necessary for the immediate preservation of peace, health, or safety, and which
should become effective prior to the time when an ordinary ordinance would
become effective. Every such ordinance shall contain, as a part of its title,
the words, "and declaring an emergency"; and in a separate section, herein
called the emergency section, shall declare the emergency. An affirmative vote
of at least four councilmen shall be required for the passage of an emergency
ordinance. An emergency ordinance shall take effect upon passage unless it
specifies a later time.
Section 2-14. Ordinances: Adoption By Reference.
The council by ordinance may adopt by reference codes, ordinances, standards,
and regulations relating to building, plumbing, electrical installations, milk
and milk products, and other matters which it has power to regulate otherwise.
Such code, ordinance, standard, or regulation so adopted need not be enrolled
in the book of ordinances; but a copy shall be filed and kept in the office of
the city clerk.
Section 2-15. Ordinances: Codification.
The permanent, general ordinances of the city shall be codified, and published
in book or pamphlet form at least every ten years unless the council, by use of
a loose-leaf system, provides for keeping the code up-to-date. The ordinances
and parts of ordinances included in the code may be revised, rearranged, and
reorganized; and the code may contain new matter, provisions of the state
constitution and law applicable to the city, and this Charter. A copy of the
published code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk after the council
adopts the code of ordinances, but the code need not be enrolled in the book of
ordinances.
ARTICLE 3. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Section 3-1. Library Board.
   (a)   There shall be a Library Board. It shall consist of five members, who
shall serve for overlapping terms of five years; but the term of one of the
first five members, serving under this Charter shall expire on July 1 in each
of the first five years. The term of one member shall begin on July 1 in every
year. Members shall serve without compensation.
   (b)   Every year, at the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of a
new member or as soon thereafter as practicable, the Library Board shall elect
a chairman, a vice chairman, and a secretary; and the secretary need not be a
member of the board. It shall determine the time and place of its regular
meetings; and the chairman or any three members may call special meetings of
the board.
   (c)   The Library Board shall have administrative supervision and control of
the public library or libraries of the city. The Library Board may adopt
regulations for the administration and operation of the library or libraries,
subject to ordinance which the council may enact.
Section 3-2. Appointments, Removals, Etc.; Personnel Regulations.
Appointments and promotions in the service of the city shall be made solely on
the basis of merit and fitness; and removals, demotions, suspensions, and
layoffs shall be made solely for the good of the service. The council,
consistently with this Charter, by ordinance or personnel rules, may regulate
personnel matters and provide for proper personnel administration.
Section 3-3. Personnel Board Created.
   (a)   There shall be a personnel board consisting of three members appointed
by the council for overlapping three-year terms. They shall be chosen with a
view to their sound judgment and their fairness to both the people of the city
and the officers and employees of the city. The term of one member shall begin
July 1 in every year. The council shall appoint the original members so that
the term of one will expire at that time in each of the first three succeeding
years. A member may not hold any other office or position in the city
government. The council, by a vote of at least four members, after adequate
opportunity for a public hearing, may remove a member for the good of the
service; and the vote shall be by yeas and nays and shall be entered in the
journal. The council shall fill vacancies for the unexpired terms. Members
shall serve without compensation.
   (b)   At the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of a newly
appointed member or as soon thereafter as practicable, the board shall elect a
chairman, a vice chairman, and a secretary; and the secretary need not be a
member of the board. The board shall determine the time and place of its
regular meetings, and the chairman or two members may call special meetings.
The chairman shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations.
   (c)   The personnel board shall have power to subpoena officers and
employees of the city and other persons to testify and to produce documents and
other effects as evidence.
Section 3-4. Classified And Unclassified Services.
   (a)   All officers and employees of the city shall be divided into the
classified and the unclassified service.
   (b)   The following shall constitute the unclassified service:
      (1)   The Mayor and other councilmen, and the municipal judge or judges.
      (2)   Members and secretary of each board, commission, or other plural
authority.
      (3)   All personnel who serve without compensation.
      (4)   All temporary and all part-time officers and employees, except
those whom the council may place in the classified service by ordinance or
personnel rules.
   (c)   All other officers and employees shall be in the classified service;
provided that the council by ordinance or personnel rules may except from the
classified service not to exceed two of such personnel and transfer them to the
unclassified service, because of their special relationship of trust and
confidence to the appointing authority.
Section 3-5. Removal, Etc.; Hearing Before The Personnel Board.
   (a)   The council or any other authority who lays off, suspends without pay
for more than ten days, demotes, or removes any officer or employee in the
classified service after a probationary period of six months, shall, at that
time or within two days thereafter, deliver, or have delivered, or mail by
registered, certified, or similar special mail, to the officer or employee a
written statement of the reason or reasons for the layoff, suspension,
demotion, or removal.
   (b)   Such officer or employee may appeal in writing to the personnel board.
The appeal must be filed with the secretary of the board, or with the city
clerk for transmittal to the board, within ten (10) days after receipt of
notice of the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal.
   (c)   As soon as practicable thereafter, the board shall hold a public
hearing on the appeal, or give an adequate opportunity therefor, and shall
report in writing its findings and recommendations to the authority laying off,
suspending, demoting, or removing; and the authority shall then make a final
decision in writing regarding the appellant's layoff, suspension, demotion, or
removal, as the case may be; provided that, if the board finds that the layoff,
suspension, demotion, or removal was made for a political reason or reasons or
for any other reason, or reasons than the good of the service, it shall veto
the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal, and the action by the authority
shall be nullified thereby.
Section 3-6. Qualifications Of Officers And Employees.
Officers and employees of the city shall have the qualifications prescribed by
this Charter and such additional qualifications as the council may prescribe;
but the council shall not prescribe additional qualifications for the Mayor and
other councilmen.
Section 3-7. Nepotism.
Neither the council, nor any other authority of the city government, may
appoint or elect any person related to the Mayor or any other councilman, or to
himself, or, in the case of a plural authority, to one of its members, by
affinity or consanguinity within the third degree, to any office or position of
profit in the city government; but this shall not prohibit an officer or
employee already in the service of the city from continuing and being promoted
therein.
Section 3-8. Holding More Than One Office.
Except as may be otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinance, the same
person may hold more than one office in the city government.
Section 3-9. Bonds Of Officers And Employees.
The city treasurer and such other officers and employees as the council may
designate, before entering upon their duties, shall provide bonds for the
faithful performance of their respective duties, payable to the city, in such
form and in such amounts as the council may prescribe, with a surety company
authorized to operate within the state. The city shall pay the premiums on such
bonds.
Section 3-10. Oath Or Affirmation Of Office.
Every officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall
take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office prescribed by the state
constitution. The oath or affirmation shall be filed in the city clerk's
office.
Section 3-11. Who May Administer Oaths And Affirmations.
All officers authorized by federal or state law, the Mayor, the city clerk, the
municipal judge or judges, or such other officers as the council may authorize,
may administer oaths and affirmations in any matter pertaining to the affairs
and government of the city.
Section 3-12. Removal, Etc., Of Officers And Employees.
The power to lay off, suspend, demote, and remove accompanies the power to
appoint or elect; and the council or other appointing or electing authority at
any time may lay off, suspend, demote, or remove any officer or employee to
whom the council or the other appointing or electing authority respectively may
appoint or elect a successor.
Section 3-13. Acting Officers And Employees.
The appointing or electing authority who may appoint or elect the successor of
any officer or employee, may appoint or elect a person to act during the
temporary absence, leave, disability, or suspension of such officer or
employee, or, in case of a vacancy, until a successor is appointed or elected
and qualifies, unless the council provides a general ordinance that a
particular superior or subordinate or such officer or employee shall act. The
council by general ordinance may provide for a deputy to act in such cases.
Section 3-14. Officers To Continue Until Successors Are Elected Or Appointed
And Qualify.
Every officer who is elected or appointed for a term ending at a definite time,
shall continue to serve thereafter until his successor is elected or appointed
and qualifies unless his services are sooner terminated by resignation,
removal, disqualification, death, abolition of the office, or other legal
manner.
Section 3-15. Conflict Of Interests.
   (a)   Neither the Mayor nor any other councilman shall sell or barter
anything to the city or to a contractor to be supplied to the city; or make any
contract with the city; or purchase anything from the city other than those
things which the city offers generally to the public (as for example, utility
services), and then only on the same terms as are offered to the public. Any
such officer violating this section, upon conviction thereof, shall thereby
forfeit his office. Any violation of this section, with the knowledge, express
or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city, shall
render the contract voidable. This subsection shall not apply in cases in which
the city acquires property by condemnation.
   (b)   The council by ordinance or personnel rules may further regulate
conflict of interests and ethics of officers and employees of the city.
ARTICLE 4. FISCAL AFFAIRS
Section 4-1. City Treasurer.
There shall be a city treasurer. He shall collect or receive revenue and other
money for the city; shall be responsible for its custody, safekeeping, deposit,
and disbursement, subject to policies adopted by the council; and shall
maintain a general accounting system for the city government.
Section 4-2. Sale Of Property Valued At More Than $25,000.
The sale of any property, real or personal, including public utilities, or of
any interest therein, the value of which is more than $25,000, may be made
only: (1) by authority of an affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified
electors of the city who vote on the question of approving or authorizing the
sale at an election; or (2) by authority of a special nonemergency ordinance.
Such ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city within ten days after its passage, and shall include a section
reading substantially as follows: "Section --. This ordinance shall be referred
to a vote of the electors of the city if a legal and sufficient referendum
petition is properly filed within thirty days after its passage; otherwise it
shall go into effect thirty days after its passage." The sale of an entire
public utility may be authorized only as provided in (1) hereinabove, by an
affirmative vote of a majority of all the qualified electors of the city
entitled to vote on the question.
Section 4-3. Public Improvements.
Public improvements may be made by the city government itself or by contract.
The council shall award all contacts for such improvements. A contract for
public improvements of more than $1,000 may be awarded only to the lowest and
best responsible bidder after such notice and opportunity for competitive
bidding as the council may prescribe. All bids may be rejected, and further
notice and opportunity for competitive bidding may be given.
Section 4-4. Fiscal Year.
The Fiscal Year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July and
shall end on the last day of June of every calendar year.
Section 4-5. Independent Annual Audit.
The council shall designate a qualified public accountant or accountants who
shall make an independent audit of the accounts and evidences of financial
transactions of the departments, offices, and agencies of the city government,
as of the end of every fiscal year at least, and who shall report to the
council. In lieu of the above, the council may arrange with an appropriate
state authority for such an audit when and if permitted by law.
ARTICLE 5. MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 5-1. Municipal Court.
Cases arising out of violations of the Charter and ordinances of the city shall
continue to be tried by the municipal court created by State Law, or a lawful
successor of such court created by state law; provided, that the council by
ordinance shall have power to create a municipal court to hear and determine
such cases if and when it deems it necessary or desirable to do so.
ARTICLE 6. ELECTIONS
Section 6-1. Nomination And Election; Terms; Nonpartisan Elections.
   (a)   At the elections in 1972 and in every third year thereafter, the
councilman from Ward Two shall be elected. At the elections in 1973 and in
every third year thereafter, the councilman from Ward Three and the Mayor shall
be elected. At the elections in 1974 and in every third year thereafter, the
councilman from Ward One and the councilman from Ward Four shall be elected.
   (b)   The Mayor and other councilmen shall serve terms of three years, and
shall serve until their respective successors are elected and qualify. Their
terms shall begin on the first Monday in May in the year in which they are
elected. If a mayor-elect or other councilman-elect fails to qualify within one
month after the beginning of his term, his office shall become vacant, and the
vacancy shall be filled as other vacancies in the council are filled.
   (c)   All candidates for Mayor and for councilmen from the wards shall be
nominated, and the Mayor and councilmen from the wards shall be elected, at
large, by the qualified electors of the entire city.
   (d)   Both the primary and the general election shall be nonpartisan; and no
party designation or emblem shall be placed on the ballots.
   (e)   Nothing in this Charter shall prohibit the use of voting machines.
Section 6-2. Primary Election: Filing.
Any person qualified for the office for which he is filing may have his name
placed on the ballot for the primary election as a candidate for Mayor or for
other councilman by filing with the secretary of the county election board, a
sworn statement of his candidacy, specifying the office for which he is a
candidate. The filing period shall begin on the first Monday of February at 8:
00 A.M. and shall continue for a period of three (3) days through Wednesday at
5:00 P.M. (Res. 145, adopted November 19, 1991; charter amendment election of
January 7, 1992)
Section 6-3. Primary Election: Time, Etc.
A primary election shall be held on the third Tuesday in March of every year to
nominate candidates for Mayor or other councilmen to succeed those whose terms
are expiring in the respective year. If only one person is a candidate for an
office to be filled, he shall be not only nominated, but also elected ipso
facto; and his name shall not appear on the primary or general election ballot.
Every qualified elector of the city shall be entitled to vote for one candidate
for each office to be filled.
Section 6-4. Primary Election: Who Nominated Or Elected.
In a primary election, the two candidates for each office to be filled
receiving the greatest number of votes for that office, shall be nominated. If
one of the candidates for an office receives a majority of all votes cast for
all candidates for that office, he alone shall be not only nominated, but also
elected ipso facto; and his name shall not appear on the ballot for the general
election. In case of a tie, the nominee or nominees (as the case may be) shall
be determined from among those tying, fairly by lot, by the county election
board in a public meeting. If one of the two candidates for an office nominated
in a primary election dies or withdraws before the general election, the
remaining candidate shall be elected ipso facto; and his name need not appear
on the ballot for the general election.
Section 6-5. General Election: Time, Who Elected.
A general election shall be held in the city on the first Tuesday in April of
every year to elect the Mayor or other councilmen to succeed those whose terms
are expiring in the respective year. Every qualified elector of the city shall
be entitled to vote for one of the two candidates for each office to be filled,
but may not vote for any other person. The candidate for each office receiving
the greater number of votes, shall be elected. In case of failure to elect
because of a tie, the election shall be determined from among those tying,
fairly by lot, by the county election board in a public meeting.
Section 6-6. Elections: When Not Held.
If there are no candidates and no questions to be voted upon at a primary or
general election, the election shall not be held.
Section 6-7. Registered Qualified Electors.
Only electors residing in this city who have the qualifications prescribed for
electors by the state constitution and law, and who are registered as may be
required by law, may vote in city elections.
Section 6-8. Political Activity Of Officers And Employees.
   (a)   No officer or employee of the city except the Mayor and other
councilmen and personnel who receive no compensation for their services, may
work for or against, or attempt to influence, the nomination, election, or
defeat of any candidate for Mayor or other councilman, or, the recall of the
Mayor or other councilman; but this shall not prohibit the ordinary exercise of
one's right to express his opinions and to vote.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section shall be punished, upon
conviction thereof, by a fine not exceeding twenty dollars including costs.
Such violation shall constitute cause for removal from office or employment;
and if the regular removal authority has not already removed a person who
violates this section, he shall be automatically removed by conviction of
violating this section effective at the time the conviction becomes final.
Section 6-9. State Constitution And Law To Govern.
   (a)   The provisions of the state constitution and law applicable to city
elections, shall govern such elections in this city insofar as they are
applicable and are not superseded by this Charter or by ordinance.
   (b)   A proclamation of the Mayor calling a special election need not (but
may) set forth the names of the precinct officers who are to conduct the
election, but shall give the locations of polling places.
ARTICLE 7. RECALL
Section 7-1. Recall Authorized.
The incumbent of any elective city office, including a person appointed to fill
a vacancy in any such office, may be recalled from office by the electors
qualified to vote for the election of a successor to the incumbent, in the
manner provided in this article.
Section 7-2. Recall Petition.
   (a)   To initiate recall proceedings, a written statement in duplicate
proposing the recall of the incumbent of an elective office, shall be signed by
fifty or more registered qualified electors of the city, and shall be filed
with the city clerk after the incumbent has held the office at least four
months. The statement shall also contain the reason or reasons for which the
recall is sought, in not more than two hundred words. Within five days, the
city clerk shall mail a copy of such statement by registered, certified, or
similar special mail to the officer at his residential address. Within ten days
after the statement is mailed to the officer, the officer may make and file
with the city clerk a written statement in duplicate justifying his conduct in
office, in not more than two hundred words; and the city clerk on request shall
deliver one copy to one of the persons filing the statement proposing the
recall.
   (b)   The petition for recall shall include a demand that a successor to the
incumbent sought to be recalled be elected, and shall also include before the
space where the signatures are to be written the statement giving the reason or
reasons for recall under the heading "STATEMENT FOR RECALL", and if the officer
has filed a statement as authorized, the statement justifying his conduct in
office under the heading "STATEMENT AGAINST RECALL". The two statements shall
be in letters of the same size. A copy of the petition shall be filed with the
city clerk within one month after recall proceedings are initiated by the
filing of the first statement, and before the petition is circulated.
   (c)   A number of registered qualified electors of the city equal at least
to twenty percent (20%) of the total number of votes cast for governor in the
city at the last general state election at which a governor was elected, must
sign the petition. Each signer shall write after his name his address within
the city, giving street or avenue and number, if any. No more than one hundred
signatures may appear on a single copy of the petition. Petitions may be
circulated only by registered qualified electors of the city; and the person
who circulates each copy of the petition shall sign an affidavit on the copy
stating that each signer signed the petition in his presence, that each
signature on the petition is genuine, and that he believes each signer to be a
registered qualified elector of the city.
   (d)   The circulated petition shall be filed with the city clerk not later
than one month after the filing of a copy as provided above. Within one month
after date of filing of the circulated petition, the city clerk shall examine
it and ascertain whether it has been prepared and circulated as required, and
whether the required number of registered qualified electors of the city have
signed it. He shall then attach his certificate to the petition. If his
certificate states that the petition has not been prepared and circulated as
required and/or lacks a sufficient number of signatures, the petition shall
have no effect. But, if the city clerk's certificate states that the petition
has been prepared and circulated as required and has a sufficient number of
signatures, he shall submit the petition and certificate to the council at its
next meeting.
Section 7-3. Recall Election: Council To Order.
   (a)   The council, by resolution or ordinance passed within ten days after
receiving the petition and certificate of the city clerk, shall order and fix
the date for a recall election, which shall be held not less than forty days,
nor more than fifty days, after passage of the resolution or ordinance. The
city clerk shall cause the resolution or ordinance ordering the election to be
published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within the city within
ten days after its passage; and such publication shall be sufficient notice of
the election.
   (b)   The qualified electors of the city may vote in a recall election on
the election of successors to more than one officer on the same day.
Section 7-4. Same: How Held.
   (a)   The recall election shall be an election to fill the office held by
the incumbent sought to be recalled. There shall be no primary. Any qualified
person, including the incumbent, may file as a candidate for the office. The
candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in the recall election shall
be elected. If a candidate other than the incumbent is elected, the incumbent
shall be recalled from office effective as of the time when the result of the
election is certified. The successful candidate must qualify within one month
thereafter; and if he fails to do so, the office shall be vacant, and the
vacancy shall be filled as other vacancies in the council are filled. A
candidate thus elected and qualifying shall serve for the unexpired term. If
the incumbent is a candidate and receives the greatest number of votes, he
shall continue in office without interruption; and recall proceedings may not
again be initiated against him within one year after the election.
   (b)   The provisions of this Charter relating to city elections shall also
govern recall elections insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded
by the provisions of this article.
Section 7-5. Person Recalled Or Resigning.
A person who has been recalled from an office, or who has resigned from such
office while recall proceedings were pending against him, may not hold any
office or position of employment in the city government within three years
after his recall or resignation.
ARTICLE 8. GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 8-1. Feminine Gender.
When the masculine gender is used in this Charter, it shall also include the
feminine unless the masculine alone is clearly indicated.
Section 8-2. Initiative And Referendum.
The powers of the initiative and referendum are reserved to the people of the
city. In the exercise of these powers, the requirements of the state
constitution and law shall be observed.
ARTICLE 9. AMENDMENT AND SEPARABILITY OF CHARTER
Section 9-1. Amendment: Proposal, Ratification, Approval.
This Charter may be amended by proposals therefor submitted by the council, or
by the Mayor upon initiative petition of the electors as provided by the state
constitution, at a general or special election, ratified by a majority of the
qualified electors voting thereon, and approved by the governor as provided by
the state constitution. If more than one amendment is proposed, all of them
except those which are so interrelated that they should be ratified or rejected
together, shall be submitted in such manner that the electors may vote on them
separately. A proposition to amend this Charter may be either in the form of a
proposed amendment to a part or parts of the Charter or of a proposed new
Charter.
Section 9-2. Separability.
   (a)   If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any section or part of this
Charter invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter
nor the context in which such section or part so held invalid may appear,
except to the extent that an entire section or part may be inseparably
connected in meaning and effect with that section or part.
   (b)   If a court of competent jurisdiction holds a part of this Charter
invalid, or if a change in the state constitution or law renders a part of this
Charter invalid or inapplicable, the council by ordinance may take such
appropriate action as will enable the city government to function properly.
ARTICLE 10. SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
Section 10-1. When Charter Goes Into Effect; Previous Charter Repealed.
If a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the question vote
to ratify this Charter, this Charter shall go into effect for purposes of
election of councilmen upon approval by the governor. The Charter shall go into
full effect, and the government provided by it shall be inaugurated, at 7:30
o'clock p.m. on the fifth Tuesday after said approval by the governor; and the
heretofore existing Charter shall be repealed as of that time.
Section 10-2. Wards.
Until the council by ordinance provides otherwise, the four wards of the city
shall be constituted as follows:
      (1)   Ward One shall be composed of all that part of the city north of
Main Street and East of Fourth Street.
      (2)   Ward Two shall be composed of all that part of the city north of
Main Street and west of Fourth Street.
      (3)   Ward Three shall be composed of all that part of the city south of
Main Street and west of Fourth Street.
      (4)   Ward Four shall be composed of all that part of the city south of
Main Street and east of Fourth Street.
Section 10-3. Election To Be Held.
   (a)   On the fourth Tuesday after the governor approves this new Charter, an
election shall be held to elect a Mayor and a councilman from Ward Four. No
primary shall be held before the election.
   (b)   Candidates may file not later than two weeks before the election as
provided in Section 6-2 of this Charter.
   (c)   If only one person is a candidate for an office at this election, he
shall be elected ipso facto; and his name shall not appear on the election
ballot. Every qualified elector of the City shall be entitled to vote for one
candidate for each office to be filled. The candidate for each office receiving
the greatest number of votes shall be elected. In case of failure to elect
because of a tie, the election shall be determined, fairly by lot, by the
county election board in a public meeting, from among the candidates tying.
   (d)   The provisions of Article 6 of this Charter shall apply to the
election held under this section insofar as such provisions are applicable and
are not superseded by the provisions of this section.
   (e)   The Mayor and the councilman from Ward Four elected pursuant to this
section shall serve until the first Monday in May 1973 and 1974 respectively.
Section 10-4. Officers And Employees To Continue.
When this new Charter goes into full effect, the commissioner of public
property, the commissioner of finance, and the commissioner of public safety
under the previous Charter shall become respectively councilmen from Ward Two,
councilman from Ward Three, and councilman from Ward One, and shall continue in
office until their terms expire on the first Monday in May 1972, 1973, and 1974
respectively. The Executive City Clerk shall become city treasurer and also
city clerk (subject to the right of the council to provide that these two
offices be held by different persons). All other officers and employees under
the previous Charter (including members of boards and commissions), shall
continue in their respective offices and positions of employment under this
Charter until their respective terms expire or until their services are
terminated in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and ordinances
relating to the creation, change, and abolition of offices and removal of
officers and employees, as the case may be. The members of the library board at
the time this Charter goes into full effect shall determine the length of their
respective terms by casting lots, which terms shall be in accordance with
section 3-1 of this Charter.
Section 10-5. Ordinances Continued.
All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this Charter shall
continue in effect until they are repealed or until they expire by their own
limitations.
Section 10-6. Pending Actions And Proceedings.
The adoption of this Charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any action or
proceeding, civil or criminal, pending when it takes effect, brought by or
against the municipality or any office, department, agency, or officer thereof.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
Incorporation; Governing Authority   1
Official City Code   2
Saving Clause   3
Definitions; Interpretations   4
General Penalty   5
Wards And Boundaries   6
Elections   7
Mayor And City Council   8
City Officers And Employees   9
  City Administrator And Acting Administrator   9A
  Municipal Judge; Alternate And Acting Judges   9B
  City Attorney   9C
  Fire Chief And Assistant Chief   9D
  Inspectors   9E
  Street Superintendent   9F
City Departments, Committees   10
  Finance Department; City Clerk; City Treasurer   10A
  Police Department   10B
  Fire Department   10C
  Civil Defense Department; Director; Committee   10D
Police And Fire Pensions   11
Finances; Funds   12
Municipal Court   13
CHAPTER 1
INCORPORATION; GOVERNING AUTHORITY 1
SECTION:
1-1-1: Incorporation
1-1-2: Form Of Government
1-1-3: General Powers Of City
 
Notes
1 1. See articles 1 and 2 of the city charter.
1-1-1: INCORPORATION:
The city of Marlow, Oklahoma, within the corporate limits as now established or
as hereafter may be established, shall continue to be a municipal body politic
and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the "City of Marlow, Oklahoma".
It shall succeed to and possess all the property, rights, privileges,
franchises, powers and immunities now belonging to the corporation known as the
city of Marlow, Oklahoma, and shall be liable for all debts and other
obligations for which the corporation is now legally bound. (1985 Code § 1-1)
1-1-2: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The municipal government provided for the city of Marlow shall be the form of
government outlined in the Marlow city charter. All powers of the city shall be
exercised in the manner prescribed by this city code, the city charter, future
ordinances or state law; provided, that this code and all future ordinances are
not repugnant to the state constitution and laws. (1985 Code § 1-2)
1-1-3: GENERAL POWERS OF CITY:
   A.   The city shall have all the powers, functions, rights, privileges,
franchises and immunities specifically granted to municipalities, or not
prohibited by the state constitution and laws, and all the implied powers
necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted.
   B.   The city shall have the power to adopt a corporate seal and alter the
same, to sue and be sued, to make contracts and to grant, extend and renew
franchises. It shall have the power to issue bonds, in accordance with the
state constitution and laws. It shall have the power, in accordance with the
state constitution and laws, to accept and administer federal and state grants-
in-aid. It shall have the power to ordain and enforce local legislation,
consistent with the state constitution and laws, for the proper organization
and functioning of municipal government, for the preservation and enforcement
of good government and order, for the protection of health, life, peace,
safety, morals and property, for the prevention, summary abatement and removal
of nuisances, and otherwise for the promotion of the common welfare.
   C.   The enumeration of particular powers of this code shall not be deemed
to be exclusive or limiting. In addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied hereby, the city shall have all powers which, under the state
constitution and laws, it would be competent for this code specifically to
enumerate. (1985 Code § 1-3)
CHAPTER 2
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Title
1-2-2: Acceptance Of Code
1-2-3: Amendments
1-2-4: Ordinances In Effect In Outlying Territory Of City
1-2-5: Code Alterations
1-2-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Marlow. This city code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the MARLOW CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-2-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this city code by title in any legal documents. (2004 Code)
1-2-2: ACCEPTANCE OF CODE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-3-1 of this title. (2004 Code)
1-2-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the city code. (2004 Code)
1-2-4: ORDINANCES IN EFFECT IN OUTLYING TERRITORY OF CITY:
   A.   All provisions of this code and ordinances of the city now in effect or
adopted in the future, are hereby extended to all real property belonging to,
or under the control of, the city of Marlow, outside the corporate limits of
the city, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar as they are applicable.
   B.   Any words in any such provision indicating that the effect is limited
to the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include also
the outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. (1985 Code § 8-13)
1-2-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city
clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-3-1: Certain Ordinances Not Affected By Code
1-3-2: Enumeration Of State And Local Provisions
1-3-3: Court Proceedings
1-3-4: Saving Clause
1-3-1: CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE:
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be construed to
repeal, or otherwise affect the validity of, any of the following, and all such
ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the
same extent as if set out at length herein:
   A.   Ordinances promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city,
authorizing the issuance of any municipal bonds or any evidence of the city's
indebtedness;
   B.   Appropriation ordinances, or ordinances providing for: 1) the levy of
taxes; 2) an annual budget; or 3) prescribing salaries for city officers and
employees;
   C.   Ordinances annexing or de-annexing territory to or from the city;
   D.   Ordinances approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to, any
contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument, or granting any
franchise;
   E.   Ordinances authorizing or otherwise relating to specific public
improvements;
   F.   Ordinances vacating, opening or dedicating specific streets and alleys;
   G.   Ordinances relating to specific street improvements and assessments
therefor;
   H.   Ordinances relating to the grade or alignment of specific streets;
   I.   Ordinances naming or renaming specific streets;
   J.   Ordinances granting railroads the right to use specific streets and
alleys;
   K.   Ordinances changing the zoning district classification of a specific
parcel of real property; or
   L.   Temporary or special ordinances. (1985 Code § 8-10)
1-3-2: ENUMERATION OF STATE AND LOCAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Provisions of state law which affect the city because of its general
relationship to the state may not be enumerated herein, but may be adopted by
reference as inseparable parts of this code.
   B.   Provisions of state law which prescribe specific actions or laws for
the city, and its citizens, may be included in this code for purposes of
clarity.
   C.   Provisions of state law in matters of wider public concern which are
not enumerated herein, but which affect the city and its citizens in a general
way, may not be enumerated herein, but may nevertheless be made a part of this
code through adoption by reference.
   D.   All provisions which are of purely local concern may be specifically
enumerated in this code. The regulations, rules, prohibitions, nuisances,
offenses and other provisions which are of purely local concern, as provided by
state law, and are specifically enumerated herein in detail, shall be enforced
by the city. Duly authorized officers and agents of the city shall have all
powers, duties and responsibilities necessary to enforce the same. (1985 Code §
8-11)
1-3-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed
as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance
of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances
contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a
new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue,
or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving
any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the
time of the adoption of this city code. (2004 Code)
1-3-4: SAVING CLAUSE:
   A.   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
separable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of said
code shall be declared invalid by the judgment or decree of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of said code, since the
same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in
this code of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
   B.   Further, if any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of
this code shall seem invalid through printing or typographical error, such
error or misprint shall not serve to misconstrue or invalidate the intent
thereof, nor affect in any way the intent or validity of any or all other
words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this code. (1985
Code § 8-16)
CHAPTER 4
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATIONS
SECTION:
1-4-1: Word Construction And Interpretation
1-4-2: Definitions, General
1-4-3: Catchlines
1-4-1: WORD CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Number And Gender: Whenever any word in any section of this city code
importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters,
parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be
included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject
matter, party or person is referred to in this city code by words importing the
singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or
persons and the opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be
included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to
any section of this city code which contains any express provision excluding
such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant
thereto.
   B.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense shall include the
future, as well as the past and present.
   C.   Or, And: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the
sense requires it.
   D.   May, Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   E.   Preceding, Following: Next before and next after, respectively.
   F.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this city code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
   G.   Terms Not Defined: Words and phrases which are not specifically defined
shall be construed according to the common and accepted usage of the language,
but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar
and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to
such meaning. (1988 Code § 8-1; amd. 2004 Code)
1-4-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   CLEET: Council on law enforcement and education training.
   CHIEF OF POLICE OR POLICE CHIEF: The chief of police or the police officer
in charge of the police force of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   CITY: The city of Marlow, in Stephens County, Oklahoma.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   CITY ATTORNEY: The city attorney of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   CITY COUNCIL OR COUNCIL: The governing body of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   CITY TREASURER: The city treasurer of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   CODE: Reference to "this code" or "the code" shall mean the code of
ordinances of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME: Whenever notice is required to be given (or an act to
be done) a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day
on which such notice is given (or such act is done) shall be excluded in
computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had, shall be
included.
   COUNTY: The county of Stephens, state of Oklahoma.
   COURT OR MUNICIPAL COURT: The municipal court of the city of Marlow,
Oklahoma.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
city of Marlow, Oklahoma".
   GENDER: A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to
other genders and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well.
   HEALTH OFFICER OR HEALTH DEPARTMENT: Whenever reference is made to the
"health officer" or the "health department", it shall be construed as meaning
the county sanitarian or county health department, unless specific reference is
made to the appointed health officer of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   HIGHWAY: Shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place,
square, bridge, underpass or overpass in the city of Marlow, Oklahoma,
dedicated or devoted to public use.
   JOINT AUTHORITY: Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
   JUDGE: The judge of the municipal court of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma,
including the acting judge and/or alternate judge thereof, as provided by
Oklahoma Statutes and this city code.
   JUDICIAL DISTRICT: The district court judicial district of the state of
Oklahoma, wherein the situs of government of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma, is
situated.
   LAW: Includes applicable federal law, provisions of the constitution and
statutes of the state of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city, and, when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   MAYOR: The chief elected officer of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   MONTH: A calendar month.
   OS: Oklahoma Statutes.
   OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
   OFFICERS, AGENCIES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city
officer, department, board, commission or other agency by title only, this
reference shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Marlow, Oklahoma".
   OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON: Shall extend, and be applied to, associations, corporations, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the word "person", as applied to
partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and
as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   POLICEMAN: The chief of police or any police officer of the city of Marlow,
Oklahoma.
   PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic.
   SIDEWALK: Any portion of the street right of way between the curb (or
lateral line of the roadway) and the adjacent property line, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
   SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
   STATE: The state of Oklahoma.
   STATUTORY REFERENCES: References to statutes of the state of Oklahoma as
they now are or as they may be amended to be.
   STREET: Shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue, public place,
underpass or overpass in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
   WRITTEN OR IN WRITING: Shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
   YEAR: Unless otherwise designated, shall mean a calendar year. (1985 Code §
8-1; amd. 2004 Code)
1-4-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1985 Code § 8-
15)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-5-1: General And Specific Penalties; Judicial Relief
1-5-2: Lawyer Or Nonlawyer As Judge; Penalty Limitation
1-5-3: Application Of Provisions
1-5-4: Liability Of Officers
1-5-1: GENERAL AND SPECIFIC PENALTIES; JUDICIAL RELIEF:
   A.   General Penalty: Whenever, in this code or in any ordinance of the city
of Marlow, Oklahoma, an act is prohibited, is made or declared to be unlawful,
an offense, or misdemeanor, or whenever in this code or any ordinance the doing
of an act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such
ordinance or provision of this code shall be punishable as follows:
The maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine for traffic related offenses
relating to speeding or parking shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).
The maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine for alcohol related or drug
related offenses shall not exceed eight hundred dollars ($800.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
For all other offenses, the maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine
shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or imprisonment not to
exceed sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. The court shall
remit fifty dollars ($50.00) of each alcohol related fine or deferral fee to a
fund of the municipality that shall be used to defray costs for enforcement of
laws relating to juvenile access to alcohol, other laws relating to alcohol and
other intoxicating substances, and traffic related offenses involving alcohol
or other intoxicating substances. Additional fees and costs shall be charged
pursuant to the provisions of section
1-13-20 of this title. For violations of the city ordinances regulating the
pretreatment of wastewater and regulating stormwater discharges the maximum
fine shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and costs or
imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment.
In accordance with 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 14-111, as amended, the city
shall not impose a penalty, including fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine
and costs, which is greater than that established by statute for the same
offense. Each day on which any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
   B.   Specific Penalties; Schedule Of Fines:
      1.   A schedule of fines is hereby established by the city council.
Specific penalties for offenses not listed herein may be set by resolution of
the city council. The schedule of fines may be amended from time to time by
resolution of the city council, provided that such fines are within the penalty
limits provided in subsection A of this section. The schedule of fines created
and amended by the city council is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference. Copies of the city's full schedule of fines shall be available in
the offices of the city clerk and the municipal court clerk.
      2.   The following schedule of fines shall be in effect except where a
specific fine is addressed in another section or set by state law; applicable
fees and costs shall be assessed according to section
 1-13-20 of this title:
 
Description Of Offense Fine Amount
Abatement of public health nuisances                                   $350.00
Alcoholic or intoxicating beverages - possession of or to drink in     100.00
public
Allowing a passenger to ride outside of vehicle                        10.00
Altered license plate                                                  200.00
Animal not to be at large                                              105.00
Assault and battery                                                    500.00
Attempt to commit offense                                              200.00
Careless driving                                                       200.00
Carrying concealed weapons                                             200.00
Certain conduct prohibited on or near school grounds                   200.00
Cleaning and mowing of property                                        200.00
Contribute to the delinquency of a minor                               150.00
Creating a disturbance                                                 100.00
Crossing fire hose                                                     200.00
Cruelty to animals                                                     150.00
Damaging or destroying property                                        500.00
Damaging utility poles                                                 500.00
Discharging firearms; air rifles or BB guns                            500.00
Disturbances by animals; public nuisance abatement                     200.00
Disturbing the peace; obscene gestures; harassing phone calls          100.00
Drive a vehicle with more than 3 persons in front seat                 200.00
Driving off of roadway when overtaking on right                        200.00
Driving under suspension                                               350.00
Driving vehicle on sidewalk                                            200.00
Eluding a police officer                                               200.00
Escape of prisoners                                                    500.00
Expired driver's license                                               300.00
Expired tag                                                            200.00
Explosives                                                             500.00
Fail to comply with order or direction of a police officer             200.00
Fail to display lighted lamps on vehicle when required                 150.00
Fail to obey traffic control device                                    150.00
Fail to pay taxes due state                                            200.00
Fail to signal intent to turn                                          100.00
Fail to yield                                                          100.00
Fail to yield to train/fail to obey RR signal/gates                    100.00
Failure to comply with compulsory insurance law                        250.00
Failure to restrain child                                              50.00
Failure to wear seat belt                                              20.00
Failure to yield to emergency vehicle                                  100.00
False fire alarms                                                      200.00
False or bogus checks                                                  200.00
False representation to municipal officials                            200.00
Fireworks discharge of prohibited                                      100.00
Fireworks sale, possession of prohibited                               200.00
Flight from an officer                                                 200.00
Follow too closely                                                     100.00
Following fire apparatus prohibited                                    100.00
Funerals; traffic violations                                           100.00
Gambling prohibited                                                    200.00
Harmful deception                                                      100.00
Illegal turn/approach                                                  200.00
Illegal U-turn                                                         200.00
Illicit use of certain chemical compounds                              200.00
Immoral conduct, shows, exhibitions; nudity                            200.00
Impede normal flow of traffic                                          100.00
Impersonating municipal officer or employee                            300.00
Improper backing                                                       100.00
Improper tag display                                                   100.00
Interference with fire alarm systems                                   200.00
Keeping animals                                                        200.00
Leaving the scene of an accident                                       500.00
Left of center                                                         250.00
License requirements for kennels, pet shops                            200.00
Littering                                                              250.00
Loading zone violation                                                 200.00
Loitering                                                              100.00
No driver's license in possession                                      350.00
No insurance verification                                              250.00
Nonintoxicating beverages - possession of or to drink in public        100.00
Obstruction of driver's view                                           200.00
Obstructions: sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements, public rights of  100.00
way
Offenses relating to controlled dangerous substance                    500.00
Operate motor vehicle in manner not reasonable and proper              200.00
Operate vehicle without driver's license                               300.00
Operating unauthorized vehicle on roadway                              300.00
Parking in posted                                                      20.00
Parking violations                                                     100.00
Passing a stopped school bus                                           500.00
Passing in a no passing zone                                           300.00
Permit unauthorized person to drive                                    200.00
Permit violation for Lake Taylor                                       250.00
Petit larceny                                                          250.00
Possession of CDS (drugs)                                              500.00
Possession of drug paraphernalia                                       500.00
Possession of marijuana                                                500.00
Prostitution; illicit sexual relations                                 500.00
Public drunk; state of intoxication                                    100.00
Pump piracy                                                            400.00
Receiving stolen property                                              250.00
Reckless driving                                                       400.00
Refusing or failing to assist a policeman                              250.00
Removal of barricades                                                  200.00
Removal of unsafe structures                                           200.00
Removed license plate or affixed unauthorized license plate on a       400.00
vehicle with the intent to conceal or misrepresent identity of vehicle
Resisting arrest                                                       350.00
Riding or clinging to vehicles                                         25.00
Size and weight of vehicles; truck routes                              200.00
Soliciting without a city permit                                       200.00
Speeding 1 - 10                                                        100.00
Speeding 11 - 15                                                       125.00
Speeding 16 - 20                                                       150.00
Speeding 21 - 25                                                       175.00
Speeding 26 and over                                                   200.00
Speeding in a construction zone                                        200.00
Speeding in school zone                                                200.00
Stopping or parking in prohibited places                               200.00
TOC; alcoholic or intoxicating beverages                               250.00
TOC; nonintoxicating beverages                                         200.00
Tampering with public utilities                                        500.00
Texting while driving                                                  50.00
Transporting a loaded firearm                                          250.00
Traveling on nonspecified truck route                                  200.00
Trespassing                                                            200.00
Under 21 year old person being at, or within any place of business
where nonintoxicating beverages are sold for consumption on the        100.00
premises
Under 21 year old person; possession of nonintoxicating beverage       200.00
Under 21 year old person; purchase, receive or procure nonintoxicating 200.00
beverages
Unlawful assembly                                                      250.00
Unlawful entry                                                         250.00
Unlawful intrusion upon land                                           250.00
Unlawful posting of advertising material                               200.00
Unlawful throwing or shooting of objects or bows and arrows            200.00
Unsafe lane change                                                     200.00
Vehicles; defective equipment                                          200.00
Vehicles; equipment, improper exhaust                                  200.00
Vicious animals                                                        200.00
Violation of restriction on driver's license                           100.00
Wrong way on a one-way street                                          200.00
 
   C.   Fines In Lieu Of Appearance: At the discretion of the judge of the
municipal court, persons who are cited for a violation of this code or an
ordinance of the city may elect to pay a fine in lieu of appearance before the
municipal court according to the schedule of fines set by the city council.
Payment of said fine in lieu of appearance shall be made in the traffic
violations bureau and such payment shall constitute a final determination of
the cause against the defendant.
   D.   Judicial Relief: No penalty imposed by, and pursuant to, this code
shall interfere with the right of the city also to apply to the proper courts
of the state of Oklahoma for a mandamus, an injunction or other appropriate
action against such person, firm or corporation. (Ord. 417, 1-24-2017)
1-5-2: LAWYER OR NONLAWYER AS JUDGE; PENALTY LIMITATION:
   A.   Licensed Attorney As Judge: If the judge of the municipal court of the
city is a licensed attorney and the trial is to the court, the court may impose
a fine not to exceed the maximum amount allowed for that offense in a municipal
court not of record as provided by law.
   B.   Nonlawyer Judge:
      1.   If the judge of the municipal court is not a licensed attorney and
has not complied with the education requirements of 11 Oklahoma Statutes
section 27-104 and 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 18-101, the trial shall be to
the court, and the court may not impose a fine of more than fifty dollars
($50.00), and may not order the defendant imprisoned except for the nonpayment
of fines or costs or both.
      2.   If the judge of the municipal court is not a licensed attorney but
has complied with the education requirements of 11 Oklahoma Statutes section
27-104 and 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 18-101, the maximum fine that may be
imposed shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 417, 1-24-2017)
1-5-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2004 Code)
1-5-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2004
Code)
CHAPTER 6
WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION:
1-6-1: City Council Wards
1-6-2: Corporate Boundaries Map
1-6-3: Zoning Districts Boundaries Map
1-6-1: CITY COUNCIL WARDS 1 :
The four (4) city council wards shall be as follows:
   A.   The ward boundary line established as Main Street in section 10-2 of
the city charter shall be extended due east in a straight line to the current
city limits and due west in a straight line to the current city limits. The
ward boundary line established as Fourth Street in section 10-2 of the city
charter shall be extended due north in a straight line to the current city
limits and due south in a straight line to the current city limits.
   B.   Ward 1 shall be composed of all that part of the city north of the said
straight line extension of the Main Street ward boundary line and east of the
said straight line extension of the Fourth Street ward boundary line.
   C.   Ward 2 shall be composed of all that part of the city north of the said
straight line extension of the Main Street ward boundary line and west of the
said straight line extension of the Fourth Street ward boundary line.
   D.   Ward 3 shall be composed of all that part of the city south of the said
straight line extension of the Main Street ward boundary line and west of the
said straight line extension of the Fourth Street ward boundary line.
   E.   Ward 4 shall be composed of all that part of the city south of the said
straight line extension of the Main Street ward boundary line and east of the
said straight line extension of the Fourth Street ward boundary line. (Ord.
377, 12-23-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 10-2 of the city charter.
1-6-2: CORPORATE BOUNDARIES MAP:
   A.   Map Maintained In Clerk's Office: A map depicting the current corporate
boundaries of the city shall be maintained and displayed in the office of the
city clerk.
   B.   Contents Of Map: This map shall reflect all current annexation and de-
annexation ordinances and orders, all plat and/or street vacation orders, and
shall represent the official map of the corporate boundaries of the city.
   C.   Combining With Zoning Districts Map: This map may be combined with the
official zoning districts map (see section
1-6-3 of this chapter). All dedicated streets and alleys shall be shown on this
map; vacated streets and alleys shall not be shown on said map, but shall be
redrawn by the methods provided by Oklahoma Statutes.
   D.   Available For Inspection: This map shall be available for public
inspection. (1985 Code § 20-5)
1-6-3: ZONING DISTRICTS BOUNDARIES MAP:
   A.   Map Maintained In Clerk's Office: A map showing the boundaries of all
current zoning districts within the entire corporate boundaries of the city
shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk.
   B.   Contents Of Map: This map shall reflect all current zoning ordinance
provisions (see title 10 of this code) and all current ordinances rezoning
land, and shall represent the official zoning districts map for the city.
   C.   Combining With Corporate Limits Map: This map may be combined with the
official map of the corporate limits of the city. (See section
1-6-2 of this chapter.)
   D.   Available For Inspection: This map shall be available for public
inspection. (1985 Code § 20-10)
   E.   New Map: A new zoning districts map is hereby adopted by reference, for
use with the city's adopted zoning ordinance. Said map shall be known as the
official zoning districts map, and shall be maintained and certified by the
city clerk, in cooperation with the building inspector and city administrator.
(Ord. 307, 8-30-1988; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS 1
SECTION:
1-7-1: Absentee Ballots
1-7-2: City Candidate Filing Period
1-7-3: Primary Election Schedule
1-7-4: General Election Schedule
 
Notes
1 1. See article 6 of the city charter.
1-7-1: ABSENTEE BALLOTS:
The use of absentee ballots in all city elections is hereby authorized in
accordance with state law. (1985 Code § 1-156)
1-7-2: CITY CANDIDATE FILING PERIOD:
The filing period shall begin on the first Monday of December at eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and shall continue for a period of three (3) days through Wednesday
at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (Ord. 384, 8-30-2005)
1-7-3: PRIMARY ELECTION SCHEDULE:
A primary election shall be held on the second Tuesday in February, except
that, in a presidential primary year, the February primary election shall be
held on the same date in February as the presidential preferential primary
election (currently held on the first Tuesday of February). (Ord. 384, 8-30-
2005)
1-7-4: GENERAL ELECTION SCHEDULE:
A general election shall be held on the first Tuesday in April. (Ord. 384, 8-
30-2005)
CHAPTER 8
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-8-1: Composition; Qualifications
1-8-2: Mayor And Vice Mayor
1-8-3: Powers Of Council
1-8-4: Municipal Policy And Business
1-8-5: Council Meetings
1-8-1: COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS 1 :
   A.   Composition: There shall be a city council of five (5) members, which
shall consist of the mayor as council member at large, and one council member
from each of the four (4) wards of the city, as the wards are constituted in
the city charter, or as they may hereafter be constituted by ordinance 2 .
   B.   Qualifications: Only qualified electors of the city who are at least
twenty five (25) years of age, who are not in litigation with the city nor in
arrears for city taxes when elected, and who have been for one year next
preceding the date of election, bona fide residents and property tax payers of
the city or territory annexed to the city, shall be qualified for the offices
of mayor and council member. Council members from the wards shall also be
residents of their respective wards.
   C.   Criminal Conviction; Termination Of Office: If the mayor or any other
council member is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, his office
shall become vacant immediately when the case is finally determined. (1985 Code
§ 1-10)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 2-1 of the city charter.
2 2. See section 10-2 of the city charter, and section
  1-6-1 of this title.
1-8-2: MAYOR AND VICE MAYOR 1 :
   A.   Powers Of Mayor:
      1.   The mayor shall preside at meetings of the city council.
      2.   He shall be recognized as head of the municipal government for all
ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law.
      3.   As a council member, he shall have all powers, rights, privileges,
duties and responsibilities of a council member, including the right to vote on
questions.
      4.   He shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by
the city charter or by ordinance.
   B.   Vice Mayor:
      1.   Election From Council Members; Term: At the first meeting after the
time prescribed for the beginning of the terms of newly elected council
members, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council shall elect from its
membership a vice mayor, who shall serve as such until the next such first
meeting.
      2.   Duties: The vice mayor shall act as mayor during the absence or
disability of the mayor, or, if a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, until
another mayor is elected by the council for completion of the unexpired term
and qualifies.
      3.   Vacancy: If the office of vice mayor becomes vacant, the council
shall elect from its membership another vice mayor for completion of the
unexpired term. (1985 Code § 1-20)
 
Notes
1 3. See section 2-2 of the city charter.
1-8-3: POWERS OF COUNCIL:
Except as otherwise provided in this code, all powers of the city, including
the determination of matters of policy, shall be vested in the city council.
The city council shall have, and may utilize, all of the powers granted to the
city and said city council by the state constitution and laws. (1985 Code § 1-
11)
1-8-4: MUNICIPAL POLICY AND BUSINESS:
   A.   Setting Policy; Limitations: The city council shall set policy for the
efficient administration of municipal government and carry out their
responsibilities, powers and duties as officers and as a corporate and politic
body, within the limits prescribed by the state constitution and laws and this
city code. (1985 Code § 1-12)
   B.   Discrimination: It shall be the policy of the municipal government that
no person shall be discriminated against on the grounds of race, creed, color,
sex, religion, national origin, age, or handicap, unless such action is related
to a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal
operation of the city, in employment or other activities sponsored directly or
indirectly by the city. (1985 Code § 1-12; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Voting Requirements And Restrictions:
      1.   Every member of the city council who shall be present when the
opportunity or need arises to vote upon a question, shall vote thereon, unless
excused by the unanimous consent of those city council members present, or
unless he is directly or indirectly interested in the question, in which event
he shall disclose his interest to the city council and it shall be made a
matter of record.
      2.   Voting procedures of the city council shall be consistent with the
requirements of the city charter, state law and other local regulations. (1985
Code § 1-12)
1-8-5: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
   A.   Dates, Times And Place Of Meetings: Municipal business shall be
conducted at regularly scheduled open and public meetings held in the city hall
(or another agreed upon place which is open to the public), on dates and times
listed in the "Schedule of Regular Meetings" adopted by the city council and
Marlow municipal authority and filed with the secretary of state. (Ord. 309,
11-29-1988)
   B.   Special Or Emergency Meetings: Special or emergency city council
meetings may be called by the mayor, or by a majority of the council, upon the
serving of notice, as requested by current state law.
   C.   Order Of Business: The city council shall establish, by motion or
resolution, an order of business for the conduct of its meetings. (1985 Code §
1-13)
CHAPTER 9
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-9-1: Bonds Of Officers
1-9-2: Succession In Government
1-9-3: Nepotism; Compatibility Of Offices
1-9-4: Conflict Of Interest
1-9-5: Employee Retirement System
1-9-6: Workers' Compensation Fund; Policy
1-9-7: Social Security
1-9-1: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
   A.   Bond Amounts: The city clerk, city treasurer, city administrator and
the mayor and council members shall each give bonds, payable to the city,
within ten (10) days after their election or appointment, in the following
manner:
 
City clerk                     $40,000.00
City treasurer                 40,000.00
City administrator             10,000.00
Mayor and council members      5,000.00
Other employees (blanket bond) 1,000.00
 
   B.   Additional Bond Requirements: The city council may establish additional
bond requirements for certain other city officers and employees. (1985 Code §
1-155)
1-9-2: SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT:
   A.   Ordinances In Effect: All ordinances, insofar as they are not
inconsistent with this code, shall continue in effect until they are repealed
or until they expire by their own limitations.
   B.   Officers And Employees: All officers and employees of the city, under
any and all previous ordinances, shall continue in the offices and employments
which they respectively hold, after this city code goes into effect.
   C.   Books And Records To Successor: All books, vouchers, monies or other
property belonging to the city, and in charge or possession of any officer of
the city, shall be delivered to his successor. (1985 Code § 1-156)
1-9-3: NEPOTISM; COMPATIBILITY OF OFFICES:
   A.   Limitations On Appointments: No member of the city council nor any
other authority of the city government may appoint, or vote for the appointment
of, any person related to himself by affinity or consanguinity within the third
degree, to any office or position of profit in the city government.
   B.   Relatives Within Third Degree Of Affinity:
      1.   The following relatives shall be considered as within the third
degree of affinity or consanguinity: son, daughter, grandson, granddaughter,
great grandson, great granddaughter, brother, sister, nephew, niece, aunt,
uncle, primary cousin, grandfather, grandmother, grand uncle, grand aunt, great
grandfather, great grandmother, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandson-in-law,
granddaughter-in-law, great grandson-in-law, great granddaughter-in-law,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, nephew-in-law, niece-in-law, aunt-in-law, uncle-
in-law, primary cousin-in-law, grandfather-in-law, grandmother-in-law, grand
uncle-in-law, grand aunt-in-law, great grandfather-in-law, great grandmother-
in-law, grand nephew, grand niece, grand nephew-in- law, grand niece-in-law,
stepson, stepdaughter, stepfather or stepmother.
      2.   A divorce decree shall be deemed to dissolve all relationships
arising by that marriage.
   C.   Holding Multiple Offices: Except as may be otherwise provided by
ordinance, the same person may hold more than one office or position in the
city government. (1985 Code § 1-157)
1-9-4: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
   A.   Actions Restricted:
      1.   The city administrator shall not sell or barter anything to the city
or to a contractor to be supplied to the city, make any contract with the city,
or purchase anything from the city, other than those things which the city
offers generally to the public (as for example, utility services), and then
only on the same terms as are offered to the public.
      2.   Violation; Termination Of Office: Any such officer violating this
subsection A, upon conviction thereof, shall thereby forfeit his office. Any
violation of this subsection, with the knowledge, express or implied, of the
person or corporation contracting with the city, shall render the contract
voidable by the city council.
      3.   Property Acquired By Condemnation: This subsection shall not apply
in cases in which the city acquires property by condemnation.
   B.   Regulate By Ordinance Or Personnel Rules: The city council, by
ordinance or personnel rules, may further regulate conflicts of interest and
ethics of officers and employees of the city. (1985 Code § 1-25)
1-9-5: EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
   A.   System Created: Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the
state of Oklahoma, and for the purpose of encouraging continuity and
meritorious service on the part of city employees and thereby promote public
efficiency, there is hereby authorized, created, established, approved and
adopted, effective as of March 1, 2000, the funded pension plan designated
"Employee Retirement System Of The City Of Marlow, Oklahoma, Defined
Contribution Plan" (hereinafter called "system"), an executed counterpart of
which is marked exhibit A and attached to ordinance 363 on file in the office
of the city clerk.
   B.   Administration: For the purpose of administration of the system, there
is hereby established a board of trustees, which shall be the members of the
city council, as now existing or as from time to time duly elected or appointed
and constituted. The powers and duties of the board of trustees shall be set
forth in the system instrument designated hereinbefore as exhibit A. (Ord. 363,
4-25-2000)
   C.   Fund: A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of
the persons entitled to benefits under the system. All contributions to such
fund shall be paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the city
treasurer, who shall be the treasurer of the system. Such fund shall be pooled
for purposes of management and investment with similar funds of other
incorporated cities, towns, and municipal trusts in the state of Oklahoma, as a
part of the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund, in accordance with the trust
agreement of the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund, a public trust. The city
treasurer shall hold such contributions in the form received, and from time to
time pay over and transfer the same to the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund,
as duly authorized and directed by the board of trustees. (Ord. 363, 4-25-2000;
amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Appropriations: The city is hereby authorized to incur the necessary
expenses for the establishment, operation and administration of the system and
to appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the city is hereby authorized to
appropriate annually such amounts as are required in addition to employee
contributions, to maintain the system and the fund in accordance with the
provisions of the defined contribution plan. Any appropriation so made to
maintain the system and fund shall be for deferred wages or salaries, and for
the payment of necessary expenses of operation and administration to be
transferred to the trustees of the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund for such
purposes, and shall be paid into the fund when available, through the city
treasurer, to be by him duly transferred to the Oklahoma municipal retirement
fund.
   E.   Execution:
      1.   The mayor and city clerk are each hereby authorized and directed to
execute (in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original), the
system instrument, and to do all other acts and things necessary, advisable and
proper to put said system and related trust into full force and effect, and to
make such changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same under
sections 401(a) and 501(a) of the internal revenue code of the United States.
The counterpart designated as exhibit A, which has been duly executed as
aforesaid simultaneously with the adoption of this section and made a part
hereof, is hereby ratified and confirmed in all respects.
      2.   The city council is hereby authorized and directed to proceed
immediately on behalf of the city to negotiate a contract with other
incorporated cities and towns of the state of Oklahoma to pool and combine the
fund into the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund as a part thereof, with
similar funds of such other cities and towns, for purposes of pooled management
and investment.
   F.   Separability: If, regardless of cause, any subsection, paragraph,
sentence or clause of this section, including the system as set forth in
exhibit A (which is on file in the office of the city clerk and is made a part
hereof by reference thereto), is held invalid or to be unconstitutional, the
remaining subsections, paragraphs, sentences or clauses shall continue in full
force and effect and shall be construed thereafter as being the entire
provisions of this section.
   G.   Conflicting Laws: Any ordinance inconsistent with the terms and
provisions of this section is hereby repealed; provided, however that, such
repeal shall be only to the extent of such inconsistency and in all other
respects this section shall be cumulative of other ordinances regulating and
governing the subject matter covered by this section. (Ord. 363, 4-25-2000)
   H.   Amendments: Any and all future amendments to said system shall be
incorporated in the system by making appropriate changes to the adopted exhibit
A attached to ordinance 363, which is on file in the office of the city clerk.
The following ordinances amend the employee retirement system, as adopted
pursuant to said ordinance 363:
Ordinance 367, adopted May 22, 2001.
      Ordinance 373, adopted February 25, 2003.
      Ordinance 374, adopted February 25, 2003.
      Ordinance 375, adopted October 28, 2003.
      Ordinance 376, adopted October 28, 2003.
(Ord. 363, 4-25-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
1-9-6: WORKERS' COMPENSATION FUND; POLICY:
   A.   Policy: The city council hereby deems it in the best interest of the
city to stabilize workers' compensation premiums by establishing a trust and
agency fund for the purpose of reserving funds for future payments of workers'
compensation claims pursuant to an agreement dated June 28, 1988, between the
city and the Oklahoma Municipal Assurance Group (OMAG). Said agreement is made
part of this section. (See exhibit A attached to ordinance 306 on file in the
office of the city clerk.)
   B.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings:
   GROUP: Oklahoma Municipal Assurance Group (OMAG).
   PLAN: Oklahoma Municipal Assurance Group (OMAG) workers' compensation plan.
   TRUST AND AGENCY FUND: The City of Marlow - Oklahoma Municipal Assurance
Group (OMAG) workers' compensation plan trust and agency fund.
   C.   Trust And Agency Fund:
      1.   There is hereby created a trust and agency fund for the purpose of
reserving funds for future payment of workers' compensation claims pursuant to
an agreement dated June 28, 1988, with the Oklahoma Municipal Assurance Group
(OMAG) workers' compensation plan trust and agency fund. (Ord. 306, 6-28-1988;
amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   The city clerk shall transfer into the trust and agency fund monies
equal to the amount so designated and invoiced by the group and approved by the
city council. Said monies are to be held in trust for future payments of
workers' compensation claims as required by the group or until released under
the terms of subsection F of this section.
      3.   In the event the city is unable to transfer the said amount invoiced
into the trust and agency fund upon approval by the city council, then the city
clerk shall take appropriate steps to make periodic payments into the trust and
agency fund in order that the amount invoiced is available for payment to the
group by the next June 30.
   D.   Earned Interest Transfer: The city clerk may transfer any interest
earned from the trust and agency fund into the general fund (or other
appropriate fund as designated by the city council).
   E.   Workers' Compensation Claims:
      1.   Only claims made by the group pursuant to the agreement dated June
28, 1988, between the group and the city shall be paid from the trust and
agency fund, with the exception of earned interest transfers, as described in
subsection D of this section.
      2.   Upon presentation of a claim by the group for any and all amounts in
the trust and agency fund, the city clerk shall make payment forthwith to the
group.
   F.   Release Of Funds: In the event that the city receives written notice of
release from the group that monies reserved in the trust and agency fund are no
longer needed, the city clerk shall transfer said monies to the general fund
(or other appropriate fund as designated by the city council).
   G.   Annual Audited Financial Statement: The city shall send to the group
the annual audited financial statement of the trust and agency fund no later
than January 1, following the end of each fiscal year.
   H.   Effective Date: The effective date of this section shall be July 1,
1988. (Ord. 306, 6-28-1988)
1-9-7: SOCIAL SECURITY:
   A.   Extension Of Benefits: It is hereby declared to be the policy and
purpose of the city to extend to the employees and officials thereof, not
excluded by law or this section, and whether employed in connection with a
governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of federal old
age and survivors insurance, as authorized by the federal social security act
and amendments thereto, including public law 734 - 81st congress. In pursuance
of such policy and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (1985 Code § 1-
140)
   B.   Execution Of Agreements: The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to
execute all necessary agreements, and amendments thereto, with the state
department of public welfare as agent or agency, to secure coverage of
employees and officials as provided in subsection A of this section. (1985 Code
§ 1-141)
   C.   Withholdings From Salaries: Withholdings from salaries or wages of
employees and officials for the purpose provided in subsection A of this
section are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as
may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall
be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by such laws and
regulations. (1985 Code § 1-142)
   D.   Contributions By City: There shall be appropriated by the city, from
available funds, such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable
state or federal laws or regulations for employers' contributions to the system
of federal old age and survivors insurance. Such funds shall be paid over to
the state or federal agency designated by said laws or regulations. (1985 Code
§ 1-143)
   E.   Records And Reports: The city shall keep such records and make such
reports, relative to the system of federal old age and survivors insurance, as
may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (1985 Code
§ 1-144)
   F.   Excluded Officers And Employees:
      1.   There is hereby excluded from this section and the benefits
established hereunder any authority to make any agreement with respect to any
position or any employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by
any other ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official
of the city.
      2.   There is hereby excluded from this section and the benefits
established hereunder any authority to make any agreement with respect to any
position, employee or official, compensation for which is on a fee basis, or
any position, employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable
state or federal laws or regulations. (1985 Code § 1-145)
ARTICLE A.  CITY ADMINISTRATOR AND ACTING ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-9A-1: Office Created; Appointment; Qualifications
1-9A-2: Removal By Council
1-9A-3: Acting Administrator
1-9A-4: Powers And Duties
1-9A-5: Interference With Appointments And Removals
1-9A-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   Establishment: There is hereby created the position of city
administrator. (1985 Code § 1-23; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Appointment: The city council shall appoint the city administrator for
an indefinite term, by a vote of a majority of all its members.
   C.   Qualifications: The council shall choose such official solely on the
basis of executive and administrative qualifications. At the time of
appointment, the city administrator need not be a resident of the city or
state, but, during his tenure of office, he shall reside within the city. (1985
Code § 1-23)
1-9A-2: REMOVAL BY COUNCIL:
The city council may suspend or remove the city administrator at any time by a
vote of a majority of all its members. (1985 Code § 1-23)
1-9A-3: ACTING ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Appointment: If the city administrator is absent from the city or is
unable to perform his duties, if the city council suspends the city
administrator or if there is a vacancy in the office of city administrator, the
council may appoint an acting city administrator to serve until the city
administrator returns, until his disability or suspension ceases, or until
another city administrator is appointed and qualified, as the case may be.
   B.   Suspension: The council may suspend or remove an acting city
administrator at any time. (1985 Code § 1-23)
1-9A-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city administrator shall be chief administrative officer and head of the
administrative branch of the city government. He shall execute the laws and
ordinances and administer the government of the city, and shall be responsible
therefor to the council. The administrator shall:
   A.   Appoint and, when deemed necessary for the good of the service, lay
off, suspend, demote, or remove all directors, or heads, of administrative
departments and all other administrative officers and employees of the city,
except as he may authorize the head of a department, an officer, or an agency
to appoint, lay off, suspend, demote and remove subordinates in such
department, office or agency;
   B.   Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all administrative
departments, agencies, officers and employees;
   C.   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the city council, be
responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect, and
recommend to the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable;
   D.   Submit to the city council a report as of the end of the fiscal year on
the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;
   E.   Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future
needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the council on matters of
policy and other matters as may seem to him desirable; and
   F.   Have such other powers, duties and functions as the city charter may
prescribe, and such powers, duties and functions consistent with the city
charter as the city council may prescribe. (1985 Code § 1-23)
1-9A-5: INTERFERENCE WITH APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS:
   A.   Authority Of Administrator: Neither the city council, the mayor, nor
any of its other members may direct or request the appointment of any person
to, or his removal from, office or employment by the city administrator or by
any other authority, or, except as provided in the city charter, participate in
any manner in the appointment or removal of officers and employees of the city.
   B.   Inquiries Through Administrator: Except for the purpose of inquiry, the
city council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely
through the city administrator.
   C.   Restriction On Council Giving Orders: Neither the city council nor any
member thereof may give orders on administrative matters to any subordinate of
the city administrator, either publicly or privately. (1985 Code § 1-24)
ARTICLE B.  MUNICIPAL JUDGE; ALTERNATE AND ACTING JUDGES 1
SECTION:
1-9B-1: Appointment; Term
1-9B-2: Qualifications; Other Employment
1-9B-3: Compensation
1-9B-4: Prescribe Rules Of Court
1-9B-5: Alternate And Acting Judges
1-9B-6: Removal Of Judges
1-9B-7: Vacancy In Office
 
Notes
  1. See also section
1 1-5-2 of this title regarding nonlawyer judge, and chapter 13 of this title
  for municipal court.
1-9B-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
   A.   Appointment:
      1.   There shall be one judge of the municipal court and he shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council.
      2.   The mayor may be designated as judge upon approval of said city
council.
   B.   Term Of Office:
      1.   The official term of the municipal judge shall be two (2) years,
expiring on the last day of June in each odd numbered year.
      2.   The municipal judge, unless sooner removed for proper cause, shall
serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. (1985 Code § 1-28)
1-9B-2: QUALIFICATIONS; OTHER EMPLOYMENT:
   A.   Qualifications: The municipal judge shall be at least twenty five (25)
years of age, a resident of the city (unless he is a licensed attorney), have a
high school education (or the equivalent) and be of good moral character.
   B.   Licensed Attorney; Other Employment: A judge who is a licensed attorney
may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he shall not accept
employment inconsistent with his duties as a municipal judge or arising out of
facts which give rise to, or are connected with, cases within the jurisdiction
of the court pending therein or which might become the subject of proceedings
therein. (1985 Code § 1-28)
1-9B-3: COMPENSATION:
The judge of the municipal court shall receive a salary as prescribed by the
city council, paid in the same manner as the salaries of other municipal
employees. (1985 Code § 1-28)
1-9B-4: PRESCRIBE RULES OF COURT:
The municipal judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the state constitution
and laws and this city code, for the proper conduct of the business of the
municipal court. (1985 Code § 1-28)
1-9B-5: ALTERNATE AND ACTING JUDGES:
   A.   Appointment; Qualifications; Duties:
      1.   There may be appointed an alternate judge of the municipal court,
possessed of the same qualifications as the municipal judge, as set out in
section
1-9B-2 of this chapter.
      2.   His appointment shall be for the same term and made in the same
manner as the municipal judge. He shall sit as acting judge of the municipal
court in any case if the municipal judge is absent from the court, or unable to
act as municipal judge in a case.
   B.   Acting Judge: If, at any time, there is not a municipal judge or
alternate judge, duly appointed and qualified, available to sit as municipal
judge, the city council may appoint some person possessing the qualifications
required by this chapter for the municipal judge, who shall preside as acting
judge over the municipal court in the disposition of pending matters until such
time as a municipal judge or alternate judge shall be available.
   C.   Compensation: An alternate judge or an acting judge shall be paid, as
prescribed by the city council, for each day devoted to the performance of his
duties, except that, for any month, the total payments so calculated shall not
exceed the salary of the municipal judge in whose stead he sits. An alternate
or acting judge who sits for an entire month shall receive the amount specified
by the city council as the salary of the municipal judge in whose stead he
sits. (1985 Code § 1-28)
1-9B-6: REMOVAL OF JUDGES:
Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the city council, for the
causes prescribed by the state constitution and laws for the removal of public
officers. Provisions of the Oklahoma administrative procedure act governing
individual proceedings (75 Oklahoma Statutes sections 308 through 317 and any
amendments or additions thereto in effect at the time of the hearing) shall
govern removal proceedings hereunder so far as they can be made applicable.
(1985 Code § 1-28)
1-9B-7: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
A vacancy in the office of municipal judge shall occur if the incumbent dies,
resigns, ceases to possess the qualifications for the office or is removed.
Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of municipal judge, the mayor
shall appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term, using the same
procedure as for an original appointment. (1985 Code § 1-28)
ARTICLE C.  CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-9C-1: Appointment
1-9C-2: Duties
1-9C-3: Travel Expenses Allowed
1-9C-1: APPOINTMENT:
The city attorney may be appointed by the city council, on a contractual basis.
(1985 Code § 1-29)
1-9C-2: DUTIES:
   A.   Legal Advice: It shall be the duty of the city attorney to give legal
advice on questions submitted to him by the city council, when the subject
matter concerns the powers of any city officials or employees, or the
performance of their duties.
   B.   Ordinances; Notices; Documents: The city attorney shall draw such
ordinances, resolutions, notices, forms, leases, deeds, papers or other
documents as may be required of him by the city council.
   C.   Court Proceedings: The city attorney shall be authorized to appear,
prosecute and defend all actions wherein the city is a party, and he shall
institute proceedings in courts of law upon the order of the city council.
   D.   Other Duties: The city attorney shall perform such other duties as the
city council may require; provided, that such duties are included within the
scope of the contractual arrangement. (1985 Code § 1-29)
1-9C-3: TRAVEL EXPENSES ALLOWED:
The city attorney shall be allowed actual and necessary traveling and hotel
expenses while outside the city and on official business for the city;
provided, that his business has been approved and directed by the city council.
(1985 Code § 1-29)
ARTICLE D.  FIRE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF 1
SECTION:
1-9D-1: Fire Chief
1-9D-2: Assistant Fire Chief
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 10, article C of this title for fire department.
1-9D-1: FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Appointment; Term:
      1.   There is hereby created the office of chief of the fire department,
who shall be appointed by the city administrator.
      2.   His term of office shall be indefinite, or until his services are
terminated by death, resignation, removal by the city administrator or other
legal manner.
   B.   Duties: Duties of the fire chief shall include:
      1.   The fire chief shall have supervision and control of the fire
department, subject to state law, the provisions of this article, other
ordinances of the city and the city council. He shall diligently perform the
duties imposed upon him by law and ordinance.
      2.   The fire chief shall be held responsible for the general condition
and efficient operation of the fire department and the training of members, and
may assign duties to other members of said department.
      3.   The fire chief shall inspect, or cause to be inspected by members of
the department, the fire hydrants and water supply sources of the city at least
once each year.
      4.   The fire chief should maintain a library or file of publications on
fire prevention and fire protection.
      5.   The fire chief should attend all fires and direct and have complete
charge of the officers and members of the fire department in the performance of
their duties.
      6.   The fire chief should ensure that the city council, city
administrator and the city's citizens are kept informed on fire hazards in the
community and on the activities of the fire department.
      7.   The fire chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause and, in the case of incendiarism, shall notify proper
authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for future use in the
case.
      8.   The fire chief shall see that complete records are kept of all
fires, inspections, apparatus, equipment, personnel and other information about
the work of the fire department. (1985 Code § 1-30)
1-9D-2: ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Appointment: The assistant chief of the fire department shall be
appointed by the city administrator.
   B.   Duties: In the absence of the fire chief, the assistant fire chief
shall command the fire department and be held responsible therefor in all
respects, with the full powers and responsibilities of the fire chief. (1985
Code § 1-31)
ARTICLE E.  INSPECTORS
SECTION:
1-9E-1: Building Inspector
1-9E-2: Electrical Inspector
1-9E-3: Plumbing Inspector
1-9E-1: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
   A.   Appointment; Term:
      1.   There is hereby created the office of building inspector for the
city. The building inspector shall be appointed by the city administrator.
(1985 Code § 1-32; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory
service and he shall not be removed from office except for cause, after full
opportunity has been given him to be heard on specific charges.
   B.   Qualifications: The building inspector shall be in good health and
shall be physically capable of performing the duties of his office.
   C.   Powers And Duties: The powers and duties of the building inspector
shall be as follows:
      1.   To enforce all provisions of the codes adopted by this code.
      2.   To receive and process applications required by such codes or this
code.
      3.   To review building permit applications, other permit applications
and issue required certificates.
      4.   To examine premises for which permits have been issued under such
codes or this code and make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of
the codes or this code are complied with and that construction is done safely.
(1985 Code § 1-32)
      5.   To investigate, when requested by the city administrator, or when
the public interest so requires, matters referred to in such codes and render
written reports on the same. (1985 Code § 1-32; amd. 2004 Code)
      6.   To issue such notices or orders as may be necessary to enforce
compliance with the adopted codes or this code, to remove illegal or unsafe
conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction or to
require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures.
      7.   To make inspections required under the provisions of the codes
adopted in this code, or to ensure that inspections are made by his duly
appointed assistant.
   D.   Acting Building Inspector: During the temporary absence or disability
of the building inspector, the city administrator may designate an acting
building inspector. The city clerk shall serve as acting building inspector,
unless the city administrator designates another person as such.
   E.   Right Of Entry For Inspections: The building inspector, while in the
discharge of his official duty, shall have the authority to enter any building
or premises for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the
construction or equipment contained therein or its installation.
   F.   Serve As Electrical Or Plumbing Inspector: The building inspector may
also serve as the electrical or plumbing inspector, if so designated by the
city administrator. (1985 Code § 1-32)
1-9E-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
   A.   Appointment: There is hereby created the office of electrical inspector
for the city. The electrical inspector shall be appointed by the city
administrator. (1985 Code § 1-33; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Qualifications: The electrical inspector shall have had experience as
an electrician, shall be of good moral character and shall be knowledgeable of
the approved methods of electrical construction.
   C.   Powers And Duties: The electrical inspector shall have all of the
powers and duties prescribed by the electrical code adopted in this city code.
He shall also ensure that all city ordinances and regulations relating to
electrical safety are properly enforced. (1985 Code § 1-33)
1-9E-3: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
   A.   Appointment; Holding Other Positions: There is hereby created the
office of plumbing inspector for the city. The plumbing inspector shall be
appointed by the city administrator. The plumbing inspector may also hold other
positions in the city government. (1985 Code § 1-34; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Power And Duties: The plumbing inspector shall have all of the powers
and duties prescribed by the plumbing code adopted in this city code. He shall
also ensure that all city ordinances and regulations relating to water and
sanitary plumbing are properly enforced. (1985 Code § 1-34)
ARTICLE F.  STREET SUPERINTENDENT
SECTION:
1-9F-1: Appointment; Term
1-9F-2: Duties
1-9F-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby created the office of street superintendent for the city. The
street superintendent shall be appointed by the city administrator and his
appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. (1985
Code § 1-35)
1-9F-2: DUTIES:
The street superintendent shall have charge of the maintenance and operation of
all city streets and alleys, and perform such duties in connection therewith as
are required of him by the city administrator. (1985 Code § 1-35; amd. 2004
Code)
CHAPTER 10
CITY DEPARTMENTS, COMMITTEES
SECTION:
1-10-1: Capital Improvements Planning Committee
1-10-2: Subdivision Review Committee
1-10-3: Cemetery Department; Sexton
1-10-4: Park Department; Superintendent Of Parks
1-10-1: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLANNING COMMITTEE:
   A.   Committee Created: There is hereby created a local capital improvements
planning committee for the city, in compliance with the provisions of the
Oklahoma capital improvements planning act 1 .
   B.   Appointment; Residency; Compensation: The local capital improvements
planning committee shall consist of five (5) voting members, to be appointed by
the mayor, subject to the confirmation of the city council. All members must be
residents of the city, and shall serve without salary.
   C.   Terms: Terms of the members shall be established in the same manner as
for those of the city planning commission, and removal procedures for the
committee shall also be the same as for said city planning commission 2 .
   D.   Planning Commission Serve As Committee: Unless the city council, at
their discretion, specifically designates a separate group of persons, the
Marlow planning commission shall serve as the local capital improvements
planning committee.
   E.   Responsibility: The local capital improvements planning committee has
the general responsibility to assist the city council in planning for the
future development, growth and improvement of the city, and in preparing,
adopting, implementing and amending the local capital improvements plan and its
related programs, consistent with the goals, guidelines and other provisions of
the Oklahoma improvements planning act.
   F.   Duties: The committee shall also:
      1.   Prepare the city's capital improvements plan;
      2.   Make recommendations to the city council regarding the adoption of
the plan;
      3.   Serve in an ongoing advisory capacity to the city council regarding
implementation of the plan, particularly in the annual update phase of the
planning process;
      4.   Conduct public hearings and solicit and encourage citizen
participation, as required by, and in accordance with, applicable provisions of
the Oklahoma capital improvements planning act;
      5.   Take such other actions as may be necessary to carry out the city's
capital improvements planning process, consistent with local ordinances and
policy, and state law requirements, including the capacity to recommend
agreements with other area jurisdictions, in order to carry out the purposes of
the capital improvements planning process; and
      6.   Maintain a working relationship with the appropriate regional 
planning council (the Association of South Central Oklahoma Governments,
ASCOG), in order to ensure that the statutory requirements for integrating the
city's plan into the ASCOG regional capital improvements plan, each year, are
fully met, to the benefit of the city and the state. (Ord. 328, 10-25-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. 62 OS § 901 et seq.
2 2. See title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
1-10-2: SUBDIVISION REVIEW COMMITTEE:
   A.   Membership: There is hereby created a subdivision review committee, the
membership of which shall be made up of one representative of each of the
following agencies, as applicable, and such other public officials as the city
administrator may designate:
   City staff
   Planning staff
   Planning commission
   Engineering staff
   Utilities staff
   Fire department
(1985 Code § 1-41; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Responsibility: It shall be the responsibility of the subdivision
review committee to meet together, on call of the city administrator who shall
serve as chairman, to review preapplication plans, to study the suitability of
any proposed subdivision for the purposes for which it is intended and to
submit their findings and recommendations to the planning commission at the
time the preliminary plat is to be reviewed by the planning commission. (1985
Code § 1-41)
1-10-3: CEMETERY DEPARTMENT; SEXTON:
   A.   Department Created; Sexton Appointed: A cemetery department is hereby
created, which shall be in the charge of a sexton, who shall be appointed by,
and work under the direction of, the city administrator, and perform such
duties as are now or may hereafter be prescribed by the city administrator.
   B.   Cemetery Employees: The city administrator may employ occasional labor
during the spring and summer seasons as the work at the city cemetery may
require, and may employ such additional permanent employees as may be
authorized by said city administrator. (1985 Code § 1-42; amd. 2004 Code)
1-10-4: PARK DEPARTMENT; SUPERINTENDENT OF PARKS:
   A.   Department Created; Superintendent Appointed: A park department is
hereby created, which shall consist of a superintendent of parks, who shall be
appointed by the city administrator, and such other additional employees as may
be authorized.
   B.   Duties Of Superintendent: The superintendent shall have charge of the
maintenance and upkeep of the city parks, and shall perform such other duties
as prescribed by the city administrator. (1985 Code § 1-43; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE A.  FINANCE DEPARTMENT; CITY CLERK; CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-10A-1: Department Created; City Clerk
1-10A-2: City Treasurer
1-10A-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; CITY CLERK:
   A.   Department Created; City Clerk: There shall be a department of finance,
the head of which is the city clerk appointed by the city administrator for an
indefinite term, and removable by the administrator. The city clerk is an
officer of the city, and has supervision and control of the department of
finance.
   B.   Duties Of Clerk:
      1.   The city clerk shall collect or receive revenue and other money for
the city, and shall deposit the same daily with the city treasurer, or for the
city treasurer in an account or accounts maintained by the city treasurer in a
depository or depositories.
      2.   The city clerk shall maintain a general accounting system for the
city government.
      3.   He shall have such other powers, duties and functions as may be
prescribed by the city charter, by applicable law, or by ordinance. (1985 Code
§ 1-26)
1-10A-2: CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment: Within the department of finance, there shall be a city
treasurer, who is an officer of the city appointed by the city administrator
for an indefinite term, and removable by said administrator.
   B.   Duties Of Treasurer:
      1.   The city treasurer shall deposit daily all funds received for the
city in such depositories as the city council may designate, and shall disburse
such funds in the manner provided by applicable laws or ordinance.
      2.   He shall have such other powers, duties and functions as may be
prescribed by the city charter, by applicable law, or by ordinance. (1985 Code
§ 1-26)
ARTICLE B.  POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-10B-1: Department Created; Chief Appointed, Term
1-10B-2: Police Officers, Appointment And Removal
1-10B-3: Powers And Liabilities
1-10B-4: Duties
1-10B-5: Compensation
1-10B-6: Giving Or Requesting Assistance
1-10B-7: Unclaimed Property
1-10B-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; CHIEF APPOINTED, TERM:
   A.   Department Created: There is hereby created a police department for the
city, the head of which shall be the chief of police.
   B.   Chief Appointed: The chief of police shall be appointed by the city
administrator.
   C.   Term: His term of office shall be indefinite, or until his services are
terminated by death, resignation, removal by the city administrator or other
legal manner. (1985 Code § 1-27)
1-10B-2: POLICE OFFICERS, APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL:
   A.   Appointment: One or more police officers may be appointed by the chief
of police.
   B.   Removal: Said police officers may be removed by the chief of police or
the city administrator, for cause. (1985 Code § 1-27)
1-10B-3: POWERS AND LIABILITIES:
The chief of police and all police officers shall possess the powers and be
subject to the liabilities possessed and conferred by law upon sheriffs in
enforcing the code of the city. All police officers are officers of the city.
(1985 Code § 1-27; amd. 2004 Code)
1-10B-4: DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: It shall be the duty of the chief of police and all police
officers to bring to justice all violators of city ordinances and federal and
state laws, and to turn such violators over to the proper authorities.
   B.   Serving Warrants, Processes: The chief of police shall serve all
warrants, writs, executions and other processes, properly directed and
delivered to him.
   C.   Other Duties: The chief of police and each police officer shall perform
all other duties prescribed by law or ordinance. (1985 Code § 1-27)
1-10B-5: COMPENSATION:
The chief of police and each police officer shall be paid such compensation as
the city administrator may prescribe, as approved by the city council by budget
adoption. (1985 Code § 1-27; amd. 2004 Code)
1-10B-6: GIVING OR REQUESTING ASSISTANCE:
   A.   Assisting Another Municipality; Benefits:
      1.   The chief of police, or his designated representative, is authorized
to direct that any regularly employed police officers of the city may provide
law enforcement assistance to another municipality in an emergency; provided,
that a written request from an official representative of the other
municipality has been received and approved by the city.
      2.   While serving in said capacity, the city shall provide salaries,
insurance and other regular benefits to these officers.
   B.   Request For Assistance:
      1.   The mayor, city administrator and police chief are also authorized
to request law enforcement assistance from other municipalities, in emergency
situations.
      2.   In such cases, the assisting officers of the other municipalities
shall have the same powers and duties as though employed by the city; however,
salaries, insurance and other benefits shall not be paid by the city.
   C.   Return To Regular Duties:
      1.   In all events, the police officers of the city shall return to their
regular duties when directed to do so by the police chief or the police chief
of the requesting municipality, whichever direction occurs first.
      2.   When the Marlow police chief shall direct, the assisting police
officers of the other municipalities shall return to their own regularly
scheduled duties in their own municipalities, and those assisting police
officers shall cease to have the powers and duties of police officers regularly
employed by the city. (1985 Code § 1-27)
1-10B-7: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
   A.   Complete Record Required: All personal property coming into the
possession of any police officer, which has been found, stolen or taken off the
person, or out of the possession of, any prisoner or person suspected of, or
charged with, being a criminal, and which is not known to belong to some person
laying claim thereto, shall be delivered into the charge of the chief of
police, who shall make a permanent, written record of said property, including
the date and circumstances of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from
whom it was taken (or the place where it was found), the subsequent disposal
thereof, the date of sale, name and address of the purchaser, and the amount
for which it was sold.
   B.   Sale And Notice; City Use Of Property:
      1.   Any personal property (other than animals) which remains unclaimed
and in the possession of the chief of police, or the ownership of which is not
satisfactorily established to him for a period of thirty (30) days, shall be
sold and the proceeds of the sale paid over to the city clerk, who shall issue
his receipt therefor and deposit the same to the credit of the general fund of
the city, except for such personal property as in the opinion of the city
administrator can be more advantageously used by some department or office of
the city government.
      2.   Ten (10) days before a sale of such unclaimed property, the chief of
police shall have posted in a conspicuous place in the city hall, notice of the
time, place and manner of such sale, including the general description of the
property to be sold. If, in the opinion of the city administrator, all or any
portion of the personal property may be more advantageously used in any city
department or office, he shall so instruct the chief of police in writing and
said police chief shall thereupon deliver the designated property to that
department or office of city government and make a permanent record of its
disposition.
   C.   Property Returned To Finder:
      1.   Any personal property found by a person other than a public official
or employee, which is delivered to any police officer for identification, if
not claimed or identified within thirty (30) days, shall, within ten (10)
additional days thereafter, if requested by the finder, be returned to him, and
a record of such disposal made thereof.
      2.   If the finder does not request return of the property to him within
such additional ten (10) days, then the chief of police shall sell the property
as if it had been found by a public official or employee, or, on the
instruction of the city administrator, deliver it to some department for its
use.
   D.   Recovery By Owner From Purchaser: If any property is sold as herein
provided, and the owner thereof takes and recovers possession of the same from
the purchaser, the amount paid therefor shall be returned to the purchaser,
upon verified claim being submitted and approved by the city council. (1985
Code § 1-27)
ARTICLE C.  FIRE DEPARTMENT 1
SECTION:
1-10C-1: Department Established; Membership
1-10C-2: Probationary Period
1-10C-3: Department Supervision And Direction
1-10C-4: Regulations Submitted To State Insurance Commission
1-10C-5: Fire Prevention Code Enforcement; Variances
1-10C-6: Rural Fire Protection
1-10C-7: Charges For Fire Calls
1-10C-8: Intergovernmental Cooperation Authorized
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 9, article D of this title for fire chief and assistant fire
  chief.
1-10C-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Established: There is hereby established for the city, a volunteer fire
department under the provisions of the Oklahoma volunteer firefighters' act 1 .
(1985 Code § 7-1; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Membership: The Marlow volunteer fire department shall consist of the
fire chief and not less than twelve (12) and not more than twenty (20) members.
(Ord. 323, 5-16-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 11 OS § 29-201 et seq.
1-10C-2: PROBATIONARY PERIOD:
All new members shall be on probation for one year after their appointment to
the department and shall not become regular members of the department until
completion of their probation period, and appointment by the fire chief or city
administrator. (1985 Code § 7-1; amd. 2004 Code)
1-10C-3: DEPARTMENT SUPERVISION AND DIRECTION:
The Marlow volunteer fire department shall be under the direction of the fire
chief. (1985 Code § 7-1; amd. 2004 Code)
1-10C-4: REGULATIONS SUBMITTED TO STATE INSURANCE COMMISSION:
Copies of this article and any amendments thereto relating to the volunteer
fire department of the city shall be submitted to the state insurance
commission. (1985 Code § 7-1)
1-10C-5: FIRE PREVENTION CODE ENFORCEMENT; VARIANCES:
   A.   Enforcement Authority: The fire prevention code adopted by the city
council shall be enforced by the Marlow volunteer fire department under the
supervision of the fire chief. Members of said department may be detailed as
inspectors by the fire chief, if he deems it necessary. (See also title 9,
chapter 1 of this code.)
   B.   Power To Grant Variances: The chief of the Marlow volunteer fire
department, with the approval of the city council, shall have the power to
grant a variance to any of the provisions of the fire prevention code, upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee (or his duly authorized agent),
when there are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of said
code; provided, that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification,
when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire chief thereon, shall be
entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished
the applicant. (1985 Code § 7-2)
1-10C-6: RURAL FIRE PROTECTION:
   A.   Authorization: The city is hereby authorized and empowered to enter
into contracts or agreements with political subdivisions of the state of
Oklahoma for fire protection outside the corporate limits of the city, and to
contract to provide fire protection jointly with other organizations and
municipal subdivisions of the state.
   B.   Rate For Service: Any contract entered into by the city with an
individual owner, firm or private corporation or association for outside aid,
or mutual aid for fire protection, shall provide for the payment by said owner,
firm, private corporation or association, or political subdivision to the city,
for such fire apparatus and personnel at the potential rate of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per hour. (1985 Code § 7-10; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Area Limited: The fire department of the city is hereby authorized and
directed to answer all outside calls within a distance of five (5) miles from
the nearest fire station, unless, in the opinion of the fire chief, it is
inexpedient to do so on account of another fire in the city, broken apparatus,
impassable or dangerous highways, or other physical conditions.
   D.   Considered As Serving Within City: All firefighters of the fire
department of the city attending or serving at fires or doing fire prevention
work outside the corporate limits of the city shall be considered as serving in
their regular line of duty as fully as if they were serving within the
corporate limits of the city, and said firefighters shall be entitled to all
the benefits of any firefighters' pension and relief fund in the same manner as
if the firefighting or fire prevention work were being done within the
corporate limits of the city.
   E.   Considered Agent Of State: The fire department of the city, answering
any fire alarm or call, or performing any fire prevention services outside the
corporate limits of the city shall be considered as an agent of the state of
Oklahoma, and acting solely and alone in a governmental capacity, and the city
shall not be liable in damages for any act of commission, omission or
negligence while answering or returning from any fire or reported fire, or
doing any fire prevention work under and by virtue of subsections A through D
of this section.
   F.   Right Of Way Of Equipment: All motorized equipment of the fire
department of the city shall have the right of way over all other commercial
and pleasure vehicles. (1985 Code § 7-10)
1-10C-7: CHARGES FOR FIRE CALLS:
The city shall charge fees to the persons or property owners involved for fire
calls outside the corporate boundaries of the city. The fees shall be
determined by the mayor and city council by resolution and may be amended from
time to time without amending this section. (Ord. 346, 9-30-1997; amd. 2004
Code)
1-10C-8: INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION AUTHORIZED:
   A.   Assisting Certain Other Departments:
      1.   The city, in an effort to improve the quality of fire protection
within the community, and to protect the health, welfare and safety of its
citizens, does hereby determine that any or all members of the fire department
of the city are authorized to assist the fire departments of Duncan, Velma,
Bray, Rush Springs or any Grady or Stephens county rural or volunteer fire
departments in protecting the city of Marlow, upon request by the Marlow fire
department for assistance.
      2.   For purposes of this section, "request for assistance" shall mean a
request for help, in an emergency situation by the city manager, mayor, police
chief, fire chief, dispatcher or county representative of the above entities.
Upon receipt of this request for aid by any of the listed personnel, any member
of the Marlow fire department shall respond to said request for assistance.
   B.   Receiving Assistance From Other Departments: In an attempt to increase
the effectiveness of fire protection within the corporate limits of the city,
and to provide for the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the
community, the city does hereby authorize any or all fire department officers
of the municipalities of Duncan, Velma, Bray, Rush Springs or of any Grady or
Stephens county rural or volunteer fire departments, to respond to a request
for assistance by the city, and the fire department officers extending said aid
shall have full powers to act within the corporate limits of the city while
under a request for assistance. (1985 Code § 7-27)
ARTICLE D.  CIVIL DEFENSE DEPARTMENT; DIRECTOR; COMMITTEE
SECTION:
1-10D-1: Department Created; Purpose
1-10D-2: Civil Defense Director
1-10D-3: Civil Defense Advisory Committee
1-10D-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; PURPOSE:
   A.   Department Created: There is hereby established a department of civil
defense under the executive branch of the municipal government, which shall
consist of a director of civil defense and a civil defense advisory committee.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of said department shall be to be prepared for,
and function in the event of, emergencies endangering the lives and property of
the people of the city, and to perform all functions necessary and incident to
the protection of the lives, health and property of the citizens of the
community 1 . (1985 Code § 1-37)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 2 of this code.
1-10D-2: CIVIL DEFENSE DIRECTOR:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: The office of civil defense director is
hereby created, to be appointed by the mayor.
   B.   Responsibility: The civil defense director shall be executive head of
the department of civil defense and shall be responsible for carrying out the
civil defense program of the city.
   C.   Duties: The civil defense director shall have the authority, duty and
responsibility to:
      1.   Form an organization to prepare and implement a civil defense
program;
      2.   Form committees to perfect such an organization;
      3.   Appoint the chairman of such committees;
      4.   Cooperate with other governmental civil defense agencies; and
      5.   Formulate plans, gather information and maintain records for said
civil defense organization.
   D.   Reimbursement For Expenses: The civil defense director may be
reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of his duties, provided
such expenses are at the direction of, and approved by, the city council.
   E.   Enforcement Authority: In the event of an enemy caused emergency or
emergency resulting from natural causes, the civil defense director, after
authorization from the mayor, shall have the authority to enforce all
regulations relating to civil defense, for the purpose of protecting the
residents of the city. (1985 Code § 1-36)
1-10D-3: CIVIL DEFENSE ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
   A.   Appointment: The civil defense advisory committee shall consist of the
mayor, who shall serve as committee chairman, and five (5) members appointed by
the mayor. Said members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor.
   B.   Officers: The civil defense advisory committee shall select from its
members a vice chairman and a secretary.
   C.   Meetings: The civil defense advisory committee shall hold such meetings
as are directed by the mayor or the city council.
   D.   Advisory Capacity: The function of the civil defense advisory committee
shall be to act in an advisory capacity to, and as needed or requested by, the
mayor or the city council. (1985 Code § 1-38)
CHAPTER 11
POLICE AND FIRE PENSIONS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Police Pension And Retirement System
1-11-2: Firefighters Pension And Retirement System
1-11-3: Deductions From Salaries
1-11-1: POLICE PENSION AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
   A.   System Adopted: It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intention
of the city, by this section, to adopt the police retirement system, as
provided by the laws of the state of Oklahoma, and as contained in 11 Oklahoma
Statutes section 50-101 et seq., as now enacted, or as may be amended, as fully
as if rewritten herein. (1985 Code § 1-110; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Contributions:
      1.   It being the desire of the police officers now eligible to
participate in said police retirement system, and in accordance with the terms
of 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 50-101 et seq., the city does hereby establish
their rate of contribution as set out by state statutes. (1985 Code § 1-111;
amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   It is hereby declared by the city council that a sum as set by
applicable state statutes shall be set aside and made available from the
general fund of the city, and transferred to the police officers' retirement
fund, in the manner described in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 50-101 et seq.,
and that said contributions shall commence on July 1, 1968. (1985 Code § 1-112;
amd. 2004 Code)
1-11-2: FIREFIGHTERS PENSION AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM 1 :
The fire department of the city shall be subject to all of the provisions of
the Oklahoma firefighters pension and retirement system act 2 , all of the
provisions of which are hereby accepted by the city for the use and benefit of
its fire department, which shall also be subject to all of the obligations
thereunder. (1985 Code § 1-135; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 7 of this code for firefighters pension and
  retirement board.
2 2. 11 OS § 49-100.1 et seq.; see also title 2, chapter 7 of this code.
1-11-3: DEDUCTIONS FROM SALARIES:
It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to deduct, or have deducted, from
salaries or wages of each member of the fire and police departments an amount
which shall be established by current state and/or local law. The deductions
shall be made at the time such firefighters and police officers are paid and,
when so deducted, shall be deposited in the firefighters and police pension and
retirement funds. (1985 Code § 1-135; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 12
FINANCES; FUNDS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Insurance
1-12-2: Capital Improvement Fund
1-12-3: Vehicle And Equipment Replacement Fund
1-12-4: Collection Agencies Authorized
1-12-1: INSURANCE:
   A.   Property: The city council may insure city property, as authorized by
Oklahoma Statutes. Any money received as a result of destruction, damages or
loss of such insured property shall be accounted for, and used, as provided by
said statutes.
   B.   Persons; Vehicle Operation: The city council may purchase insurance to
pay damages to persons sustaining injuries or damages to property as a result
of negligent operation of motor vehicles or motorized equipment of the city.
(1985 Code § 1-66)
1-12-2: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND:
   A.   Statute Authority: In accordance with 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 17-
109, there is hereby created the Marlow capital improvement fund for the city.
   B.   Definition: "Capital improvement" shall mean all items and articles,
either new or replacements not consumed with use but only diminished in value
with prolonged use, including, but not limited to: roads and streets; drainage
improvements; water, electrical and sewerage improvements; machinery;
equipment; furniture and fixtures; all real property; all construction or
reconstruction of buildings, appurtenances and improvements to real property;
engineering, architectural or legal fees; and payment for improvements for
which subsequent reimbursement is made from the capital improvement fund.
   C.   Funding: Contributions to the capital improvement fund (CIF) shall be
made as follows: (Ord. 299, 6-20-1987)
      1.   Any special or extraordinary monies received by the city or the
Marlow municipal authority upon approval of the city administrator, with report
of such contribution to the city council; and
      2.   Any other monies received, on deposit or available to the city upon
approval of the city administrator.
   D.   Account Established: The CIF shall be placed in an insured interest
bearing account. (Ord. 299, 6-30-1987; amd. 2004 Code)
   E.   Claims Approval: No funds may be appropriated or expended from the CIF
account in the absence of a recorded vote by the city council and until claims
duly verified by affidavit are presented and approved by the city council.
(Ord. 299, 6-30-1987)
1-12-3: VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT FUND:
   A.   Fund Created; Purpose: There is hereby created a Marlow vehicle and
equipment replacement fund (VERF). The fund shall be used to purchase vehicles
and equipment to be owned by the city and used to accomplish the operations and
activities conducted by the city.
   B.   Funding: Funding shall be made as follows:
      1.   Any special contributions to the VERF or extraordinary monies
received by the city or the Marlow municipal authority (MMA) upon majority
approval of the city council; and
      2.   Any other monies received, on deposit or available to the city upon
majority approval of the city council.
   C.   Account Created: The VERF shall be placed in an insured interest
bearing account. The fund shall be nonfiscal and shall not be considered in
computing any levy.
   D.   Claims Approval: No funds shall be appropriated or expended from the
VERF account in the absence of a recorded vote by the city council and until
claims duly verified by affidavit are presented and approved by the city
council. (Ord. 305, 5-31-1988)
1-12-4: COLLECTION AGENCIES AUTHORIZED:
   A.   The city may enter a contract or contracts with a collection agency or
agencies for the provision of collection services for one or more of the
following items:
      1.   Debts and accounts receivable including, but not limited to, unpaid
fees, penalties, interest, and other sums due the city of Marlow, as
applicable; or
      2.   Court penalties, costs, fines and fees in cases in municipal court
in which the accused has failed to appear or otherwise failed to satisfy a
monetary obligation ordered by the court.
   B.   For each item referred to a collection agency under this section, a
collection fee in an amount not to exceed thirty five percent (35%) shall be
added on each item to cover the cost charged the city by the collection agency,
and in the case of court penalties, costs, fines and fees in cases in municipal
court, the court shall order defendants to reimburse such collection fees. The
court ordered fee may be collected as provided by law for the collection of any
other civil debt or criminal action. (Ord. 417, 1-24-2017)
CHAPTER 13
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
1-13-1: Application Of Chapter
1-13-2: Jurisdiction Of Court
1-13-3: Judge; Alternate Judge; Acting Judge
1-13-4: Chief Of Police
1-13-5: City Attorney
1-13-6: Clerk Of Court
1-13-7: Traffic Violations Bureau; Fines For Violations
1-13-8: Traffic Violations; Procedure; Citation
1-13-9: Style Of Prosecutions
1-13-10: Summons
1-13-11: Complaints Against Corporation
1-13-12: Warrant Of Arrest
1-13-13: Bail; Temporary Bonds
1-13-14: Arraignment
1-13-15: Postponement Of Trial
1-13-16: Trial Procedure
1-13-17: Contempt
1-13-18: Defendant Presence At Trial; Failure To Appear
1-13-19: Judgment
1-13-20: Costs Upon Judgment Of Conviction; Collections
1-13-21: Imprisonment For Failure To Pay Fine; Inability To Pay
1-13-22: Suspension Of Sentence
1-13-23: Witness Fees
1-13-24: Penalty
1-13-1: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
   A.   This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the
municipal court of the city, as put into operation and continued by resolution
duly passed and filed in accordance with state law on January 14, 1969.
   B.   To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of any other ordinance of the city, the provisions of this
chapter shall control. (1985 Code § 11-1)
1-13-2: JURISDICTION OF COURT:
The municipal court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine
all prosecutions wherein a violation of any provision of this code or of any
other ordinance of the city is charged, including any such prosecutions
transferred to said court, in accordance with applicable laws. (1985 Code § 11-
2)
1-13-3: JUDGE; ALTERNATE JUDGE; ACTING JUDGE:
   A.   Reference Provisions: See chapter 9, article B of this title. (1985
Code § 11-5)
   B.   Compensation: The compensation of the judge and the alternate or acting
judge of the municipal court of the city shall be as determined by resolution
of the city council. (1985 Code § 11-6)
   C.   No Change Of Venue; Disqualification Of Judge:
      1.   In prosecutions before the municipal court, no change of venue shall
be allowed, but the municipal judge before whom the case is pending may certify
his disqualification or he may be disqualified from sitting, under the terms,
conditions and procedures provided by law for courts of record.
      2.   If the municipal judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard by
an alternate or acting judge appointed as provided in this code. (1985 Code §
11-7)
1-13-4: CHIEF OF POLICE:
All writs or processes of the municipal court shall be directed to the chief of
police who shall be the principal officer of the court. (1985 Code § 11-8)
1-13-5: CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   Prosecuting Officer: The city attorney, his duly designated assistant,
or the municipal judge or his duly designated assistant, shall be the
prosecuting officer of the municipal court. He shall be authorized to prosecute
all alleged violations of the ordinances of the city, and to prosecute and
resist appeals and proceedings in error and review from the court to any other
courts of the state.
   B.   City Representative: The city attorney shall also be authorized to
represent the city in all proceedings arising out of matters of the court.
(1985 Code § 11-9)
1-13-6: CLERK OF COURT:
   A.   Designation: The city clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be
the clerk of the court.
   B.   Duties: Duties of the court clerk shall include the following:
      1.   He shall assist the municipal judge in recording the proceedings of
the court and in preparing writs, processes and other papers;
      2.   He shall administer oaths required in proceedings before the court;
      3.   He shall enter all pleadings, processes and proceedings in the
dockets of the court;
      4.   He shall perform such other clerical duties relating to the
proceedings of the court, as the municipal judge shall direct;
      5.   He shall receive and receipt for forfeitures, fees, deposits and
sums of money payable to the court; and
      6.   He shall pay to the city treasurer or the city clerk all money so
received by him (except such special deposits or fees as shall be received to
be disbursed by him for special purposes), to be placed in the general fund of
the city, or in such other fund and in such manner as the city council may
direct, by motion or resolution. (1985 Code § 11-10; amd. 2004 Code)
1-13-7: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU; FINES FOR VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Bureau Established: A traffic violations bureau is hereby established
as a division of the office of the clerk of the court, to be administered by
said clerk, or by subordinates designated by him for that purpose. (1985 Code §
11-11)
   B.   Fines For Traffic Violations: See subsection
1-5-1B of this title for traffic violation fine amounts. (2004 Code)
   C.   Rules; Payment Of Fine: The court may adopt further rules to implement
this section. Payment of a fine under this section shall constitute a final
determination of the case against the defendant. If a defendant who has elected
to pay a fine under this section fails so to do, prosecution shall proceed
under other provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code § 11-11)
1-13-8: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURE; CITATION:
   A.   Issuance Of Traffic Citation:
      1.   If a police officer observes facts which he believes constitute a
violation of the traffic ordinances of the city, by a resident thereof, in lieu
of arresting such person, he may take his name, address, operator's license
number, the license number of the motor vehicle involved and any other
pertinent information, and may issue to him, in writing in a form prescribed by
state law, a traffic citation embracing the above information, stating the
traffic violation alleged to have occurred and notifying him to answer to the
charge against him in the municipal court at a time (not later than 5 days
thereafter or the next municipal court date) specified in the citation.
      2.   The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged
violator (on the citation) to answer as specified, shall release said person
from custody. If the person to whom a citation is issued fails to answer as
prescribed in the citation, a complaint shall be filed and the case shall be
prosecuted as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   B.   Parking Violations; Citation Placed On Vehicle:
      1.   If the alleged offense constitutes violation of any parking
ordinance and the operator is not present, the police officer shall place on
the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to come to the notice of the
operator, an appropriate citation (subsection A of this section), with such
variations as the circumstances require.
      2.   The operator of the vehicle shall be under the same obligation to
respond to the citation as if it had been issued to him personally under other
provisions of this section. (1985 Code § 11-12; amd. 2004 Code)
1-13-9: STYLE OF PROSECUTIONS:
All prosecutions for violation of this code or other ordinances of the city
shall be styled "The City of Marlow, Oklahoma, Plaintiff, vs. (naming defendant
or defendants)". Except as otherwise provided with respect to traffic
violations, prosecutions shall be initiated by the filing of a written
complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making the complaint and
setting forth concisely the offense charged. (1985 Code § 11-13)
1-13-10: SUMMONS:
   A.   Issuance: Upon the filing of a complaint charging a violation of this
code or other ordinances of the city, the municipal judge, unless he determines
to issue a warrant of arrest, unless the defendant previously has been issued a
citation, or unless he has been arrested and given bond for his appearance,
shall issue a summons, naming the person charged, specifying his address or
place of residence (if known), stating the offense with which he is charged and
giving him notice to answer the charge in the municipal court on a day certain,
five (5) days hence (Sundays and holidays excepted), or the next municipal
court date after the summons is served upon him, containing a provision for the
official return of the summons and including such other pertinent information
as may be necessary.
   B.   Delivery To Defendant: The summons shall be served by delivering a copy
to the defendant personally. If he fails to appear and answer the summons
within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as
provided by this chapter. (1985 Code § 11-14)
1-13-11: COMPLAINTS AGAINST CORPORATION:
   A.   Issuance Of Summons: Upon complaint against a corporation being filed
with the municipal judge of the city, said judge shall issue a summons in a
form as outlined in this chapter, signed by him with his title of office,
requiring the corporation to appear before him at a specific time and place to
answer the complaint.
   B.   Time Of Serving Summons: The summons must be served at least two (2)
days before the day of appearance fixed therein, by delivering a copy thereof
and showing the original to the president, secretary, cashier or managing agent
or director of the corporation.
   C.   Consideration Of Complaint: At the time appointed in the summons, the
municipal judge shall try the complaint in the same manner as in the case of
any other person brought before him.
   D.   Collection Of Fine: When a fine is imposed upon conviction, it may be
collected by the municipal judge making a transcript of his proceedings
thereof, together with the judgment of the court duly certified and filed with
the clerk of the district court, and execution shall be issued thereon and
served by the sheriff of the county as in cases of execution generally. (1985
Code § 11-15)
1-13-12: WARRANT OF ARREST:
   A.   Form Of Warrant: Except as may otherwise be provided in this code, upon
the filing of a complaint, approved by the endorsement of the city attorney or
by the municipal judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest in
substantially the following form:
The City of Marlow, Oklahoma, to the Chief of Police of the Municipal Court of
Marlow, Oklahoma:
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by                    that the
offense of                          has been committed and accusing            
          , thereof, you are commanded therefore forthwith to arrest the above
named (Defendant or Defendants) and bring (him, her, them) before me at my
office at the Marlow, Oklahoma, Municipal Court Room.
Witness my hand this        day of             , 20    .
         Judge of the Municipal Court
         of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   B.   Execution Of Warrant: It shall be the duty of the chief of police to
execute such warrant as promptly as possible, either: 1) personally; 2) through
a duly constituted member of the police force of the city; or 3) through any
other person lawfully authorized to act. (1985 Code § 11-16; amd. 2004 Code)
1-13-13: BAIL; TEMPORARY BONDS:
   A.   Residents:
      1.   Whenever a resident of the city is arrested for a violation of any
ordinance by a police officer of the city, the officer shall immediately
release such person if he acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it,
unless it reasonably appears to the officer that the person may cause injury to
himself or others, or damage to property, if released, or if it reasonably
appears that the person will not appear in response to the citation. (If such
person fails to appear in response to the citation, a warrant shall be issued
for his arrest and his appearance in court shall be compelled.)
      2.   Whenever a resident of the city is arrested by a police officer of
the city for the violation of any ordinance, and is not released by being
permitted to sign a citation as provided in subsection A1 of this section, said
resident shall be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment, or
released on his own recognizance.
   B.   Nonresidents: Whenever a nonresident of the city is arrested by a
police officer of the city for a violation other than a traffic violation, the
defendant shall be eligible to be admitted to bail either before or after
arraignment.
   C.   Traffic Violations: The city may require any person who is arrested by
a police officer of the city for a municipal traffic violation to comply with
statutory procedures for state traffic violations, with respect to the release
of the arrested person. (1985 Code § 11-17; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Amount And Conditions Of Bail:
      1.   The amount and any conditions of bail granted under this section
shall be determined by the municipal judge, who shall prescribe rules for the
receipt of bail and for release on personal recognizance. In the event of
arrests at night, other emergencies, or when the municipal judge is not
available, the chief of police (or his designated representative) shall be
authorized by the municipal judge, under such conditions as shall be prescribed
by said judge, to accept a temporary cash bond in a sufficient amount to secure
the appearance of the accused, but in no event shall the cash bond be more than
the allowable maximum fine for each offense charged.
      2.   The chief of police (or his designated representative) is
authorized, subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the municipal
judge, to release a resident of the city on his own recognizance. (1985 Code §
11-17)
1-13-14: ARRAIGNMENT:
Upon making his appearance before the municipal court, the defendant shall be
arraigned. The municipal judge or the city attorney shall read the complaint to
the defendant, inform him of his legal rights, of the consequences of
conviction, and ask him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. If the
defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and sentence or may
continue the matter for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not guilty, the
court may proceed to try the case or may set it for hearing at a later date.
(1985 Code § 11-18)
1-13-15: POSTPONEMENT OF TRIAL:
Before a trial commences in the municipal court, either party, upon good cause
shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof. (1985 Code § 11-19)
1-13-16: TRIAL PROCEDURE:
In all trials in the municipal court as to matters not covered: a) in this
chapter; b) by the statutes relating to municipal criminal courts; or c) by
rules duly promulgated by the supreme court of Oklahoma, the procedure
applicable in trials of misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply, to the
extent that they can be made effective. (1985 Code § 11-20)
1-13-17: CONTEMPT:
   A.   Enforcement Of Obedience: Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments
made by the municipal judge or by the municipal court may be enforced by said
judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt committed as to him while holding
court, or committed against processes issued by him, in the same manner and to
the same extent, as the district court of this state.
   B.   Contempt An Offense: It shall be an offense to be in contempt, directly
or indirectly, of the municipal court of the city, and of its orders. (1985
Code § 11-21)
1-13-18: DEFENDANT PRESENCE AT TRIAL; FAILURE TO APPEAR:
   A.   Presence Mandatory: The defendant must be present in person at the
trial of his case in the municipal court.
   B.   Failure To Appear:
      1.   If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according
to the terms or conditions of his bond, either for hearing, arraignment, trial
or judgment, or upon any other occasion when his presence in court or before
the magistrate may be lawfully required, the municipal judge may direct that
fact to be entered upon the court minutes, thereby declaring the bond to be
forfeited.
      2.   Without advancing court costs, said judge shall then cause the
forfeiture to be certified to the district court of the county wherein the
situs of government is situated, where it shall be entered upon the judgment
docket and shall have the full force and effect of a district court judgment.
At such time as the forfeiture is entered upon the district court judgment
docket, the district court clerk shall proceed in accordance with the
applicable provisions of state statutes. (1985 Code § 11-22)
1-13-19: JUDGMENT:
   A.   Judgment Rendered And Recorded: At the close of a trial in the
municipal court, judgment must be rendered by the municipal judge, who shall
cause it to be entered in his docket.
   B.   Discharge Upon Acquittal: If the judgment of the municipal court is of
acquittal and the defendant is not to be detained for any other legal cause, he
must be discharged at once.
   C.   Guilty Plea Or Conviction: If the defendant pleads guilty or is
convicted after trial, the municipal court must render judgment thereon, fixing
the penalty within the limits prescribed by this code or other applicable
ordinance, and imposing sentence accordingly. (1985 Code § 11-23)
1-13-20: COSTS UPON JUDGMENT OF CONVICTION; COLLECTIONS:
   A.   Court Costs: Pursuant to 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 27-126, as
amended, court costs shall be no more than thirty dollars ($30.00) plus witness
and mileage fees, per case and may be added to the fine. All funds collected
shall be deposited in the appropriate fund.
   B.   Additional Fees, Costs, And Assessments: In addition to the court costs
collected pursuant to subsection A of this section, for every fine, deferral
fee in lieu of a fine, or bond forfeiture collected by the municipal court of
the city, additional local and state mandated fees, costs, and penalty
assessments shall be collected as provided in 20 Oklahoma Statutes sections
1313.2, 1313.3, 1313.4, as amended, and as provided in other applicable state
law and in this code. The city treasurer, or other individual designated by the
city council, shall forward mandated reimbursements to the state on a quarterly
basis unless otherwise required by law.
   C.   Costs Related To Prisoner Confinement:
      1.   Notwithstanding other costs allowed pursuant to this section and
this code, the municipal court at its discretion may require that a person
confined in the county jail, both before or after conviction, upon conviction,
or receiving a deferred sentence in lieu of a fine, pay the contract account
owed by the city to the county sheriff's office for the cost of incarceration
of the individual.
      2.   The municipal court, in its discretion, in addition to the contract
amount paid to the county sheriff's department for the incarceration of the
individual convicted, may also assess additional cost associated with medical
care, dental care, psychiatric services or other costs expended for the health
services provided to the municipal prisoner.
      3.   The municipal court shall not assess the cost hereinabove described,
if, in the discretion of the court, such costs would impose a manifest hardship
on the person, or, in the discretion of the court, the property of the person
is needed for the maintenance and support of the prisoner's immediate family.
      4.   The cost of incarceration shall be paid by the inmate to the city
and shall be collected by the clerk of the municipal court. The clerk of the
municipal court shall then pay the monies collected to the city treasurer for
payments as required pursuant to 22 Oklahoma Statutes section 979a.
   D.   Collection Fees: Any person convicted of any offense or misdemeanor who
fails to pay all or a portion of any penalties, fines, deferral fees,
assessments, fees, warrants, court costs, or other applicable costs whose
unpaid balance is referred to a collection agency shall pay a collection fee in
an amount not to exceed thirty five percent (35%) per offense, in addition to
the remainder of the unsatisfied monetary obligation. (Ord. 417, 1-24-2017)
1-13-21: IMPRISONMENT FOR FAILURE TO PAY FINE; INABILITY TO PAY:
   A.   Imprisonment For Failure To Pay Fine: If a defendant who is financially
able refuses or neglects to pay a fine or costs, or both, payment may be
enforced by imprisonment until the same shall be satisfied at the rate of five
dollars ($5.00) per day. (1985 Code § 11-25; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Inability To Pay Fine: If the defendant is without means to pay the
fine or costs, the municipal judge of the city may direct the total amount due
to be entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the district court
of the county wherein the situs of government is situated, where it shall be
entered upon the district court judgment docket and shall have the full force
and effect of a district court judgment. Thereupon, the same remedies shall be
available for the enforcement of said judgment as are available to any other
judgment creditor. (1985 Code § 11-25)
1-13-22: SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE:
After conviction and sentence of a defendant in the municipal court of the
city, the municipal judge may suspend sentence in accordance with the
provisions of, and subject to the conditions and procedures imposed by,
applicable provisions of 11 Oklahoma Statutes, as amended. (1985 Code § 11-26)
1-13-23: WITNESS FEES:
   A.   Payment Allowed: Witnesses in any proceeding in the municipal court,
other than police officers or peace officers, shall be entitled to such amount
as allowed by statute for each day of attendance, plus such amount as allowed
by statute for each mile actually and necessarily traveled in going to, and
returning from, the place of attendance, if their residence is more than five
(5) miles outside the corporate limits of the city. No witness shall receive
fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or the same
travel. (1985 Code § 11-27; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Deposit From Defendant; Indigents Excepted:
      1.   A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit, with the
clerk of the court, a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of
attendance for each witness to be summoned.
      2.   Such deposit shall not be required from an indigent defendant who
files an affidavit setting out:
         a.   The names of no more than three (3) witnesses;
         b.   That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to
provide fees and mileage allowed by law;
         c.   That the testimony of such witnesses is material; and
         d.   That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper
defense.
      3.   The fees of witnesses in such cases (in subsection B2 of this
section) shall be paid by the city. (1985 Code § 11-27)
1-13-24: PENALTY:
See chapter 5 of this title for penalty provisions. (2004 Code)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Municipal And Regional Planning Commission   1
Zoning Board Of Adjustment   2
Baseball And Softball Board   3
Fair Housing Board   4
Library Board   5
Personnel Board   6
Firefighters Pension And Retirement Board   7
Board Of Health; Cooperative Health Department   8
Senior Citizens' Center Advisory Board   9
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL AND REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Creation; Membership; Appointment
2-1-2: Terms Of Office
2-1-3: Officers
2-1-4: Removals And Vacancies
2-1-5: Serve As Regional Planning Commission
2-1-6: Jurisdiction
2-1-7: Rules And Regulations
2-1-8: Meetings
2-1-9: Employees; Expenditures
2-1-10: Project Review; Investigation And Report
2-1-11: Duties And Powers
2-1-1: CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT:
   A.   Commission Created; Members: There is hereby created a municipal
planning commission of the city, to be composed of at least five (5) members.
The mayor and the city engineer (local staff only) shall serve as ex officio
members of said commission, without voting powers. (1985 Code § 1-39; amd. 2004
Code)
   B.   Appointment; Qualifications:
      1.   The members of the municipal planning commission shall be nominated
for appointment by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, shall be
residents of the city, and shall serve without salary. (1985 Code § 1-39)
      2.   The members of the municipal planning commission shall be appointed
at large. (Ord. 388, 6-27-2006)
      3.   Each appointed member shall hold office for a term of three (3)
years ending at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. on the first Monday in May, or
until his successor takes office.
      4.   The appointed members of the commission shall be appointed solely
with reference to their fitness and without reference to party affiliation.
(1985 Code § 1-39)
2-1-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
Upon the initial appointment of members to the municipal planning commission,
the mayor shall designate one member of the municipal planning commission to
serve for a period of one year, two (2) members to serve for a period of two
(2) years, and two (2) members to serve for a period of three (3) years. All
subsequent appointments of members shall be for a three (3) year term, and
until their successors are appointed and qualified. (1985 Code § 1-39)
2-1-3: OFFICERS:
   A.   Election Of Officers: Within five (5) days of the appointment and
qualification of the members of the municipal planning commission, said
commission shall meet and elect one of their number as chairman, one as vice
chairman and one as secretary. In addition, the municipal planning commission
may create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary.
   B.   Terms Of Office: The term of all such offices shall be one year, with
eligibility for reelection. (1985 Code § 1-39)
2-1-4: REMOVALS AND VACANCIES:
   A.   Removal: Members of the municipal planning commission may be removed by
the mayor, with the approval of the city council, for inefficiency, neglect of
duty, malefaction in office or other cause established by resolution of the
city council.
   B.   Vacancies: Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of a
term shall be filled only for the unexpired term. (1985 Code § 1-39)
2-1-5: SERVE AS REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   Creation; Members: There is hereby created a regional planning
commission for the city. The municipal planning commission for the city shall
also serve as the regional planning commission, in order to avail itself of the
powers of state law.
   B.   Ex Officio Members: The mayor of the city, and the chairman of the
Stephens County board of commissioners shall be ex officio members of said
regional planning commission, to serve without voting powers. (1985 Code § 1-
39)
2-1-6: JURISDICTION:
   A.   Within City Limits: The municipal planning commission shall have
jurisdiction over all land within the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   Outside City Limits: The jurisdictional area of the regional planning
commission shall include, for the purposes of the regulation and review of land
subdivision only, any lands outside the corporate limits of the city, whose any
one boundary, at any point, shall be at and within a distance of three (3)
miles from the corporate limits of the city. (1985 Code § 15-2)
2-1-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The planning commission shall prescribe and adopt rules and regulations
governing the transaction of its business, and shall keep a public record of
its regulations, transactions and findings. (1985 Code § 15-3)
2-1-8: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular: Regular meetings shall be scheduled at least once each month.
   B.   Special Or Emergency: Special or emergency meetings may be called by
the chairman of the planning commission, in accordance with the state open
meetings law 1 . (1985 Code § 15-3)
 
Notes
1 1. 25 OS § 301 et seq.
2-1-9: EMPLOYEES; EXPENDITURES:
   A.   Contract For Services: The planning commission shall have the authority
to contract for necessary professional services, within the limits of any
appropriation fixed by the city council. All compensation for such services
shall also be fixed by the city council.
   B.   Necessary Expenses: The planning commission may incur other necessary
expenses, within the limits of the city council appropriation, to carry out its
purposes and responsibilities. (1985 Code § 15-4)
2-1-10: PROJECT REVIEW; INVESTIGATION AND REPORT:
   A.   Investigation And Report Required: All projects or matters that fall
within the duties and powers of the planning commission (as specified in this
code) shall be referred to said planning commission for investigation and
report before any final action shall be taken thereon by the city council.
   B.   Failure To Investigate; Council Action: If the planning commission
fails to make an investigation and report on any matter referred to it within
sixty (60) days, or other agreed upon time, the city council may proceed to act
upon such matter. (1985 Code § 15-5)
2-1-11: DUTIES AND POWERS:
The planning commission shall have the following duties and powers:
   A.   To prepare and recommend to the city council, for adoption, a
comprehensive plan for the future development of the city, and to ensure that
said plan, once prepared and adopted, is properly utilized and updated at
appropriate intervals;
   B.   To make recommendations concerning the community's growth, improvement
and beautification;
   C.   To investigate and report to the city council on all matters relating
to the location and development of parks and recreational areas, streets,
public grounds and structures;
   D.   To investigate, prepare and recommend to the city council, for
adoption, a suitable zoning ordinance to assist in the implementation of the
community's comprehensive plan, and to assist the council in administering said
zoning ordinance;
   E.   To investigate, prepare and recommend to the city council, for
adoption, rules and standards for use in regulating the subdivision of land
within the planning commission's jurisdictional area, and to assist the council
in administering the land subdivision regulations; and
   F.   To investigate, prepare and recommend to the city council, for
adoption, such other rules, regulations or standards as may be necessary to
implement the comprehensive plan for the city. (1985 Code § 15-6)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
2-2-1: Board Created; Members; Rules
2-2-2: Meetings
2-2-3: Authority; General Duties
2-2-4: Powers
2-2-5: Reversal Of Decisions Of Officers
2-2-6: Right Of Appeal
2-2-7: Serve As Appeals Board For Floodplain Variances
2-2-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS; RULES:
   A.   Board Created: A zoning board of adjustment is hereby created.
   B.   Members: Said board of adjustment shall consist of the five (5) council
members sitting as such board of adjustment. The number and term of the members
thereof and the filling of vacancies therein shall be the same as that of the
city council.
   C.   Rules: The city council as such zoning board of adjustment shall adopt
rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any amendment
thereto. (Ord. 294, 1-27-1987)
2-2-2: MEETINGS:
   A.   Times Of Meetings: Meetings of the city council, sitting as such board
of adjustment, shall be held at the call of the mayor and at such times as such
board may determine.
   B.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the council, sitting as such board of
adjustment, shall be open to the public. (Ord. 294, 1-27-1987)
2-2-3: AUTHORITY; GENERAL DUTIES:
The mayor, or in his absence the vice mayor, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. The city council, sitting as such board of
adjustment, shall keep minutes of its proceedings, show the vote of each member
upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact, and
shall keep a record of its examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk and shall
become a public record. (Ord. 294, 1-27-1987)
2-2-4: POWERS:
The city council, sitting as a board of adjustment, shall have the following
powers:
   A.   To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the city clerk, city
building inspector, or other administrative official;
   B.   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the zoning or
other ordinances upon which the city council, sitting as such board of
adjustment, is required to pass; and
   C.   To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, variances from the terms
of such ordinances as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing
to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinances
will result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinances will
be observed and substantial justice done. (Ord. 294, 1-27-1987)
2-2-5: REVERSAL OF DECISIONS OF OFFICERS:
   A.   Authority: In exercising the above mentioned powers, the city council,
sitting as a board of adjustment, may, in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make such other
order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that
end shall have the power of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
   B.   Majority Vote: A majority vote of the members of the city council,
sitting as a board of adjustment, shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the city clerk, city building
inspector or other officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant in any
matter upon which it is required to pass, or to effect any variance in the
regulations and restrictions provided for in the zoning or other ordinances.
(Ord. 294, 1-27-1987)
2-2-6: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
   A.   Appeal To Board:
      1.   Appeals from the action of any administrative officer may be taken
to the city council, sitting as a board of adjustment, by any person aggrieved
or by any officer, department, or board of the city affected by any decision of
such administrative officer.
      2.   Such appeal shall be taken within five (5) days from the date of
such decision, by filing with said officer and with the city council, sitting
as a board of adjustment, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof.
      3.   The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit
to the city council, sitting as a board of adjustment, certified copies of all
papers constituting the record of said matter involved in said appeal, together
with a copy of the ruling or order from which said appeal is taken.
      4.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to
the city council, sitting as a board of adjustment, after notice of appeal
shall have been filed, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the city council, sitting as a board of adjustment, or
by a court of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and due cause shown.
      5.   The city council, sitting as a board of adjustment, shall hear said
appeal within a reasonable time after the filing of said notice of appeal,
giving public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest
and shall decide the same within a reasonable time.
      6.   Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by his attorney
or by agent.
   B.   Appeal To District Court:
      1.   An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment, or order of
the city council, sitting as a board of adjustment, may be taken to the
district court by any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved, or any
taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city by filing
with the city clerk and with the city council, sitting as a board of
adjustment, within ten (10) days, a notice of appeal; which notice shall
specify the grounds of such appeal.
      2.   No bond or deposit for costs shall be required for such appeals.
      3.   Upon filing of such notice of appeal as herein provided, the city
council, sitting as a board of adjustment, shall transmit forthwith to the
court clerk of the county, the original certified copies of all the papers
constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision, or
ruling expected thereto.
      4.   An appeal to the district court from the city council, sitting as a
board of adjustment, stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the mayor, chairman of the board of adjustment, certifies
to the court clerk, after notice of appeal shall have been filed, that, by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the district court,
upon application or notice to the mayor, chairman of the city council, sitting
as a board of adjustment, or other  proper city official. (Ord. 294, 1-27-1987)
2-2-7: SERVE AS APPEALS BOARD FOR FLOODPLAIN VARIANCES:
   A.   Authority; Duties:
      1.   The zoning board of adjustment shall also serve as the appeals board
to hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of
the floodplain management regulations.
      2.   The appeals board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the city building inspector in the enforcement or
administration of the city floodplain management regulations.
   B.   Right Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeals
board may appeal such decision in any court of competent jurisdiction. The city
building inspector shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal
and shall report variances to the federal emergency management agency (FEMA),
upon request.
   C.   Issuance Of Variances:
      1.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Register of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
      2.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size,
contiguous to, and surrounded by, lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, provided all relevant factors have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      3.   Upon consideration of all factors noted above, the appeals board may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purpose and objectives of the city floodplain management program.
      4.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      5.   Prerequisites for granting variances shall be as follows:
         a.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         b.   Variances shall only be issued upon: 1) showing a good and
sufficient cause; 2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 3) a determination that
the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, the creation
of nuisances, fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
         c.   Any applicant for whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
         d.   Variances may be issued by the city for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use; provided, that: 1) the criteria outlined in this
code are met; and 2) the structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional
threats to public safety. (Ord. 294, 1-27-1987)
CHAPTER 3
BASEBALL AND SOFTBALL BOARD 1
SECTION:
2-3-1: Appointment; Terms
2-3-2: Duties
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  7-2-1B of this code.
2-3-1: APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
There is hereby created a baseball and softball board, consisting of five (5)
members appointed by the city council, for terms of four (4) years, to serve
until their respective successors have been appointed and qualified; provided,
that the initial members shall be appointed one for a term of one year, one for
a term of two (2) years, one for a term of three (3) years, and two (2) for
terms of four (4) years. Thereafter, said terms shall be four (4) years for all
successor members of said board. (1985 Code § 1-44)
2-3-2: DUTIES:
The baseball and softball board shall have charge of the care, management and
control of the city baseball and softball program; and may make rules and
regulations governing the program, subject to the enacting of ordinances by the
city council. The board may also make such rules and regulations governing its
operations as it may deem necessary, subject to approval by the city council.
(1985 Code § 1-44)
CHAPTER 4
FAIR HOUSING BOARD 1
SECTION:
2-4-1: Board Created; Members
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5, chapter 4 of this code for fair housing regulations.
2-4-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created a fair housing board for the city, to assist in the
enforcement of all municipal fair housing regulations and ordinances. The city
council shall serve as the fair housing board of the community. (1985 Code § 1-
45)
CHAPTER 5
LIBRARY BOARD 1
SECTION:
2-5-1: Appointment; Terms
2-5-2: Authority And Responsibilities
 
Notes
1 1. See section 3-1 of the city charter.
2-5-1: APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
   A.   Appointment: There is hereby created a library board for the city. The
library board shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom shall be a
resident of the city, and who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to
confirmation by the city council.
   B.   Terms: All appointments and confirmations to the library board shall be
for terms of five (5) years from the expiration of the term of office of the
members of said board whose terms have expired, the term of one member shall
begin on July 1 of every year. (1985 Code § 1-46)
2-5-2: AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Management Of Libraries: The library board shall have administrative
supervision and responsibilities for the management of all municipal libraries
in the city.
   B.   Rules And Regulations: The library board may make all necessary rules
and regulations for its operation and for the care and management of libraries
supported by the city, subject to approval and enactment by the city council.
(1985 Code § 1-46)
CHAPTER 6
PERSONNEL BOARD 1
SECTION:
2-6-1: Appointment; Terms
2-6-2: Removals; Vacancies
2-6-3: Compensation
2-6-4: Officers
2-6-5: Meetings
2-6-6: Powers
 
Notes
1 1. See section 3-3 of the city charter.
2-6-1: APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
   A.   Appointment; Terms: There shall be a personnel board consisting of
three (3) members appointed by the city council for overlapping three (3) year
terms. The term of one member shall begin July 1 in every year. The council
shall appoint the original members so that the term of one will expire at that
time in each of the first three (3) succeeding years.
   B.   Sound Judgment And Fairness: They shall be chosen with a view to their
sound judgment and their fairness to both the people of the city and the
officers and employees of the city.
   C.   Holding Other City Position Disallowed: A member may not hold any other
office or position in the city government. (1985 Code § 1-47)
2-6-2: REMOVALS; VACANCIES:
   A.   Removals: The city council, by a vote of at least four (4) members,
after adequate opportunity for a public hearing, may remove a member for the
good of the service, and the vote shall be by yeas and nays and shall be
entered in the journal.
   B.   Vacancies: The council shall fill vacancies for the unexpired terms.
(1985 Code § 1-47)
2-6-3: COMPENSATION:
Members shall serve without compensation. (1985 Code § 1-47)
2-6-4: OFFICERS:
   A.   Election Of Officers: At the time prescribed for the beginning of the
term of a newly appointed member, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the
board shall elect a chairman, a vice chairman and a secretary. The secretary
need not be a member of the board.
   B.   Administer Oaths: The chairman shall have power to administer oaths and
affirmations. (1985 Code § 1-47)
2-6-5: MEETINGS:
The board shall determine the time and place of its regular meetings, and the
chairman or two (2) members may call special meetings. (1985 Code § 1-47)
2-6-6: POWERS:
The personnel board shall have power to subpoena officers and employees of the
city and other persons to testify and to produce documents and other effects as
evidence. (1985 Code § 1-47)
CHAPTER 7
FIREFIGHTERS PENSION AND RETIREMENT BOARD
SECTION:
2-7-1: Board Created; Compliance With State Law
2-7-1: BOARD CREATED; COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
There is hereby created a firefighters pension and retirement board, with
membership, organization, powers, duties and functions as prescribed by state
law, and as may be provided by any later laws relating to the board 1 . (1985
Code § 1-48; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 49-103; see also title 1, chapter 11 of this code.
CHAPTER 8
BOARD OF HEALTH; COOPERATIVE HEALTH DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2-8-1: Board Membership; Supervision; Duties
2-8-2: Health Officer
2-8-3: County Health Department
2-8-1: BOARD MEMBERSHIP; SUPERVISION; DUTIES:
   A.   Membership: The city council shall constitute a municipal board of
health and shall be capable of performing all the functions provided by state
law.
   B.   Supervision: The municipal board of health shall be under the
supervision of the Stephens County department of health and the Oklahoma state
department of health.
   C.   General Duties: It shall be the general duty of the municipal board of
health to examine and consider all measures necessary for the preservation of
the public health of residents of the city, and to see that all ordinances and
regulations in relation thereto are observed. (1985 Code § 1-49)
2-8-2: HEALTH OFFICER:
The municipal board of health may appoint a local health officer to carry out
its health programs and policies. The county health officer or his authorized
representative may perform the duties of a local health officer. (1985 Code §
1-49)
2-8-3: COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT:
The cooperative health department of Stephens County, and its director, shall
have the powers of a local health department and local health officer
respectively for the city. References to health department and health officer
or director of the health department in this code and in other ordinances of
the city shall mean the cooperative health department and its director, unless
the context clearly indicates another meaning. (1985 Code § 1-49)
CHAPTER 9
SENIOR CITIZENS' CENTER ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
2-9-1: Appointment; Terms
2-9-2: Vacancies
2-9-3: Officers
2-9-4: Meetings; Quorum
2-9-5: Duties Of Board And Officers
2-9-6: Finances; Expenditures
2-9-1: APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
   A.   Board Created: There is hereby created an advisory board of directors
for the Marlow senior citizens' center.
   B.   Appointment; Membership: The membership of the senior citizens' center
advisory board of directors shall consist of seven (7) members. Four (4) center
participants shall be elected by the center membership, one member shall be
appointed by the mayor, one member shall be appointed by the city
administrator, and one member shall be appointed by the president of the
chamber of commerce.
   C.   Terms: Changes in the board shall take place in December at the annual
membership meeting, depending on expiration dates for terms. All elections and
appointments shall be for a two (2) year term. (1985 Code § 1-53)
2-9-2: VACANCIES:
Premature vacancies will be filled by election or appointment, as described
above, for the remaining term of office, at a called center general meeting.
(1985 Code § 1-53)
2-9-3: OFFICERS:
At the January meeting, the board will elect from their own members, a
president, a vice president, a secretary and a treasurer for a two (2) year
term of office. (1985 Code § 1-53)
2-9-4: MEETINGS; QUORUM:
   A.   Time Of Meetings: The board shall meet once a month. The president may
call any additional meetings of the board deemed necessary.
   B.   Quorum: A quorum will consist of a simple majority of the board at
regular meetings. (1985 Code § 1-53)
2-9-5: DUTIES OF BOARD AND OFFICERS:
   A.   Board Responsibilities: Responsibilities and powers of the board shall
include: 1) help in planning center activities; and 2) hire or dismiss and
supervise the employed center staff members. It shall also help raise the
necessary funds to implement a well rounded schedule of programs.
   B.   Duties Of Officers: The duties of the officers of the board shall
include:
      1.   The president will give leadership to the organization, preside at
all meetings, perform all duties associated with the office, and vote only in
case of a tie.
      2.   The vice president shall assist the president, preside over meetings
in the absence of the president, and share responsibilities for leadership.
      3.   The secretary shall take minutes at each meeting. Minutes shall be
accessible to the general membership of the center.
      4.   The treasurer shall receive and deposit all monies in the bank,
keeping an accurate record of income and expenditures, and pay documented debts
by check. (1985 Code § 1-53)
2-9-6: FINANCES; EXPENDITURES:
   A.   Signing Checks: All checks must be cosigned by one board designated
person, and the treasurer.
   B.   Purchases; Expenses: Debts and contracts may be entered into by the
board only through designated methods, according to board procedures. A board
approved list of supplies may be purchased by the director without further
board action and may be paid for by check by the treasurer. A board approved
list of overhead expenses may be paid for by check by the treasurer without
further approval of the board. All other purchases will be made only after
favorable action of the board. (1985 Code § 1-53)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
General Licensing Provisions   1
  Miscellaneous Businesses   1A
Taxes; Fees   2
  Sales Tax   2A
  Use Tax   2B
  Telephone Exchange Fee   2C
  Public Utility Gross Receipts Tax   2D
  Emergency Telephone Service Fee   2E
Alcoholic Beverages   3
  Occupational Tax; Sales For On Premises Consumption   3A
  Retail Stores; Off Premises Consumption   3B
Tobacco Products Sales; Youth Addiction   4
Pool, Billiard And Other Recreational Halls   5
Pawnbrokers   6
Contractors   7
Itinerant Occupations   8
Private Ambulance Services   9
Taxicabs   10
Medical Marijuana   11
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Short Title
3-1-2: Scope
3-1-3: Definitions
3-1-4: License Required; Application; Exemption
3-1-5: License Fee
3-1-6: Issuance And Term Of License
3-1-7: Qualifications Of Applicant
3-1-8: Procedure For Issuance Of License
3-1-9: Contents Of License
3-1-10: Duties Of Licensee
3-1-11: Enforcement And Inspections
3-1-12: Revocation Of License Or Permit; Hearing
3-1-13: Appeal Procedure
3-1-14: Penalty
3-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the GENERAL LICENSING ORDINANCE
OF MARLOW. (2004 Code)
3-1-2: SCOPE:
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances. Where
this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises or personal
property than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law,
ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(2004 Code)
3-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
   BUSINESS: All kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises,
establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with
all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, and of which
are conducted for private profit, or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on
any premises in the city, or anywhere else within its jurisdiction.
   LICENSE OR LICENSEE: Means, respectively, the words "permit" or "permittee"
or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar privilege, wherever
relevant to any provisions of this chapter or other law or ordinance.
   PERSON: Individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations; or any
officers, agents, employees, factors, or any kind of personal representations
of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself, or for any other
person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
   PREMISES: All lands, structures, places, and also the equipment and
appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any
personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in
connection with, any such business conducted on such premises. (2004 Code)
3-1-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; EXEMPTION:
   A.   License Or Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person, either
directly or indirectly, to conduct any business or nonprofit enterprise,
without a license or permit therefor being first procured and kept in effect at
all such times as required by this chapter or other law or ordinance of the
city.
   B.   Application For Special Permit: An applicant for a special permit shall
submit an application therefor to the city clerk upon forms prescribed by the
clerk and shall furnish such additional information and make such affidavits as
the clerk shall require.
   C.   Exemption; Nonprofit Organization: The city clerk shall issue special
permits, without the payment of any license fees or other charges therefor, to
any person or organization for the conduct or operations of a nonprofit
enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when he finds that the applicant
operates without private profit, for a public, charitable, educational,
literary, fraternal, or religious purpose. (2004 Code)
3-1-5: LICENSE FEE:
License fees shall be in the amounts set by resolution of the city council from
time to time. (2004 Code)
3-1-6: ISSUANCE AND TERM OF LICENSE:
The city clerk shall collect all license fees and shall issue licenses in the
name of the city to all persons qualified under the provisions of this chapter
and shall use such forms as adopted by the city council. Such license shall
expire no later than one year after issuance or on June 30 of each year, unless
otherwise provided. (2004 Code)
3-1-7: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT:
The general standards herein set out relative to the qualifications of every
applicant for a city license shall be considered and applied by the city clerk.
The following are required:
   A.   History Of Applicant: The license history of the applicant; whether
such person, in previously operating in this or another state under a license
has had such license revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor, and the
demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action.
   B.   Indebtedness To City: The applicant shall not be in default under the
provisions of this chapter or indebted or obligated in any manner to the city
except for current taxes.
   C.   Compliance With Zoning Regulations: The applicant shall verify that the
proposed use of any premises is not in violation of city zoning regulations.
(2004 Code)
3-1-8: PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Application For License: Every person required to procure a license
under the provisions of any ordinance or law of the city shall submit an
application for such license to the city clerk. The application shall:
      1.   Be a written statement upon forms provided by the city clerk; such
form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn to by the applicant before a
notary public of this state;
      2.   Require the disclosure of all information necessary for compliance
with section
3-1-7 of this chapter and of any other information which the city clerk shall
find to be reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter; and
      3.   Be accompanied by the full amount of the fees chargeable for such
license.
   B.   Renewal Application: The applicant for the renewal of a license shall
submit a renewal application for such license, together with the license fee,
to the city clerk.
   C.   Duplicate License Or Permit: A duplicate license or special permit
shall be issued by the city clerk to replace any license previously issued,
which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed upon the paying to the city
clerk of a license fee.
   D.   Denial Of License; Appeal: The city clerk shall, upon disapproving any
application submitted under the provisions of this chapter, place the matter on
the next agenda of the city council, where the applicant may appeal from the
denial. (2004 Code)
3-1-9: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Each license issued hereunder shall state, at a minimum upon its face, the
following:
   A.   The name of the licensee and any other name under which such business
is to be conducted.
   B.   The kind and address of each business so licensed.
   C.   The amount of license fee therefor.
   D.   The dates of issuance and expiration thereof.
   E.   Such other information as the city clerk shall determine. (2004 Code)
3-1-10: DUTIES OF LICENSEE:
Every licensee under this chapter shall:
   A.   Permit all reasonable inspections of his business by public authorities
so authorized by law.
   B.   Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations
applicable to such licensed business.
   C.   Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary practices or conditions
which do or may affect the public health, morals or welfare.
   D.   Refrain from operating the licensed business on premises after
expiration of his license and during the period his license is revoked or
suspended.
   E.   Post and maintain such license upon the licensed premises in a place
where it may be seen at all times.
   F.   Not loan, sell, give or assign, to any other person or allow any other
person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or remove, or to have in his
possession a license or insignia which has been issued to the licensee. (2004
Code)
3-1-11: ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Persons Authorized To Inspect: The following persons are authorized to
conduct inspections in the manner prescribed herein:
      1.   The city clerk or other city employee shall make all investigations
reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.
      2.   The city clerk shall have the authority to order the inspection of
licensees, their businesses and premises, by all city officials having duties
to perform with reference to such licensees or businesses.
      3.   All police officers shall inspect and examine businesses located
within their respective jurisdictions or beats to enforce compliance with this
chapter.
   B.   Premises For Inspection: All persons authorized herein to inspect
licensees and businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without
search warrant, at all reasonable times, the following premises:
      1.   Those for which a license is required.
      2.   Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of
inspection, are operating under such license.
      3.   Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended.
   C.   Report Violations: Persons inspecting licensees, their businesses or
premises as herein authorized shall report all violations of this chapter or of
other laws or ordinances to the city clerk and shall submit such other reports
as the city clerk shall order. (2004 Code)
3-1-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; HEARING:
Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be revoked by  the mayor during
the life of such license or permit for the violation by the licensee or
permittee of any provision relating to the license or permit, the subject of
the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such revocation may be in
addition to any fine imposed. The mayor shall be authorized to summarily order
the cessation of business, the closing of the premises, and the suspension of
any business license or permit for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
   A.   Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the mayor has so acted, the mayor
shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license
or permit should be revoked.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the
licensee or permittee by certified mail at his last known address or personally
served at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
   C.   Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine
witnesses. The mayor shall preside and the city council shall render the
decision and recommendation.
   D.   Causes For Revocation: Business licenses and permits issued under the
provisions of this code, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the mayor
after notice and hearing as provided in subsections B and C of this section for
any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit.
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
or state law relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the
license or permit, or the premises occupied.
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the city.
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference
with a duly authorized city officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections, as provided in the city code. (2004 Code)
3-1-13: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the city to
issue a license or permit or by the revocation of a license or permit shall
have the right to appeal the city's decision to the city council. Such appeal
shall be requested by submitting a written request to the mayor within five (5)
days of the action of the city which is appealed.
   B.   Council Consideration: The city council shall consider the appeal at
its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the applicant shall be
entitled to present his appeal orally or in writing. The city council shall act
on the appeal within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall either uphold the
action of the mayor or shall direct the issuance of a license or permit which
the city had denied or the reissuance of a license or permit which the city had
revoked. (2004 Code)
3-1-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in section
 1-5-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
ARTICLE A.  MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-1A-1: Garage Sales
3-1A-2: Sale Of Merchandise On Vacant Property
3-1A-3: Street Sales
3-1A-4: Wrecker Services
3-1A-5: Penalty
3-1A-1: GARAGE SALES:
   A.   Definition: For purpose of this section, "garage sales" are defined as
those sales advertised and conducted on property not zoned for commercial,
industrial or other business use. (1985 Code § 5-67; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Before any garage sale is held, a garage sale permit shall be
obtained for each sale, from the city clerk. (1985 Code § 5-67)
      2.   Each permit shall have designated thereon the days for which it
shall be valid. (Ord. 295, 4-28-1987; amd. 2004 Code)
      3.   Each permit shall be conspicuously displayed on the sale premises
for the entire sale period.
      4.   The city clerk shall maintain a garage sale permit book wherein are
recorded all permit sales.
   C.   Conducting Sales; Limitations: Garage sales shall be limited to three
(3) days a week for one garage sale, per month, per year, except for charitable
or nonprofit organizations. (Ord. 295, 4-28-1987)
3-1A-2: SALE OF MERCHANDISE ON VACANT PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, trade or
transfer any merchandise of any kind on or in any vacant property, without the
consent of the owner or person in control of said property. (1985 Code § 5-55)
3-1A-3: STREET SALES:
No person, firm or corporation shall sell, peddle or barter any grain, hay,
seed, feedstuff, melons or any commercial products, or permit the same to
remain available for sale in any stationary automobile, wagon or other vehicle,
or stand in the hereinafter specified areas to offer said goods for sale. Said
areas shall include Main Street, and certain streets adjacent to, and
intersecting, Main Street, including: beginning at the west line of First
Street, Second Street north and south to the first alleys, Broadway Avenue
north to the south line of Kiowa Avenue and south to the north line of Seminole
Avenue, Fourth Street north and south to the first alleys, and terminating at
the east line of Fifth Street. (1985 Code § 5-68)
3-1A-4: WRECKER SERVICES:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to operate a wrecker vehicle or
to operate a wrecker service within the corporate limits of the city, unless
the owner or operator of said wrecker or wrecker service first obtains a
wrecker service license from the office of the city clerk.
   B.   License Fee; Term Of License:
      1.   Each wrecker or wrecker service operating within the city shall pay
an annual license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00). Said fee shall be due on May
1 of each year.
      2.   Any license issued for a portion of a year shall have the fee
therefor prorated on the basis of the number of months remaining in the
application year at the time the application for a license is made. (1985 Code
§ 5-66)
3-1A-5: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-5-1 of this code, and is subject to revocation of any license in his
possession. Each day upon which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense 1 . (1985 Code § 5-85; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
  1. See also sections
1 3-1-12,
  3-1-13 and
  3-1-14 of this title.
CHAPTER 2
TAXES; FEES
ARTICLE A.  SALES TAX
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Title
3-2A-2: Definitions
3-2A-3: Tax Imposed; Rates; Effective Dates
3-2A-4: Subsisting State Permits
3-2A-5: Classification Of Taxpayers
3-2A-6: Sales Subject To Tax; Exemptions
3-2A-7: Tax Due Date
3-2A-8: Payment Of Tax; Brackets
3-2A-9: Collection By Vendors
3-2A-10: Returns, Remittances And Discounts
3-2A-11: Delinquencies; Interest And Penalties
3-2A-12: Fraudulent Returns
3-2A-13: Enforcement Of Payment
3-2A-14: Refund Of Erroneous Payments
3-2A-15: Records Confidential
3-2A-16: Amendments
3-2A-17: Provisions Cumulative
3-2A-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known and may be cited as CITY OF MARLOW SALES TAX
ORDINANCE. (2004 Code)
3-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the state sales tax
code are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   STATE SALES TAX CODE: Reference to the "state sales tax code" shall mean
such code as set out in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1350 et seq., as amended.
   TAX COLLECTOR: The department of the city government or the official agency
of the state duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law or
contract to administer the collection of the tax levied by this article. (2004
Code)
3-2A-3: TAX IMPOSED; RATES; EFFECTIVE DATES:
The following city sales tax, in the total amount of three and one-half percent
(3.5%), shall be imposed and effective as indicated, unless otherwise extended
by a vote of the people. Said taxes have been approved by a majority of the
registered voters of the city voting on same in elections conducted in the
manner prescribed by Oklahoma Statutes:
 
Tax Amount Ordinance/Effective Date/Purpose
Two percent      Ordinances 135, 223.
                 Effective date: October 1, 1979.
                To support functions of municipal government.
                 Ordinance 335, 6-27-1995.
One percent      Effective date: October 1, 1995.
                 Termination date: October 1, 2017.
                 To provide revenues to be used for capital expenditures for
                 the use and benefit of the city and any public trust having
                the city as beneficiary thereof and/or for the payment of debt
                 service in connection with obligations issued to finance said
                 capital expenditures.
                 This tax was levied also to retire debt incurred for
                construction of a sanitary sewer improvement project. This
                 debt is in the form of a loan received from the Oklahoma water
                 resources board and has been pledged to them as collateral.
One-half percent Ordinance 351, 8-20-1998.
                 Effective date: January 1, 1999.
                 For funding emergency services including, but not limited to,
                ambulance services, police protection, and fire protection for
                 the citizens of the city. (2004 Code)
 
3-2A-4: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma tax
commission pursuant to the Oklahoma sales tax code are, for the purposes of
this article, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any
requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. (2004 Code)
3-2A-5: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the state sales tax code.
(2004 Code)
3-2A-6: SALES SUBJECT TO TAX; EXEMPTIONS:
The city sales tax shall be levied upon the gross receipts or gross proceeds of
such sales as specified by Oklahoma Statutes, and exemptions from such tax
shall be allowed pursuant to Oklahoma Statutes. (2004 Code)
3-2A-7: TAX DUE DATE:
The tax levied under the provisions of this article shall be due and payable at
the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales
tax under the state sales tax law. (2004 Code)
3-2A-8: PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS:
   A.   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the state tax commission at the
time and in form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax under the
state sales tax law.
   B.   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the
state tax commission shall be as the same is hereafter adopted by the agreement
of the city and the state tax commission, in the collection of both the city
sales tax and the state sales tax. (2004 Code)
3-2A-9: COLLECTION BY VENDORS:
   A.   The tax levied under the provision of this article shall be paid by the
consumer or user to the vendor and it shall be the duty of each and every
vendor in the city to collect from the consumer or user, the full amount of the
tax levied by this article, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or
practicable to the average equivalent thereof.
   B.   Vendors shall add the tax imposed under this article, or the average
equivalent thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or
user to vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner
as other debts.
   C.   A vendor who wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to
collect the full amount of the tax levied hereof, or wilfully or intentionally
fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions or remits or rebates
to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by whatsoever means,
all or any part of the tax herein levied, or makes in any form of advertising,
verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he is absorbing the tax,
or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a
price including the tax, or in any manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-5-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
3-2A-10: RETURNS, REMITTANCES AND DISCOUNTS:
Returns and remittances of the tax levied and collected under the provisions of
this article shall be made to the state tax commission at the time and in the
manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by
the state sales tax code; and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be
subject to the same discount as may be allowed by said code for collection of
state sales tax. (2004 Code)
3-2A-11: DELINQUENCIES; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Failure To Pay Tax: Section 217 of title 68, Oklahoma Statutes, and
amendments thereto, is hereby adopted and made a part of this article, and
interest or penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified are
hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and
paying the tax levied under this article; provided, that the failure or refusal
of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the
time and manner required by this article shall cause such tax to be delinquent.
   B.   Waiver: The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by
reason of a taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax as levied under this article
may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or
remittance as applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68
Oklahoma Statutes section 220, and amendments thereto; and to accomplish the
purposes of this section the applicable provisions of said section 220 are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. (2004 Code)
3-2A-12: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties which may be imposed for the violation of
this article, the wilful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and
remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report
for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof
rightfully due under this article shall be an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, the offending taxpayer shall be subject to punishment as provided in
section 1-5-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
3-2A-13: ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT:
Taxes, penalty and interest due under the provision of this article shall at
all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the
claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
(2004 Code)
3-2A-14: REFUND OF ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax levied under the provisions
of this article may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in
the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as
provided for administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 Oklahoma
Statutes section 227, and amendments thereto, and to accomplish the purposes of
this section, the applicable provisions of said section 227 are hereby adopted
by reference and made a part of this article. (2004 Code)
3-2A-15: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same, provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 205, and
amendments thereto, of the state sales tax code, and each subsection thereof,
are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to
administration of the city sales tax as if herein set forth in full. (2004
Code)
3-2A-16: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city, by their approval of the ordinances from which this
article was derived at the elections provided for in section
3-2A-3 of this article, hereby authorize the city council by ordinances duly
enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the
method and manner of administration and enforcing this article as may be
necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness except that the rate of the tax
herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors
of the city as provided by law. (2004 Code)
3-2A-17: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and
all taxing provisions of this code or city ordinances. (2004 Code)
ARTICLE B.  USE TAX
SECTION:
3-2B-1: Title
3-2B-2: Definitions
3-2B-3: Classification Of Taxpayers
3-2B-4: Subsisting State Permits
3-2B-5: Purpose Of Revenues
3-2B-6: Tax Imposed
3-2B-7: Exemptions
3-2B-8: Tax Due Date; Payment
3-2B-9: Tax Constitutes Debt
3-2B-10: Collection Of Tax By Retailer Or Vendor
3-2B-11: Deductions For Vendors Of Other States
3-2B-12: Delinquencies; Interest And Penalties
3-2B-13: Erroneous Payments; Claim For Refund
3-2B-14: Fraudulent Returns
3-2B-15: Records Confidential
3-2B-16: Provisions Cumulative
3-2B-17: Revocation Of Permit
3-2B-18: Effective Date
3-2B-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known and may be cited as CITY OF MARLOW USE TAX
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 340, 12-19-1995; amd. 2004 Code)
3-2B-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma use tax
code, 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1401, are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this article. In addition thereto, the following words and terms
shall be defined as follows:
   CITY: The city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   TAX COLLECTOR: As used herein, means the department of the city government
or the official agency of the state, duly designated according to law or
contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of the use tax herein
levied.
   TRANSACTION: Sale. (Ord. 340, 12-19-1995)
3-2B-3: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma use tax code.
(Ord. 340, 12-19-1995)
3-2B-4: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma tax
commission pursuant to the Oklahoma use tax code are, for the purpose of this
article, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for
an additional municipal permit for the same purpose. (Ord. 340, 12-19-1995)
3-2B-5: PURPOSE OF REVENUES:
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues for
the support of the functions of the city government, and any and all revenues
derived hereunder may be expended by the governing body for any purpose for
which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized. (Ord. 340, 12-19-1995)
3-2B-6: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Levy Of Tax: There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every
person storing, using or otherwise consuming within the city tangible, personal
property purchased or brought into the city, an excise tax on the storage, use
or otherwise consuming within the city of such property at the rate of three
and one- half percent (3.5%) of the purchase price of such property.
   B.   Payment Of Tax; Exception: Such tax shall be paid by every person
storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the city, tangible, personal
property purchased or brought into the city. The additional tax levied
hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property
within the city and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside
Oklahoma; provided, that the tax levied herein shall not be levied against
tangible, personal property intended solely for use outside the city, but which
is stored in the city pending shipment outside the city or which is temporarily
retained in the city for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing,
alteration, maintenance or other service.
   C.   Deductions: Any person liable for payment of the use tax authorized
herein may deduct from such use tax any local or municipal sales tax previously
paid on such goods or services; provided, that the amount deducted shall not
exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by the city had
been levied on the sale of such goods or services. (Ord. 352, 12-22-1998)
3-2B-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply:
   A.   In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property
brought into the city by a nonresident individual visiting in the city for his
or her personal use or enjoyment while within the city.
   B.   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for
resale before being used.
   C.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property on
which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the Oklahoma use tax
code and the city use tax ordinance, has been paid by the person using such
tangible, personal property in the city, whether such tax was levied under the
laws of Oklahoma or some other state or municipality of the United States. If
any article of tangible, personal property has already been subjected to a tax
by Oklahoma or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use,
in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the Oklahoma use tax code and
the city use tax ordinance, the provisions of this article shall also apply to
it by a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both
the Oklahoma use tax code and the city use tax ordinance, and the rate by which
the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed. Provided, that no credit
shall be given for taxes paid in another state or municipality, if that state
or municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in Oklahoma and the
city.
   D.   In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the city, and
machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons in the operation of
manufacturing plants already established in the city. Provided, that this
exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated
into, and is directly used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to
taxation under the sales tax code of the city. The term "manufacturing plants"
shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or
processing operations, and generally recognized as such.
   E.   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now specifically
exempted from taxation under the sales tax code of the city.
   F.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
brought into the city by an individual with intent to become a resident of the
city where such personal property is for such individual's personal use or
enjoyment.
   G.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
used, or to be used, by commercial airlines or railroads.
   H.   In respect to livestock purchased outside Oklahoma and brought into the
city for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold. (Ord. 340,
12-19-1995)
3-2B-8: TAX DUE DATE; PAYMENT:
The tax levied by this article is due and payable at the time and in the manner
and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the use tax code of
the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 340, 12-19-1995)
3-2B-9: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a
prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Ord. 340, 12-19-
1995)
3-2B-10: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR:
   A.   Places Of Business Within And Without State: Every retailer or vendor
maintaining places of business both within and without the state of Oklahoma,
and making sales of tangible, personal property from a place of business
outside this state for use in the city, shall, at the time of making such
sales, collect the use tax levied by this article from the purchaser and give
to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the
Oklahoma tax commission, if said tax commission shall, by regulation, require
such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with said tax commission the
name and address of all his agents operating in the city and location of any
and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of business in
the city.
   B.   Places Of Business Outside State: The Oklahoma tax commission may, in
its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax herein
levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within
this state but who makes sales of tangible personal property for use in the
city, and by the out-of-state place of business of any retailer or vendor
maintaining places of business both within and without Oklahoma and making
sales of tangible, personal property at such out-of-state place of business for
use in the city. Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a
permit to collect such taxes, by said tax commission, in such manner and
subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so
authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the use
tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his knowledge for use within
the city. Such authority and permit may be canceled when, at any time, said tax
commission considers that such use tax can more effectively be collected from
the person using such property in the city. Provided, however, that in all
instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the purchaser
within the city by the retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's
vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales or
transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable municipal sales tax at
the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under the
taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly. (Ord. 340, 12-19-1995)
3-2B-11: DEDUCTIONS FOR VENDORS OF OTHER STATES:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the Oklahoma tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma use tax code.
Remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as
may be allowed by said code for the collection of state use taxes. (Ord. 340,
12-19-1995)
3-2B-12: DELINQUENCIES; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Statutory Provisions Adopted: Section 217 of title 68, Oklahoma
Statutes, is hereby adopted and made a part of this article, and interest and
penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified are hereby
levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying
the use tax levied by this article; provided, that the failure or refusal of
any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and remittances of use
tax in the time and manner required by this article shall cause such tax to be
delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five (5)
days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed
under this article.
   B.   Waiver Of Interest And Penalties: The interest and penalty, or any
portion thereof, accruing by reason of a retailer's or vendor's failure to pay
the use tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as
provided for said waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the
state use tax provided in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 220. To accomplish the
purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 220 are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. (Ord. 340, 12-19-
1995)
3-2B-13: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the municipal use tax herein levied may be made
to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state use tax set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 227. To accomplish the
purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 227 are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. (Ord. 340, 12-19-
1995)
3-2B-14: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any use tax, or portion thereof, rightfully due under this
article, shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending
taxpayer shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. Each day of noncompliance with this article shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 340, 12-19-1995; amd. 2004 Code)
3-2B-15: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the municipal use tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes
section 205, of the state use tax code, and each subsection thereof, are hereby
adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration
of the municipal use tax as if herein set forth in full. (Ord. 340, 12-19-1995)
3-2B-16: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and
all other taxing provisions of municipal ordinances. (Ord. 340, 12-19-1995)
3-2B-17: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, authorized to collect the use tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article or
the Oklahoma use tax code or any order, rules or regulations of the Oklahoma
tax commission, said tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided
for in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1408, by order, revoke the use tax permit,
if any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor
is a corporation authorized to do business in this state may, after the notice
and hearing above provided, cancel said corporation's license to do business in
this state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has
complied with the obligations under this article, the Oklahoma use tax code, or
any order, rules or regulations of the Oklahoma tax commission. (Ord. 340, 12-
19-1995)
3-2B-18: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall become effective on and after February 1, 1996. (Ord. 340,
12-19-1995)
ARTICLE C.  TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
SECTION:
3-2C-1: Inspection Fee And Service Charge
3-2C-2: Fee In Lieu Of Taxes
3-2C-3: Failure To Pay Fee
3-2C-1: INSPECTION FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE:
   A.   Fee Levied: There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service
charge upon every person, firm or corporation operating a telephone exchange or
rendering telephone service in the city in an amount equal to two percent (2%)
of the gross revenues for each current year, for exchange telephone
transmission service rendered wholly within the corporate limits of the city,
to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident
to the exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulation and control
during construction and operation of lines and equipment of said telephone
company in the city.
   B.   Time Of Payment: Said fee shall be due and payable on or before May 1
of each year, commencing with May 1, 1936, and shall be paid into, and
appropriated and expended from, the general fund of the city. (1985 Code § 1-
150)
3-2C-2: FEE IN LIEU OF TAXES:
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this article by the
owner of the telephone exchange (or company rendering telephone service within
the limits of the city), the charge levied hereby shall be and continue to be
in lieu of all concessions, charges, excises, franchises, licenses, privileges
and permit fees, taxes or assessments except ad valorem taxes; provided
however, that it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate all existing
arrangements whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduits, duct
space or pole contracts of said company. (1985 Code § 1-151)
3-2C-3: FAILURE TO PAY FEE:
Should any person, firm or corporation fail or refuse to pay such fee when
levied, action may be taken against such person, firm or corporation for the
amount such fees. All expenses for collection of the same, including a
reasonable attorney fee, shall be paid by the party or parties that said action
is taken against. (1985 Code § 1-152)
ARTICLE D.  PUBLIC UTILITY GROSS RECEIPTS TAX
SECTION:
3-2D-1: Utility Tax Levied
3-2D-2: Not To Apply To Franchises
3-2D-3: Payment Of Tax
3-2D-4: Failure To Pay Tax
3-2D-5: Tax Constitutes Lien
3-2D-6: Record Of Sales
3-2D-1: UTILITY TAX LEVIED:
There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of two percent (2%) upon the
gross receipts from residential and commercial sales of power, light, heat,
electricity or water within the city of Marlow, which tax shall be in lieu of
any other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax levied by the city, in
accordance with the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes sections 2601-2605,
2001, as amended and supplemented, and other applicable provisions of state
law. (Ord. 400, 9-28-2010, eff. 9-30-2010)
3-2D-2: NOT TO APPLY TO FRANCHISES:
The tax levied under this article shall, when levied, apply to all persons,
firms, associations or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing
power, light, heat, electricity or water within the city of Marlow municipal
limits, except it shall not apply to any person, firm, association or
corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city granted pursuant to
article 18, section 5(a) of the Oklahoma constitution, nor shall it apply to
those entities exempt from taxation under applicable provisions of state law.
(Ord. 400, 9-28-2010, eff. 9-30-2010)
3-2D-3: PAYMENT OF TAX:
The tax levied under this article shall be levied for a term of not less than
one year and shall be payable monthly, on or prior to the tenth day of the
following month, and the proceeds thereof shall be placed in the general
revenue fund of the city. (Ord. 400, 9-28-2010, eff. 9-30-2010)
3-2D-4: FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
Any person, firm, association or corporation failing or refusing to pay such
tax when levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from such
city and in addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person,
firm, association or corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of
collecting same, including reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 400, 9-28-2010, eff.
9-30-2010)
3-2D-5: TAX CONSTITUTES LIEN:
The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets
located within the city of any person, firm, association or corporation engaged
in the business of selling utility services within the municipal limits of the
city. (Ord. 400, 9-28-2010, eff. 9-30-2010)
3-2D-6: RECORD OF SALES:
It shall be the duty of any person, firm, association or corporation subject to
the tax levied hereunder to keep and maintain records as to the amount of gross
receipts of sales of power, light, heat, electricity or water within the city,
and such records shall be subject to review and audit by the city upon
reasonable request. In addition, a summary of such sales for the preceding
calendar quarter, including the number of customers served, the number of
customers exempt from taxation under applicable Oklahoma sales tax laws, the
number of units of electricity or water (cubic feet, kilowatt hours or gallons,
respectively) sold to exempt and nonexempt customers, the gross receipts from
sales to exempt and nonexempt customers, and the amount of sales tax charged
and collected with respect to such sales, shall be provided unto the city at
the time of payment of the tax pursuant to section
3-2D-3 of this article. (Ord. 400, 9-28-2010, eff. 9-30-2010)
ARTICLE E.  EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE FEE
SECTION:
3-2E-1: Maintenance And Operation Of 9-1-1 System
3-2E-2: Service Fee Imposed
3-2E-1: MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM:
The city of Marlow, Oklahoma, shall provide for the maintenance and operation
of its nine-one-one (9-1-1) emergency telephone system through an emergency
telephone service fee (tariff) not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the base
rate for landline telephone service. (Ord. 401, 12-21-2010)
3-2E-2: SERVICE FEE IMPOSED:
The emergency telephone service fee (tariff) is set at fifteen percent (15%) of
the base rate for landline telephone service for the 658 telephone exchange.
This fee shall begin in 2011 following ninety (90) days' notice by certified
mail to all service providers. The service fee shall continue to be set at
fifteen percent (15%) of the base rate for landline telephone service until
changed by resolution of the mayor and council. (Ord. 401, 12-21-2010)
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Alcoholic Beverage Control Act Adopted
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Possession Of Unauthorized Intoxicating Beverages Prohibited
3-3-4: Loitering On Premises Where Sold
3-3-5: Keeping, Maintaining Place Of Sale In Violation Of Laws
3-3-6: Transporting Alcoholic Beverages In Vehicle
3-3-7: Employees Not To Solicit Patrons
3-3-8: Nudity In Licensed Business Or Establishment
3-3-9: Certificate Of Compliance
3-3-10: Location Of Establishment Or Bottle Club
3-3-11: Issuance Of Certificate Of Compliance
3-3-12: Prohibited Acts By Persons
3-3-13: Misrepresentation Of Age
3-3-14: Prohibited Acts By Licensees
3-3-15: Penalties For Altering Or Rendering Illegible Branding Or Other
Information Required
3-3-16: Penalty
3-3-1: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT ADOPTED:
The Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37A Oklahoma Statutes sections 1-
101 et seq., as amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference in
this Code. Applicable provisions of said Act are hereby declared to be in full
force, as if included herein in complete detail. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-
1-2018)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   ABLE COMMISSION OR COMMISSION: The Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement
Commission.
   ALCOHOL: Any hydrated oxide of ethyl, ethyl alcohol, ethanol or spirits of
wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. It does not include
wood alcohol or alcohol which has been denatured or produced as denatured in
accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any alcohol, spirits, beer and wine as those terms are
defined herein and also includes every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by human beings.
   APPLICANT: Any individual, legal or commercial business entity, or any
individual involved in any legal or commercial business entity allowed to hold
any license issued in accordance with the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act.
   BEER: Any beverage of alcohol by volume and obtained by the alcoholic
fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, or other grain, malt or
similar products. "Beer" may or may not contain hops or other vegetable
products. "Beer" includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer,
potter and other malt or brewed liquors, but does not include sake, known as
Japanese rice wine.
   BEER DISTRIBUTOR: Any person licensed to distribute beer for retail sale in
the State, but does not include a holder of a small brewer self-distribution
license or brewpub self- distribution license. The term "distributor", as used
in this chapter, shall be construed to refer to a beer distributor.
   BEER KEG: Any manufacturer-sealed, single container that contains not less
than four (4) gallons of beer.
   BOTTLE CLUB: Any establishment in a county which has not authorized the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the individual drink, which is required
to be licensed to keep, mix and serve alcoholic beverages belonging to club
members on club premises.
   BREWER: Any person who manufactures for human consumption by the use of raw
materials or other ingredients any beer upon which a license fee and a tax are
imposed by any law of this State.
   BREWPUB: A licensed establishment operated on the premises of, or on
premises located contiguous to, a small brewer, that prepares and serves food
and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, for on-premises consumption.
   CONVENIENCE STORE: Any person primarily engaged in retailing a limited range
of general household items and groceries, with extended hours of operation,
whether or not engaged in retail sales of automotive fuels in combination with
such sales.
   CONVICTED AND CONVICTION: A finding of guilt resulting from a plea of guilty
or nolo contendere, the decision of a court or magistrate or the verdict of a
jury, irrespective of the pronouncement of judgment or the suspension thereof.
   DISTILLER: Any person who produces spirits from any source or substance, or
any person who brews or makes mash, wort or wash, fit for distillation or for
the production of spirits (except a person making or using such material in the
authorized production of wine or beer, or the production of vinegar by
fermentation), or any person who by any process separates alcoholic spirits
from any fermented substance, or any person who, making or keeping mash, wort
or wash, has also in his or her possession or use a still.
   DRUG STORE: A person primarily engaged in retailing prescription and
nonprescription drugs and medicines.
   GROCERY STORE: A person primarily engaged in retailing a general line of
food, such as canned or frozen foods, fresh fruits and vegetables, and fresh
and prepared meats, fish and poultry.
   HOTEL OR MOTEL: An establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages by the individual drink and which contains guestroom accommodations
with respect to which the predominant relationship existing between the
occupants thereof and the owner or operator of the establishment is that of
innkeeper and guest. For purposes of this section, the existence of other legal
relationships as between some occupants and the owner or operator thereof shall
be immaterial.
   LEGAL NEWSPAPER: A newspaper meeting the requisites of a newspaper for
publication of legal notices as prescribed in sections 101 through 114 of title
25 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   LICENSEE: Any person holding a license under the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act, and any agent, servant or employee of such licensee while in the
performance of any act or duty in connection with the licensed business or on
the licensed premises.
   MANUFACTURER: A brewer, distiller, winemaker, rectifier or bottler of any
alcoholic beverage and its subsidiaries, affiliates and parent companies.
   MANUFACTURER'S AGENT: A salaried or commissioned salesperson who is the
agent authorized to act on behalf of the manufacturer or nonresident seller in
the State.
   MEALS: Foods commonly ordered at lunch or dinner and at least part of which
is cooked on the licensed premises and requires the use of dining implements
for consumption. Provided, that the service of only food such as appetizers,
sandwiches, salads or desserts shall not be considered "meals".
   MINI-BAR: A closed container, either refrigerated in whole or in part, or
non-refrigerated, and access to the interior of which is:
      1.   Restricted by means of a locking device which requires the use of a
key, magnetic card or similar device; or
      2.   Controlled at all times by the licensee.
   MIXED BEVERAGES: One or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or
part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal
size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a
mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, charitable event or
special event license.
   MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An establishment which is licensed by section 6-110
of title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes to sell alcoholic beverages by the
individual drink and where motion pictures are exhibited, and to which the
general public is admitted.
   NONRESIDENT SELLER: Any person licensed pursuant to section 2-135 of title
37A of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   OCCUPATION: As used in connection with "Occupation Tax" means the sites
occupied as the places of business of the manufacturers, wholesalers, beer
distributors, retailers, mixed beverage licensees, on premises beer and wine
licensees, bottle clubs, caterers, public event and special event licensees.
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any container of alcoholic beverage filled and stamped or
sealed by the manufacturer.
   PACKAGE STORE: Any sole proprietor or partnership that qualifies to sell
wine, beer and/or spirits for off-premises consumption and that is not a
grocery store, convenience store or drug store, or other retail outlet that is
not permitted to sell wine or beer for off-premises consumption.
   PATRON: Any person, customer or visitor who is not employed by a licensee or
who is not a licensee.
   PERSON: An individual, any type of partnership, corporation, association,
limited liability company or any individual involved in the legal structure of
any such business entity.
   PREMISES: The grounds and all buildings and appurtenances pertaining to the
grounds including any adjacent premises if under the direct or indirect control
of the licensee and the rooms and equipment under the control of the licensee
and used in connection with or in furtherance of the business covered by a
license. Provided that the ABLE Commission shall have the authority to
designate areas to be excluded from the licensed premises solely for the
purpose of:
      1.   Allowing the presence and consumption of alcoholic beverages by
private parties which are closed to the general public; or
      2.   Allowing the services of a caterer serving alcoholic beverages
provided by a private party.
This exception shall in no way limit the licensee's concurrent responsibility
for any violations of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act occurring on
the licensed premises.
   PRIVATE EVENT: A social gathering or event attended by invited guests who
share a common cause, membership, business or task and have a prior established
relationship. For purposes of this definition, advertisement for general public
attendance or sales of tickets to the general public shall not constitute a
private event.
   PUBLIC EVENT: Any event that can be attended by the general public.
   REGULATION OR RULE: A formal rule of general application promulgated by the
ABLE Commission as herein required.
   RESTAURANT: An establishment that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by
the individual drink for on-premises consumption and where food is prepared and
sold for immediate consumption on the premises.
   RETAIL CONTAINER FOR SPIRITS AND WINES: An original package of any capacity
approved by the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
   RETAIL SALESPERSON: A salesperson soliciting orders from and calling upon
retail alcoholic beverage stores with regard to his or her product.
   RETAILER: A package store, grocery store, convenience store or drug store
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for off- premises consumption pursuant to
a retail spirits license, retail wine license or retail beer license.
   SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether as
principal, proprietor or as an agent, servant or employee. The term "sale" is
also declared to be and include the use or consumption in this State of any
alcoholic beverage obtained within or imported from without this State, upon
which the Excise Tax levied by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act has
not been paid or exempted.
   SPECIAL EVENT: An entertainment, recreation or marketing event that occurs
at a single location on an irregular basis and at which alcoholic beverages are
sold.
   SPIRITS: Any beverage other than wine or beer, which contains more than one-
half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol measured by volume, and obtained by
distillation, whether or not mixed with other substances in solution and
includes those products known as whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, vodka, liqueurs,
cordials and fortified wines and similar compounds, but shall not include any
alcohol liquid completely denatured in accordance with the Acts of Congress and
regulations pursuant thereto.
   WINE: Any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%)
alcohol by volume and not more than twenty four percent (24%) alcohol by volume
at sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F) obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits, vegetables, honey, milk or other products containing sugar,
whether or not other ingredients are added, and includes vermouth and sake,
known as Japanese rice wine.
   WINE AND SPIRITS WHOLESALER OR WINE AND SPIRITS DISTRIBUTOR: Any sole
proprietorship or partnership licensed to distribute wine and spirits in the
State. The term "wholesaler", as used in this chapter, shall be construed to
refer to a wine and spirits wholesaler.
   B.   Additional definitions contained within the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act not contained herein are incorporated into this chapter by
reference. Words in the plural include the singular, and vice versa, and words
imparting the masculine gender include the feminine, as well as persons and
licensees as defined in this section. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3-3: POSSESSION OF UNAUTHORIZED INTOXICATING BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to have in their possession or under their
control any alcohol of any kind except as authorized by law. (Ord. 424, 9-25-
2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3-4: LOITERING ON PREMISES WHERE SOLD:
It is unlawful for any person to loiter in any place where alcohol of any kind
is bartered, sold, given away or otherwise furnished contrary to law. (Ord.
424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3-5: KEEPING, MAINTAINING PLACE OF SALE IN VIOLATION OF LAWS:
It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or aid or abet in keeping or
maintaining, in the City a place where alcohol is manufactured, sold, bartered,
given away or otherwise furnished in violation of the ordinances of the City.
(Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3-6: TRANSPORTING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN VEHICLE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any
vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley within the corporate limits of
the City of Marlow, Oklahoma, any alcoholic beverage except in the original
container which shall not have been opened and the seal upon which shall not
have been broken and from which the original cap or cork shall not have been
removed, unless the open container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment, or
any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other
person in said vehicle while it is in motion.
   B.   Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3-7: EMPLOYEES NOT TO SOLICIT PATRONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, manager, or employee of
any business or establishment licensed pursuant to the provisions of the
Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act contained in title 37A of the Oklahoma
Statutes, as amended, to permit an employee to solicit a patron to purchase an
alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage for the employee or any other employee, or
knowingly serving any employee with a beverage purchased by a patron or
permitting any employee to remain on the licensed premises who solicits a
patron to purchase a beverage for any employee or who solicits a patron to
purchase a beverage for himself or herself or for any person not a patron, or
permitting an employee to mingle or fraternize with patrons of such licensed
business or establishment, except in the furtherance of service of food and/or
drinks.
   B.   Any licensee, owner, manager, or employee of a licensed business or
establishment who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs. (Ord. 424, 9-25-
2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3-8: NUDITY IN LICENSED BUSINESS OR ESTABLISHMENT:
No owner, operator, partner, manager or person having supervisory control of
any establishment licensed to sell or serve intoxicating beverages shall permit
any of the following on or about any commercial premises where intoxicating
beverages are dispensed or consumed:
   A.   The performance by any person of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual acts which are otherwise prohibited by law;
   B.   The actual intentional touching or caressing or fondling by any person
of the breasts, anus or genitals;
   C.   Any person on the licensed premises while such person is unclothed or
in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the
areola of the female breast or any portion of the pubic hair, buttocks or
genitals; or
   D.   Any person to perform acts of, or acts which simulate, sexual acts
which are prohibited by law, or permit any person to use artificial devices or
inanimate objects to depict any prohibited activities or permit the showing of
films, still pictures, electronic reproductions or other visual reproductions
depicting any of the prohibited activities described in this paragraph. (Ord.
424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3-9: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Requirement Of Certificate: Every applicant for an original or renewal
license, as required under title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes, as amended,
except applicants for a special event, shall be required to furnish the
Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission a certificate of compliance with
Zoning, Fire, Safety, and Health Codes.
   B.   Application: Applications for such certificates shall be in writing on
a form provided by the City Clerk. Upon receipt of an application for a
certificate of compliance, the City Clerk shall cause an investigation to be
made to determine whether the premises proposed for licensed operations comply
with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and any Health, Fire, Building and
other Safety Codes applicable to it.
   C.   Timing: The City Clerk shall act on all such applications within twenty
(20) days of receipt thereof. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3-10: LOCATION OF ESTABLISHMENT OR BOTTLE CLUB:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any mixed beverage establishment, beer and
wine establishment or bottle club which has been licensed by the ABLE
Commission and which has as its main purpose the selling or serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, or package store, to be
located within three hundred feet (300') of any public or private school or
church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious
activities.
   B.   The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the
nearest property line of such public or private school or church to the nearest
perimeter wall of the premises of any such mixed beverage establishment, beer
and wine establishment, bottle club or package store which has been permitted
by the City to sell alcoholic beverages.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Mixed beverage establishments, beer and wine establishments, or
bottle clubs, which have been permitted by the City to sell alcoholic beverages
for on-premises consumption or retail package stores prior to November 1, 2000;
provided, if at the time of application for an Occupational Tax permit renewal
the previously permitted location has not been in actual operation for a
continuous period of more than sixty (60) days, the permit shall not be
renewed; or
      2.   Establishments licensed prior to October 1, 2018, to sell low- point
beer which were permitted to be located within three hundred feet (300') of any
public or private school or church property primarily and regularly used for
worship services and religious activities, pursuant to the provisions of
section 163.27 of title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Such establishments shall
be permitted to have any license in effect on October 1, 2018, transferred to a
mixed beverage license by the ABLE Commission and would thereafter be eligible
to apply for an Occupational Tax permit with the City pursuant to this chapter;
provided, if such an establishment ceases to regularly be open to the public or
changes ownership, the provisions of this paragraph shall cease to apply.
   D.   If any school or church shall be established within three hundred feet
(300') of any package store, mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine
establishment or bottle club subject to the provisions of this section after
such package store, mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment
or bottle club has been granted an Occupational Tax permit by the City, the
provisions of this section shall not be a deterrent to the renewal of such
permit if there has not been a lapse of more than sixty (60) days. When any
mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment or bottle club
subject to the provisions of this section which has been granted an
Occupational Tax permit by the City to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption, or package store, changes ownership or the operator thereof is
changed and such change of ownership results in the same type of business being
conducted on the premises, the provisions of this section shall not be a
deterrent to the issuance of such a permit to the new owner or operator if he
or she is otherwise qualified. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3-11: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in
compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, the Planning and Zoning
Department shall provide approval of zoning compliance on the certificate that
shall be issued to the applicant.
   B.   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in
compliance with all applicable Fire, Safety, and Health Codes, a certificate of
compliance shall be issued to the applicant.
   C.   The above certificate of compliance shall be signed by the City Clerk
or the City Clerk's designee. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3-12: PROHIBITED ACTS BY PERSONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Knowingly sell, deliver, or furnish alcoholic beverages to any person
under twenty one (21) years of age;
   B.   Sell, deliver, or knowingly furnish alcoholic beverages to an
intoxicated person or to any person who has been adjudged insane or mentally
deficient;
   C.   Open a retail container or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises
of a package store, grocery store, convenience store or drug store, unless
otherwise permitted by law;
   D.   Import into this State, except as provided for in the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, any alcoholic beverages; provided, that nothing
herein shall prohibit the importation or possession for personal use of not
more than one liter (1 L) of alcoholic beverages upon which the Oklahoma Excise
Tax is delinquent;
   E.   Receive, possess or use any alcoholic beverage in violation of the
provisions of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act;
   F.   Transport into, within or through this State more than one liter (1 L)
of alcoholic beverages upon which the Oklahoma Excise Tax has not been paid
unless the person accompanying or in charge of the vehicle transporting same
shall possess a true copy of a bill of lading, invoice, manifest or other
document particularly identifying the alcoholic beverages being transported and
showing the name and address of the consignor and consignee; provided, this
prohibition shall not apply to the first one hundred eighty liters (180 L) of
alcoholic beverages classified as household goods by military personnel, age
twenty one (21) or older, when entering Oklahoma from temporary active
assignment outside the contiguous United States;
   G.   Consume spirits in public except on the premises of a licensee of the
ABLE Commission who is authorized to sell or serve spirits by the individual
drink, or be intoxicated in a public place. This provision shall be cumulative
and in addition to existing law;
   H.   Forcibly resist lawful arrest, or by physical contact interfere with an
investigation of any infringement of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act or with any lawful search or seizure being made by a law enforcement
officer or an employee of the ABLE Commission, when such person knows or should
know that such acts are being performed by a State, County or Municipal officer
or employee of the ABLE Commission;
   I.   Manufacture, duplicate, counterfeit or in any way imitate any bottle
club membership card required to be issued by the ABLE Commission without the
permission of the ABLE Commission;
   J.   Consume or possess alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises of a
bottle club unless such person possesses a valid membership card for that club
issued by the club;
   K.   Knowingly possess any bottle club membership card required to be issued
by the ABLE Commission which has been manufactured, counterfeited, imitated or
in any way duplicated without the permission of the ABLE Commission; or
   L.   Knowingly and willfully permit any individual under twenty one (21)
years of age who is an invitee to the person's residence, any building,
structure or room owned, occupied, leased or otherwise procured by the person
or on any land owned, occupied, leased or otherwise procured by the person, to
possess or consume any alcoholic beverage as defined by section 3-3-1 of this
chapter, any controlled dangerous substance as defined in the Uniform
Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, or any combination thereof, in such place.
   M.   No person who shall engage in any of the following and disturb the
peace of any person:
      1.   In any public place, or in or upon any passenger coach, streetcar,
or in or upon any other vehicle commonly used for the transportation of
passengers, or in or about any depot, platform, waiting station or room, drink
or otherwise consume any intoxicating liquor unless authorized by this chapter,
intoxicating substance or intoxicating compound of any kind, or inhale glue,
paint or other intoxicating substance;
      2.   Be drunk or intoxicated in any public or private road, or in any
passenger coach, streetcar or any public place or building, or at any public
gathering, from drinking or consuming such intoxicating liquor, intoxicating
substance or intoxicating compound or from inhalation of glue, paint or other
intoxicating substance; or
      3.   Be drunk or intoxicated from any cause. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff.
10-1-2018)
3-3-13: MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE:
   A.   Any person under twenty one (21) years of age who shall misrepresent
his or her age in writing or by presenting false documentation of age for the
purpose of inducing any person to sell or serve him or her alcoholic beverage
or issue him or her a bottle club membership card, or who enters or attempts to
enter a package store or a separate or enclosed bar area as designated by the
ABLE Commission, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than fifty
dollars ($50.00).
   B.   In addition, if a person is convicted or pleads guilty to a violation
of the provisions of this section in any court having jurisdiction over the
offense, the court may order the Department of Public Safety to cancel or deny
the offender's privilege to operate a motor vehicle and, upon such order, shall
require that the operator's or chauffeur's license, if any, be surrendered to
the department pursuant to 3-3-209 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes. The
cancellation or denial period shall be for one year, or until the person
reaches twenty one (21) years of age, whichever is longer.
   C.   Any person whose driving privileges are ordered cancelled or denied
pursuant to this section may petition the court of original jurisdiction for
review of the order. Upon notice and hearing, the court may modify or withdraw
the order as the court deems appropriate except:
      1.   A court may not withdraw an order for at least ninety (90) days
following the issuance of the order if it is the first such order issued
regarding the person named; and
      2.   A court may not withdraw an order for at least six (6) months
following the issuance of the order if it is the second or subsequent such
order issued regarding the person named. If the department receives written
notice from the court of original jurisdiction that it has withdrawn such an
order, the department shall immediately reinstate any driving privileges that
have been canceled or denied under this section, without requiring payment of a
reinstatement fee.
   D.   In addition to any other penalty provided by law, a person convicted of
a violation of the provisions of this section shall be required to complete a
substance abuse prevention program conducted by the Department of Mental Health
and Substance Abuse Services or a private entity approved by the department.
Such program shall include at least two (2) sessions, each of which shall be
not less than two (2) hours in length. The cost of the program shall be paid by
the person required to complete the program. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-
2018)
3-3-14: PROHIBITED ACTS BY LICENSEES:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee of the ABLE Commission within the
corporate limits of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma to:
   A.   Purchase, receive, possess or sell any alcoholic beverage except as
authorized by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and by the license or
permit which the licensee holds;
   B.   Give any alcoholic beverage as a prize, premium or consideration for
any lottery, game of chance or skill or any type of competition;
   C.   Use any of the following means or inducements to stimulate the
consumption of alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to:
      1.   Deliver more than two (2) drinks to one person at one time;
      2.   Sell or offer to sell to any person or group of persons any drinks
at a price that is less than six percent (6%) below the markup of the cost to
the mixed beverage licensee; provided, a mixed beverage licensee shall be
permitted to offer these drink specials on any particular hour of any
particular day and shall not be required to offer these drink specials for an
entire calendar week or from open to close;
      3.   Sell or offer to sell to any person an unlimited number of drinks
during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions
not open to the public;
      4.   Sell or offer to sell drinks to any person or group of persons on
any one day or portion thereof at prices less than those charged the general
public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public;
      5.   Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink
without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such drink
during the same calendar week; or
      6.   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
The provisions of this subsection C shall not prohibit the advertising or
offering of food or entertainment in licensed establishments;
   D.   Permit or allow any patron or person to exit the licensed premises with
an open container of any alcoholic beverage. Provided, this prohibition shall
not be applicable to closed original containers of alcoholic beverages which
are carried from the licensed premises of a bottle club by a patron, closed
original wine containers removed from the premises of restaurants, hotels and
motels, or to closed original containers of alcoholic beverages transported to
and from the place of business of a licensed caterer by the caterer or an
employee of the caterer;
   E.   Serve or sell alcoholic beverages with an expired license issued by the
ABLE Commission; or
   F.   Permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated on the licensee's licensed
premises.
   G.   Furnish alcoholic beverages to any person during any hours or days not
authorized under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff.
10-1-2018)
3-3-15: PENALTIES FOR ALTERING OR RENDERING ILLEGIBLE BRANDING OR OTHER
INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Any person who erases, removes, obliterates, destroys or renders illegible in
any manner any serial numbers, marks, brands, legends, license numbers, case
numbers or other information required by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act or by Acts of Congress to be attached or placed upon any original
containers or cases containing alcoholic beverages before the contents of such
packages or cases have been entirely removed is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord.
424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3-16: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise provided by State law, whenever in this chapter an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor,
or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful the violation of any provision of this Code or of any
ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs. Each day or any portion of a day during
which any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
ARTICLE A.  OCCUPATIONAL TAX; SALES FOR ON PREMISES CONSUMPTION
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Occupational Tax Levied
3-3A-2: Payment Required And Penalty
3-3A-3: Annual Report
3-3A-4: Hours Of Operation
3-3A-5: Employment
3-3A-6: Mixed Beverage/Caterer Combination Permit
3-3A-7: Special Event Temporary Permit
3-3A-8: Breweries And Brewpubs
3-3A-9: Charitable Auction Or Charitable Alcoholic Beverage Event
3-3A-10: Persons Under Twenty One Years Of Age Not To Be Admitted To Certain
Lounge Or Bar Areas
3-3A-11: Revocation Of License
3-3A-1: OCCUPATIONAL TAX LEVIED:
   A.   No person shall operate or maintain any business serving mixed
beverages or beer or wine without having previously paid the Occupational Tax
as shown below. An annual Municipal Occupation Tax is hereby levied on persons
engaging in the following businesses within the City of Marlow, Oklahoma:
 
1.  Brewer                                       $1,250.00
2.  Small brewer                                 125.00
3.  Distiller                                    3,125.00
4.  Winemaker                                    625.00
5.  Small farm winery                            75.00
6.  Rectifier                                    3,125.00
7.  Wine and spirits wholesaler                  3,000.00
8.  Beer distributor                             750.00
9.  Retail spirits                               905.00
10. Retail wine                                  1,000.00
11. Retail beer                                  500.00
12. Mixed beverage:                               
    Initial                                    1,005.00
    Renewal                                    905.00
13. Mixed beverage/caterer combination           1,250.00
14. On-premises beer and wine:                    
    Initial                                    500.00
    Renewal                                    450.00
15. Bottle club:                                  
    Initial                                    1,000.00
    Renewal                                    900.00
16. Caterer:                                      
    Initial                                    1,005.00
    Renewal                                    905.00
17. Annual special event                         55.00
18. Quarterly special event                      55.00
19. Hotel beverage:                               
    Initial                                    1,005.00
    Renewal                                    905.00
20. Airline/railroad beverage:                    
    Initial                                    1,005.00
    Renewal                                    905.00
21. Agent                                        55.00
22. Employee                                     30.00
23. Industrial                                   23.00
24. Carrier                                      23.00
25. Private carrier                              23.00
26. Bonded warehouse                             190.00
27. Storage                                      23.00
28. Nonresident seller license or manufacturer's 750.00
29. Manufacturer's agent                         55.00
30. Sacramental wine supplier                    100.00
31. Charitable auction                           1.00
32. Charitable alcoholic beverage                55.00
33. Winemaker self-distribution                  750.00
34. Annual public event                          1,005.00
35. One-time public event                        255.00
36. Small brewer self-distribution               750.00
37. Brewpub                                      1,005.00
38. Brewpub self-distribution                    750.00
 
(Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3A-2: PAYMENT REQUIRED AND PENALTY:
   A.   Any State licensee originally entering upon any occupation herein
listed shall pay the tax therefor at the Office of City Clerk on or before the
date upon which he enters upon such occupation. Said licensee shall provide a
copy of a current State license before payment of an Occupation Tax will be
accepted. Thereafter, the licensee shall pay the tax annually on or before the
first day of April now and through October 31, 2019. Effective November 1,
2019, the licensee shall pay the tax annually on or before the first day of
November.
   B.   The Occupation Tax subject to this section shall be prorated on a
monthly basis for the year in which an occupation began operations.
   C.   Upon payment of the said Occupation Tax, the City Clerk shall issue a
receipt to said State licensee, which said licensee shall post in a conspicuous
place on the occupation premises to exhibit that said licensee is permitted by
the City to enter upon such occupation on said premises.
   D.   Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this article
without paying said Occupation Tax imposed therefor in advance of such
operation, is guilty of an offense against the City, and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined the sum of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
excluding costs. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3A-3: ANNUAL REPORT:
The City Clerk shall make an annual report to the ABLE Commission, covering the
fiscal year, showing the number and class of licensees subject to the
Occupation Tax and the amount of money collected from said tax. (Ord. 424, 9-
25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3A-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No establishment to which the mixed beverage or on premises beer and wine
Occupational Tax is applicable, nor any agent, servant or employee of such
establishment shall sell, dispense, serve or allow to be consumed any mixed
beverages, beer or wine on the premises between the hours of two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3A-5: EMPLOYMENT:
No person shall employ any person under eighteen (18) years of age in the
selling of beer or wine or employ any person under twenty one (21) years of age
in the selling of spirits. Provided that:
   A.   A mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special event,
bottle club, retail wine or retail beer licensee may employ servers or sales
clerks who are at least eighteen (18) years of age, except persons under twenty
one (21) years of age may not serve in designated bar or lounge areas; and
   B.   A mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special event
or bottle club licensee may employ or hire musical bands who have musicians who
are under eighteen (18) years of age if each such musician is either
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or has in their person, to be made
available for inspection upon demand by any employee of the ABLE Commission or
law enforcement officer, a written, notarized affidavit from the parent or
legal guardian giving the underage musician permission to perform in designated
bar or lounge areas. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3A-6: MIXED BEVERAGE/CATERER COMBINATION PERMIT:
A mixed beverage/caterer combination Occupational Tax permit shall authorize
the holder thereof to purchase or sell mixed beverages as specified by law for
the holder of a mixed beverage license or a caterer license. A separate permit
shall be required for each place of business. Prior to obtaining a City
Occupational Tax permit, a mixed beverage/caterer combination license must be
issued by the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission. (Ord. 424, 9-25-
2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3A-7: SPECIAL EVENT TEMPORARY PERMIT:
A special event temporary permit may be issued to an organization, association,
or nonprofit corporation organized for political, fraternal, charitable,
religious or social purposes. The holder of a special event temporary permit is
authorized to sell and distribute alcoholic beverage on the premises for which
the permit is issued. A special event temporary permit shall be valid for a
period not to exceed ten (10) consecutive days, and no qualified organization
may obtain more than one such permit in a 90-day period. Prior to obtaining a
City Occupational Tax permit, a special event license must be issued by the
Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-
1-2018)
3-3A-8: BREWERIES AND BREWPUBS:
   A.   No person shall operate or maintain a brewery or brewpub without having
previously paid the Occupational Tax as provided in this article.
   B.   No brewery or brewpub to which the brewery or brewpub Occupational Tax
is applicable, nor any agent, servant or employee of such establishment shall
sell, dispense, serve or allow to be consumed any beer, as that term is defined
in 37A Oklahoma Statutes section 1-103(5), on the premises between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff.
10-1-2018)
3-3A-9: CHARITABLE AUCTION OR CHARITABLE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE EVENT:
   A.   A charitable organization exempt from taxation under title 26 of
section 501(c)(3), (4), (5), (7), (8), (9), (10), or (19) of the United States
Internal Revenue Code shall be permitted to conduct a charitable auction or
alcoholic beverage event. The sponsor of the event must hold a charitable
auction or charitable alcoholic beverage event license as required by 37A
Oklahoma Statutes section 2-129, pay the City Occupational Tax as provided in
this article, and conform to all requirements of State law and this Code. The
charitable alcoholic beverage event Occupational Tax permit shall authorize the
holder thereof to conduct a wine, spirit and/or beer event which may consist of
one or more of a wine, spirit and/or beer-tasting event, a wine, spirit and/or
beer dinner event or a wine, spirit and/or beer auction, which may be either a
live auction conducted by an auctioneer or a silent auction for which:
      1.   Bid sheets are accepted from interested bidders at the event;
      2.   The holders of tickets are allowed to bid online for a period not
exceeding thirty (30) days prior to the event; or
      3.   Both bid sheets are accepted at the event and online bids are
accepted pursuant to subsection A2 of this section.
   B.   A charitable alcoholic beverage event shall be conducted solely to
raise funds for charitable purposes. A charitable alcoholic beverage
Occupational Tax permit shall allow the event attendees access to tastings,
samples, dinners and alcoholic beverages as parts of their entrance fee or
ticket price. Wine, spirits and/or beer used in, served or consumed at a
charitable alcoholic beverage event may be purchased by the charitable
organization or donated by any person or entity.
   C.   The charitable alcoholic beverage event Occupational Tax permit shall
allow the event to be held for a period not exceeding four (4) days. Only one
such Occupational Tax permit may be issued to an organization in any twelve-
month period. The charitable organization holding a charitable alcoholic
beverage event Occupational Tax permit shall not be required to obtain a
special event license.
   D.   Charitable auction and charitable alcoholic beverage event Occupational
Tax permit holders may also utilize a State-licensed caterer to provide
additional alcohol services at the event and on the premises. The State-
licensed caterer shall be required to obtain a special event Occupational Tax
permit from the City.
   E.   The charitable auction Occupational Tax permit shall authorize the
holder thereof to auction wine, spirits and/or beer purchased from a retail
package store or received as a gift from an individual if the auction is
conducted to raise funds for charitable purposes. The charitable auction
Occupational Tax permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed two (2)
days. Only two (2) such Occupational Tax permits shall be issued to an
organization in any twelve-month period. The maximum amount of wine, spirits
and/or beer auctioned pursuant to the charitable auction Occupational Tax
permit shall not exceed fifty (50) gallons. All wines, beer and spirits
auctioned pursuant to the charitable auction Occupational Tax permit shall be
registered and all fees and taxes shall be paid in accordance with the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
   F.   No charitable alcoholic beverage event Occupational Tax permit shall be
required for an organization, association or nonprofit corporation which is an
economic development chamber or similar entity, provided the event is not
conducted primarily for fundraising purposes, and provided the services of a
State- licensed caterer are used to provide and distribute the alcoholic
beverages at the event. The State-licensed caterer shall be required to obtain
a special event Occupational Tax permit from the City. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018,
eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3A-10: PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE YEARS OF AGE NOT TO BE ADMITTED TO CERTAIN
LOUNGE OR BAR AREAS:
If the premises of a licensee of the ABLE Commission contains a separate or
enclosed lounge or bar area, which has as its main purpose the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages for on- premises consumption,
notwithstanding that as an incidental service, meals or short order foods are
made available therein, no person under twenty one (21) years of age shall be
admitted to such area, except for members of a musical band employed or hired
as provided in subsection
3-3A-5B of this article when the band is to perform within such area, or
persons under twenty one (21) years of age who are on the licensed premises for
the limited purpose of performing maintenance, construction, remodeling,
painting or other similar services relating to the building or equipment
installation, repair or maintenance on the premises during those hours when the
licensed establishment is closed for business. The provisions of this section
shall not prohibit persons under twenty one (21) years of age from being
admitted to an area which has as its main purpose some objective other than the
sale or mixing or serving of alcoholic beverages, in which sales or serving of
alcoholic beverages are incidental to the main purpose, as long as the persons
under twenty one (21) years of age are not sold or served alcoholic beverages.
The incidental service of food in the bar area shall not exempt a licensee from
the provisions of this section. The ABLE Commission shall have the authority to
designate the portions of the premises of a licensee where persons under twenty
one (21) years of age shall not be admitted pursuant to this section. When
determining a licensee's main purpose, a licensee that operates a full kitchen,
sells food items from a full menu, and has thirty five percent (35%) or more of
its monthly gross sales attributable to food items, shall have as its main
purpose other than the sale of alcoholic beverages. The main purpose of those
mixed beverage establishments whose main purpose was other than the sale of
alcoholic beverages prior to October 1, 2018, shall not automatically lose that
designation upon the elimination of low- point beer in the State. If the ABLE
Commission wishes to change said mixed beverage establishments' main purpose
designation, it shall be the burden of the ABLE Commission to prove by clear
and convincing evidence that said mixed beverage establishments no longer
qualify for that designation. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3A-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
If any person having an Occupational Tax permit as provided for herein is
convicted more than once of a violation of the terms hereof, said permit may be
revoked by the Council. Furthermore, if any person having a license, as
provided for in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, is convicted more than once
of a violation of the terms hereof, said license may be revoked as provided in
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
ARTICLE B.  RETAIL STORES; OFF PREMISES CONSUMPTION
SECTION:
3-3B-1: Occupational Tax Levied
3-3B-2: Payment Required And Penalty
3-3B-3: Deliveries
3-3B-4: Duty Of Operators And Prohibited Conduct On Sales Premises
3-3B-5: Hours Of Operation
3-3B-6: Employment
3-3B-7: Revocation Of License
3-3B-8: Enforcement
3-3B-1: OCCUPATIONAL TAX LEVIED:
No person shall operate, manage, or work in any retail establishment that
sells, for off premises consumption only, any type of alcoholic beverage, as
that term is found in 37A Oklahoma Statutes section 1-103 without having
previously paid the Occupational Tax as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 424, 9-
25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3B-2: PAYMENT REQUIRED AND PENALTY:
   A.   Any State licensee originally entering upon any occupation herein
listed shall pay the tax therefor at the Office of the City Clerk on or before
the date upon which he enters upon such occupation. Said licensee shall provide
a copy of a current State license before payment of an Occupation Tax will be
accepted. Thereafter, the licensee shall pay the tax annually on or before the
first day of April now and through October 31, 2019. Effective November 1,
2019, the licensee shall pay the tax annually on or before the first day of
November.
   B.   The Occupation Tax subject to this section shall be prorated on a
monthly basis for the year in which an occupation began operations.
   C.   Upon payment of the said Occupation Tax, the City Clerk shall issue a
receipt to said State licensee, which said licensee shall post in a conspicuous
place on the occupation premises to exhibit that said licensee is permitted by
the City to enter upon such occupation on said premises.
   D.   Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this chapter
without paying said Occupation Tax imposed therefor in advance of such
operation, is guilty of an offense against the City, and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined the sum of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
excluding costs. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3B-3: DELIVERIES:
No wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages shall sell or deliver to any retail
spirits store any alcoholic beverages on Sundays, New Year's Day, Fourth of
July, Thanksgiving, or Christmas Day. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3B-4: DUTY OF OPERATORS AND PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON SALES PREMISES:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person operating any retail
establishment that sells, for off premises consumption only, any type of
alcoholic beverage, to permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
to loiter in or be in such a place, or to permit any intoxicated person to loaf
or loiter or be in or about said place of business, or to permit any person to
violate any of the law of the State. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3B-5: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   Retail Spirit Stores: No retail spirits store may sell any alcoholic
beverages at any hour other than between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Monday through Saturday. Further, no person
shall open or operate a retail spirits store on the following days:
      1.   Thanksgiving Day.
      2.   Christmas Day.
   B.   Retail Beer Or Retail Wine Stores: A retail wine or retail beer
establishment may offer wine or beer for sale on Monday through Sunday between
the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. the following
day.
   C.   Elections: Retail spirit, retail beer, and retail wine licensees shall
be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages on the day of any general, primary,
runoff primary or special election whether on a national, State, County or City
election, provided that the election day does not occur on any day on which
such sales are otherwise prohibited by law. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-
2018)
3-3B-6: EMPLOYMENT:
No person shall employ any person under eighteen (18) years of age in the
selling of beer or wine or employ any person under twenty one (21) years of age
in the selling of spirits. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3B-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
If any person having an Occupational Tax permit as provided for herein is
convicted more than once of a violation of the terms hereof, said permit may be
revoked by the Council. Furthermore, if any person having a license, as
provided for in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, is convicted more than once
of a violation of the terms hereof, said license may be revoked as provided in
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-3B-8: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The Marlow Police Department is authorized and empowered to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The provisions shall be enforced in a manner that
can reasonably be expected to reduce the extent to which alcohol is sold or
distributed to persons under twenty one (21) years of age.
   B.   Persons under twenty one (21) years of age may be enlisted by the
Marlow Police Department to assist in enforcement. Provided, however, that such
persons may be used to test compliance only if the testing is conducted under
the direct supervision of the Marlow Police Department; provided, written
parental consent shall be obtained prior to the use of any person under the age
of eighteen (18) years. Any other use of persons under twenty one (21) years of
age to test compliance shall be unlawful and punishable by assessment of an
administrative fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 424, 9-25-2018,
eff. 10-1-2018)
CHAPTER 4
TOBACCO PRODUCTS SALES; YOUTH ADDICTION
SECTION:
3-4-1: Findings And Intent
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: Distribution And Sales; Identification
3-4-4: Distribution Of Samples
3-4-5: Tobacco Sales In Original, Sealed Packaging
3-4-6: Possession By Minor; Falsifying Proof Of Age
3-4-7: Reporting To State
3-4-8: Nonretaliation
3-4-1: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
The mayor and city council find that youth addiction to tobacco products is a
public health problem with grave health consequences. In recognition that
almost ninety percent (90%) of all smokers begin smoking by the age of eighteen
(18), action is needed to curtail the easy access of minors to cigarettes and
other addictive tobacco products. Furthermore, the mayor and city council find
that the Oklahoma state legislature has limited the powers granted to local
governments to address the problems of youth access to tobacco. Therefore, the
intent of this chapter is to:
   A.   Implement the strictest and most enforceable system allowed under
Oklahoma state law to prevent the illegal sale of cigarettes and other tobacco
products to minors;
   B.   Periodically amend and update this chapter as necessary to best utilize
any applicable powers which may be returned to Oklahoma municipalities in the
future; and
   C.   Educate, encourage and assist underage tobacco users in ceasing all use
of addictive tobacco products, preferably before daily use of such products is
initiated. (Ord. 349, 4-28-1998)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the section:
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust, or
association, however formed.
   PROOF OF AGE: A driver's license, license for identification only, or other
generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as
eighteen (18) years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness
of the individual and appears on its face to be valid.
   SAMPLE: A tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost
for the purpose of promoting the product.
   SAMPLING: The distribution of samples to members of the public.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption. (Ord. 349, 4-28-1998)
3-4-3: DISTRIBUTION AND SALES; IDENTIFICATION:
   A.   Furnishing To Underage Person: It is unlawful for any person to sell or
furnish in any manner any tobacco product to another person who is under
eighteen (18) years of age, or to handle tobacco products on behalf of any such
person.
   B.   Underage Employees: It shall not be unlawful for an employee under
eighteen (18) years of age to handle tobacco products when required in the
performance of the employee's duties.
   C.   Demand Proof Of Age: A person engaged in the sale or distribution of
tobacco products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or
recipient if any ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that
the prospective purchaser may be under eighteen (18) years of age.
   D.   Failure To Require Proof Of Age: If an individual engaged in the sale
or distribution of tobacco products has demanded proof of age from a
prospective purchaser or recipient who is not under eighteen (18) years of age,
the failure to subsequently require proof of age shall not constitute a
violation of this chapter.
   E.   Guilt Of Employee: If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a
store at which tobacco products are sold at retail, the employee shall be
guilty of the violation and shall be subject to the fine.
   F.   Defense To Action; Demanding Proof: Proof that the defendant demanded,
was shown, and reasonably relied upon proof of age, shall be a defense to any
action brought pursuant to this chapter.
   G.   Multiple Locations: For purposes of determining the liability of a
person controlling franchises or business operations in multiple locations for
any violation of subsection A or B of this section, each individual franchise
or business location shall be deemed a separate entity.
   H.   Violation; Fine: Any person who shall violate subsection A or B of this
section shall be guilty of an offense and may be assessed a fine of not more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense within a one year
period and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense or subsequent
offenses within a one year period.
   I.   Failure To Pay Fine: Upon failure of any person to pay any fine
authorized by this section within ninety (90) days of the day of the assessment
of such fine, the court clerk or his designee shall notify the Oklahoma
department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not
issue a driver's license to the person until proof of payment has been
provided. (Ord. 349, 4-28-1998)
3-4-4: DISTRIBUTION OF SAMPLES:
   A.   Distributing Near Playground Or School: No person shall distribute
tobacco product samples in or on any public street, sidewalk, or park that is
within three hundred feet (300') of any playground, school, or other facility
when the facility is being used primarily by persons under eighteen (18) years
of age.
   B.   Violation; Fine: Any person who shall violate subsection A of this
section shall be guilty of an offense and may be assessed a fine of not more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense within a one year
period and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense or subsequent
offenses within a one year period.
   C.   Failure To Pay Fine: Upon failure of any person to pay any fine
authorized by this section within ninety (90) days of the day of the assessment
of such fine, the court clerk or his designee shall notify the Oklahoma
department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not
issue a driver's license to the person until proof of payment has been
provided. (Ord. 349, 4-28-1998)
3-4-5: TOBACCO SALES IN ORIGINAL, SEALED PACKAGING:
   A.   Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in
the original, sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer.
   B.   Violation; Fine: Any person who shall violate subsection A of this
section shall be guilty of an offense and may be assessed a fine of not more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. (Ord. 349, 4-28-1998)
3-4-6: POSSESSION BY MINOR; FALSIFYING PROOF OF AGE:
   A.   Prohibition: Except as provided under subsection
 3-4-3B of this chapter, it is unlawful for a person under eighteen (18) years
of age to purchase, receive, or have in their possession a tobacco product, or
to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age which is false or
fraudulent for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco product.
   B.   Tobacco Education Program Attendance: On conviction of an individual
for an offense under subsection A of this section, the court shall suspend
execution of sentence and shall require the defendant to attend a tobacco
education program. The court shall require the parent or guardian of the
defendant to attend the tobacco education program with the defendant.
   C.   Community Service In Lieu Of Education Program: If access to the
tobacco education program is not readily available, the court shall require the
defendant to perform eight (8) to twelve (12) hours of tobacco related
community service instead of attending a tobacco education program.
   D.   Remedial Action: The tobacco education program and the tobacco related
community services are remedial and are not punishment.
   E.   Evidence Of Completion Of Program Or Service: No later than the
ninetieth day after the date of conviction under subsection A of this section,
the defendant shall present to the court, in a manner required by the court,
evidence of satisfactory completion of the tobacco education program or the
tobacco related community service.
   F.   Court Action: On receipt of the evidence required under subsection E of
this section, the court shall:
      1.   If the defendant has been convicted of a previous offense under
subsection A of this section which offense occurred within one year prior to
the offense for which the defendant is currently charged, execute the sentence,
and at the discretion of the court, assess a fine of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
      2.   If the defendant has not been convicted of a previous offense under
subsection A of this section which offense occurred within one year prior to
the offense for which the defendant is currently charged, dismiss the complaint
and discharge the defendant.
   G.   Dismissal Of Complaint: If the court dismisses the complaint under
subsection F2 of this section, the defendant is released from all penalties and
disabilities resulting from the offense, except that the defendant is
considered to have been convicted of the offense if the defendant is
subsequently convicted of the same charge if such a repeat offense occurs
within one year of the dismissed offense.
   H.   Apply For Expungement: Any person convicted of an offense under
subsection A of this section may apply to the court to have the conviction
expunged. If the court finds that the individual satisfactorily completed the
tobacco education program or tobacco related community service ordered by the
court and that there has been no subsequent offense for a period of at least
one year after the date of the offense for which the person was convicted, the
court shall order the conviction and any complaint, verdict, sentence, or other
document relating to the offense to be expunged from the individual's record
and the conviction may not be shown or made known for any purpose.
   I.   Failure To Satisfy Penalty Or Fine; Driver's License Suspension: If the
defendant does not provide the evidence required under subsection E of this
section within the period specified by that subsection or upon failure of the
defendant to pay any fine authorized by this section within ninety (90) days of
the day of the assessment of such fine, the court clerk or his designee shall
notify the Oklahoma department of public safety, as such department is
authorized to suspend or not issue a driver's license to the person until the
required evidence or proof of payment has been provided. (Ord. 349, 4-28-1998)
3-4-7: REPORTING TO STATE:
The city clerk or his designee shall furnish any information or reports
required or requested by the Oklahoma alcoholic beverage law enforcement (ABLE)
commission in the form, manner and time as may be determined by the ABLE
commission. (Ord. 349, 4-28-1998)
3-4-8: NONRETALIATION:
No person shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against
any employee, applicant for employment or customer because such employee,
applicant, or customer reported violations of any provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 349, 4-28-1998)
CHAPTER 5
POOL, BILLIARD AND OTHER RECREATIONAL HALLS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Underage Persons Restricted
3-5-2: Prohibited Acts
3-5-3: Family Recreation Centers
3-5-4: Penalty
3-5-1: UNDERAGE PERSONS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Employment: It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager or operator to
employ or permit any minor (as defined by current state law) to work in a pool,
billiard, domino or card hall or parlor; and it shall be unlawful for any minor
(as defined by current state law) to work in such a hall or parlor.
   B.   Loitering On Premises:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any hall or parlor
mentioned in subsection A of this section to permit any minor (as defined by
current state law) to loiter in such a hall or parlor, or to play games
therein, unless he is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for such person to loiter in such a hall or
parlor, or to play games therein, unless he is accompanied by a parent or
guardian. (1985 Code § 5-58)
3-5-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or operator of a pool, snooker,
billiard, domino or card hall or parlor, or bowling alley to permit therein
gambling, betting, or operation of a lottery; the sale, furnishing or drinking
of intoxicating liquor; disorderly conduct; loud or disturbing language; noise;
loud music; profane language; or any other violation of state laws or this
code. (1985 Code § 5-58)
3-5-3: FAMILY RECREATION CENTERS:
   A.   Exception: Sections
3-5-1 and
3-5-2 of this chapter shall not, however, apply to establishments created as
family entertainment and recreation centers for the use and enjoyment of the
entire family (regardless of age).
   B.   Liquor Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or
operator of such a family center to permit the sale, furnishing or drinking of
alcoholic beverages of any type. (1985 Code § 5-58)
3-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
3-1A-5 of this title. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 6
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definition
3-6-2: Licenses Required; Fee
3-6-3: Register Of Transactions; Inspection
3-6-4: Hours Of Business
3-6-5: Restrictions On Operation
3-6-6: Suspicious Circumstances
3-6-7: Penalty; License Revocation
3-6-1: DEFINITION:
A "pawnbroker" shall be defined as any person who lends money upon deposit, or
pledge of personal property or valuable thing, or any person who lends money
upon chattel or personal property for security, and required possession of
property so mortgaged, on condition of returning the same upon payment of a
stipulated amount of money. (2004 Code)
3-6-2: LICENSES REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   Licenses Required: No person, corporation, partnership or association
of any kind shall carry on the business of a pawnbroker without first having
obtained a license to do so from the state of Oklahoma and the city of Marlow.
The city shall issue a license upon documentation of a state license. (2004
Code)
   B.   Fee: Each and every person engaged in the business of being a
pawnbroker or person engaged in the business of making loans on pledges of
chattel or personal property shall, before the exercise of said occupation, pay
a license fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council. (1985 Code § 5-
59; amd. 2004 Code)
3-6-3: REGISTER OF TRANSACTIONS; INSPECTION:
   A.   Register Required:
      1.   Every pawnbroker shall keep at his place of business a register in
which he shall enter in writing a detailed description of all property taken,
purchased or received by him, including any number that may be in stock of such
article or articles, together with the time and the name and place of residence
(giving street and number, if within the city) of the person leaving said
property; also, the amount loaned, the interest charged and the time when the
loan falls due.
      2.   Said register shall be kept clean, in good order and plainly
legible.
      3.   Such entries shall be made within one hour after the receipt or
purchase of any and all such property.
   B.   Entries; Furnish To Police Chief:
      1.   Every entry shall be made in the register in ink and shall not in
any manner be obliterated or erased.
      2.   The pawnbroker shall give a plainly written or printed ticket to the
person negotiating or leaving such property, having upon it a full and perfect
copy of all the entries required by ordinance to be kept in such register, for
which copy no charge shall be made. (1985 Code § 5-60)
      3.   It shall be the further duty of each and every pawnbroker to make
said register available for inspection upon request of the police department.
(1985 Code § 5-60; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Goods Purchased From Wholesalers Excepted: No person shall be required
to furnish such description of any property purchased from manufacturers or
wholesale dealers having an established place of business, or of any goods
purchased at open sale or from any bankrupt stock or from any other person
having an established place of business. Such goods shall be accompanied by a
bill of sale or other written evidence of open and legitimate purchase, and
shall be exhibited to any public officer when demanded.
   D.   Inspection By City And County Officials:
      1.   Said register, so kept by said person, shall at all times be open to
the inspection of the city police, and the sheriff or deputy sheriffs of
Stephens County, or by any person authorized in writing for that purpose by any
of such officers, which authority shall be exhibited to said pawnbroker.
      2.   Said pawnbroker shall, upon request, show and exhibit to such person
or officer, for inspection, any article purchased, taken or received by him,
unless the time of the pledge has expired and the goods have been sold and
delivered to the purchaser. (1985 Code § 5-60)
3-6-4: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
No pawnbroker shall purchase, receive or take on deposit from any person, any
article of property between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M.; and such places of business shall remain closed all day
Sunday. (1985 Code § 5-61)
3-6-5: RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATION:
   A.   Persons Under The Influence Of Liquor Or Drugs: It shall be unlawful
and an offense in the city for any pawnbroker or the proprietor or his employee
in such cases, or for any person whosoever to purchase, take or receive in
pledge, by gift or on deposit, or to accept possession of any article or
property from, any common drunkard or person under the influence of alcoholic
beverages or drugs. (1985 Code § 5-62)
   B.   Minors: It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person in the city
in charge of any pawnshop to purchase from, or advance any money to, any minor
under the age of eighteen (18) years, upon any thing or article of value, or to
have any dealings with such minor with respect to the title of chattel or
personal property, without the written consent of the parent or guardian of
such minor, which said consent shall be kept on file and subject to police
inspection. (1985 Code § 5-63; amd. 2004 Code)
3-6-6: SUSPICIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES:
   A.   Suspicion Of Stolen Property: Any suspicious circumstances, sufficient
to put any ordinarily prudent person upon his guard, shall be sufficient notice
to any pawnbroker or person making loans on pledged chattel, or purchasing the
same, that the property involved or tendered is, or may be, stolen property.
   B.   Proof Of Right To Dispose Of Property: Any knowledge, notice or
information as to the improper character of the person offering chattel in
pledge shall, in each case, require positive proof of the holder's right to
dispose of said property.
   C.   Aiding Crime Of Petty Theft: Any person or pawnbroker making any loans
upon chattel from persons, where the circumstances of title are uncertain to
any extent as to the legal right of the holder to dispose of such property,
shall, by the act of making such loan, become an aider and abettor of the crime
of petty theft in any and all cases where it has been, or may be, established,
by any court of competent jurisdiction that the said chattel was illegally
acquired or illegally disposed of by said holder. (1985 Code § 5-64)
3-6-7: PENALTY; LICENSE REVOCATION:
   A.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
3-1A-5 of this title. (2004 Code)
   B.   License Revocation: Upon conviction of any pawnbroker, or any other
person who may be engaged in any calling or occupation which shall, under the
present or future ordinances of the city, require a license or permit, who
shall be guilty of the violation of any of the provisions hereof, in addition
to the fine otherwise provided as a penalty therefor, the municipal judge shall
order such license or permit to be revoked 1 . (1985 Code § 5-65)
 
Notes
  1. See also sections
1 3-1-12 and
  3-1-13 of this title.
CHAPTER 7
CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Plumbers; Registration And Fee
3-7-2: Electricians; Registration And Fees
3-7-3: Penalty
3-7-1: PLUMBERS; REGISTRATION AND FEE:
   A.   Registration Required: Any person desiring to engage in the business of
plumbing in the city shall first register with the city clerk, and provide
evidence of a bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
   B.   Gas Fitting By Registered Plumber: No person shall do any gas fitting,
extensions, connection of fixtures or repairs to any gas fitting, except a
registered plumber, as provided in this code.
   C.   Registration Fee: The fee for registration for a contractor's license
shall be as prescribed by resolution of the city council. (1985 Code § 4-39;
amd. 2004 Code)
3-7-2: ELECTRICIANS; REGISTRATION AND FEES:
   A.   Registration Required: All persons, firms, partnerships, corporations
or individuals, engaged locally, or hereafter engaging, in the business of
installing electrical fixtures, wiring or apparatus in or on any building
within the corporate limits of the city shall register with the city clerk
before they may engage in said business, and shall first provide evidence of a
bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
   B.   Fees:
      1.   The registration fee for an electrician contractor, a journeyman, or
a mechanical contractor license shall be as prescribed by resolution of the
city council. (1985 Code § 4-40; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   Apprentices shall register but will not be required to pay any
registration fee. (Ord. 327, 8-30-1994)
3-7-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
3-1A-5 of this title. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 8
ITINERANT OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definition
3-8-2: Licensing And Bond Requirements; Fees
3-8-3: Lost License; Duplicate; Fee
3-8-4: Sales Restrictions; Exceptions
3-8-5: Payment Of State And Local Taxes
3-8-6: Hours Restricted
3-8-7: Revocation Of License
3-8-8: Penalty
3-8-1: DEFINITION:
"Itinerant occupations, trades, businesses or solicitations" shall mean those
occupations, trades, businesses and solicitations having no permanent
warehouse, building, structure, residence or place of business within the city
at which a permanent business is carried on throughout the year or usual
production season in good faith (and not for the purpose of evading the
provisions of this chapter), and shall include occupations, trades, businesses
and solicitations housed in temporary stands or quarters (including permanent
quarters occupied pursuant to any temporary arrangement), or carried on by
means of house to house solicitation or upon the streets and sidewalks of the
city; provided however, that no occupation, trade or business engaged in by a
charitable, educational or religious organization, association or club having a
membership duly enrolled in accordance with the rules, regulations, and bylaws
of said organization, association or club and the majority of said members
being residents of the city of Marlow or of Stephens County, Oklahoma, shall be
considered an "itinerant occupation, trade, business or solicitation". (1985
Code § 5-1)
3-8-2: LICENSING AND BOND REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   License Required: It shall be an offense for any person to engage in
any kind of itinerant occupation in the city without first having obtained an
itinerant occupation license from the office of the city clerk. (1985 Code § 5-
2)
   B.   License Fees: License fees shall be as established by resolution of the
city council for persons, firms, associations and corporations engaged in
itinerant occupations, trades, businesses or solicitations within the city.
(1985 Code § 5-2; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Separate License For Each Business: Every person, firm, association or
corporation who engages in an occupation or business for which an itinerant
occupation license is required shall pay the fee and secure a separate license
for each such business or occupation.
   D.   Display Of License: Every holder of a license to engage in, exercise or
pursue a business, profession, trade, occupation or privilege shall carry the
license and shall display it to any person who requests to see it.
   E.   License Nontransferable: Assignment or transfer of licenses shall not
be permitted. (1985 Code § 5-3)
   F.   Bond: A bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall
be required for any person licensed as provided for in this chapter. (2004
Code)
3-8-3: LOST LICENSE; DUPLICATE; FEE:
   A.   Issuance Of Duplicate: Whenever an itinerant occupation license has
been lost or destroyed without any wrongful act or connivance by the holder,
the city clerk, on application, may issue a duplicate license for the unexpired
time.
   B.   Affidavit: Before the duplicate is issued, the holder shall file with
the city clerk an affidavit that the license has not been transferred, that it
has been lost or destroyed without any wrongful act or connivance by the
holder, and that, if believed lost, he has made a diligent search for it and
has not been able to find it.
   C.   Fee: The fee for every duplicate license issued, payable to the city
clerk, shall be one dollar ($1.00). (1985 Code § 5-3)
3-8-4: SALES RESTRICTIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
Each person, firm or corporation engaged in occupations, trades or businesses
defined as "itinerant occupations" in section
3-8-1 of this chapter shall be prohibited from door to door solicitation in all
areas within the central business district of the city; provided, that this
shall not apply to persons selling farm products produced within this state, by
themselves, nor shall this prohibit solicitation for activities excluded under
the definition of "itinerant occupation" in section
3-8-1 of this chapter. (1985 Code § 5-3)
3-8-5: PAYMENT OF STATE AND LOCAL TAXES:
Each applicant for an itinerant occupation license shall provide written proof
or certification to the city clerk that the applicant will collect and remit
state and local sales taxes to the city, if required by state law and municipal
ordinance. (1985 Code § 5-3)
3-8-6: HOURS RESTRICTED:
No person, firm, association or corporation to whom an itinerant occupation
license has been issued shall conduct, exercise or pursue the business or
occupation for which such license is issued any day between the hours of five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. (on the following day). (1985
Code § 5-3)
3-8-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
An itinerant occupation license issued to any person, firm, association or
corporation may be revoked by the city council, after adequate opportunity for
a hearing, for any one of the following reasons:
   A.   That the licensee is engaging in, exercising or pursuing the business
or occupation in such a manner that he has created or is creating a public
nuisance; or
   B.   Serious or repeated violation of the law or ordinances. (1985 Code § 5-
3)
3-8-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
3-1A-5 of this title. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 9
PRIVATE AMBULANCE SERVICES
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: Emergency Medical Services Board
3-9-3: Certificate Of Public Convenience And Necessity
3-9-4: General And Vehicle Insurance Required
3-9-5: Bond Required
3-9-6: Vehicle Permits
3-9-7: Registration Of Ambulance Drivers And Attendants
3-9-8: Appeal
3-9-9: Fees For Ambulance Service
3-9-10: Discontinuance Of Service; Notify City
3-9-11: City Register Of Operators And Vehicles
3-9-12: Right To Inspect Records And Equipment
3-9-13: Operators Report To City; Transporting Patients
3-9-14: Emergency Medical Services Made Available
3-9-15: Dead On Arrival Procedure
3-9-16: Penalty
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations, shall have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory. The word "city" as used herein means all
areas within the territorial limits of the city.
   AMBULANCE: Any motor vehicle equipped with facilities therein to convey
infirm or injured persons.
   ATTENDANT: Any person who has the duty of caring for a sick, ill or injured
person in an ambulance, and who is registered with the city of Marlow,
Oklahoma, and certified by the state of Oklahoma as an emergency medical
technician (EMT).
   BOARD: The Marlow emergency medical services board, as herein established.
   CERTIFICATE: A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the
city council of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma, licensing an operator as
hereinafter defined.
   CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma, or her designated
representative.
   COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   DRIVER: Every individual who shall drive an "ambulance", as herein defined,
who has a commercial chauffeur's license issued by the state department of
public safety, and who is registered with the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   OPERATOR: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business as the
owner or proprietor of ambulances.
   PERMIT: The operating permit which an operator is required to obtain
annually for each and every motor vehicle operated as an ambulance.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or
other group or combination acting as a unit.
   REGISTRATION: The registration of drivers and attendants by the city of
Marlow, Oklahoma. (1985 Code § 5-20; amd. 2004 Code)
3-9-2: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES BOARD:
   A.   Board Created; Membership; Terms:
      1.   Board Created; Responsibilities: There is hereby created an
emergency medical services board to act in an advisory capacity to the city
council in the development, formulation and alteration of rules, regulations
and standards for the operation of ambulances, certification of operators,
issuance of permits, and registrations as defined herein. The board shall be
responsible for continuing study and recommendations concerning the emergency
medical services of the city.
      2.   Membership: The board shall consist of seven (7) members, as
follows:
         a.   A member who is a licensed physician and who is also a member of
the Stephens County medical society;
         b.   A member who is a representative of one of the local hospital
administrations;
         c.   A member who is a representative from the state nurses
association;
         d.   A member who is a representative of one of the local law
enforcement agencies; and
         e.   Three (3) members from the community at large. (Ord. 336, 6-27-
1995)
      3.   Compensation: All board members shall serve without compensation.
      4.   Appointment; Terms:
         a.   The members shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of
the city council, for a term of three (3) years, except that initially two (2)
of the members shall be appointed for three (3) year terms, three (3) of the
members shall be appointed for two (2) year terms, and two (2) of the members
shall be appointed for a one year term.
         b.   All members shall hold office until their successors are
appointed.
         c.   The initial members of the board shall be appointed within two
(2) weeks of the date of the initial enactment of this chapter. (Ord. 336, 6-
27-1995; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Organization Of Board; Meetings:
      1.   Chairman: The board shall select annually a chairman from among its
members.
      2.   Meetings:
         a.   The board shall hold at least three (3) regular meetings each
year and such additional meetings as the chairman deems necessary.
         b.   Special meetings may be called by the chairman, or upon written
request of any four (4) members.
      3.   Quorum: Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum.
(1985 Code § 5-30)
      4.   Minutes Maintained: The city clerk or his designee shall maintain
minutes of each board meeting and provide a copy of same to the city council.
(1985 Code § 5-30; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Duties:
      1.   Rules And Standards Submitted To Council: Within thirty (30) days
from the time of its appointment, the board shall submit to the city council
its initial rules, regulations and standards for operation of ambulances,
certification of operators, issuance of permits and registrations as defined
herein.
      2.   Approval By Council Resolution: The rules, regulations and standards
formulated by the board and approved by the council shall become effective when
adopted by the city council by resolution.
      3.   Compliance With National And State Standards: At no time shall the
standards for ambulance service operation, ambulance service personnel, or
ambulance service equipment, as adopted hereunder, be less than the current
minimal standards adopted by the committee on trauma of the American college of
surgeons, national highway safety bureau, and the Oklahoma state department of
health. (1985 Code § 5-31)
3-9-3: CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY:
   A.   Certificate Required; Exceptions:
      1.   Requirement; Exceptions: Commencing with the passage and publication
of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be
operated an ambulance within the city without first having obtained a
certificate of public convenience and necessity from the city council.
Provided, however, that no such certificate shall be required for any person
operating an ambulance or other vehicle who:
         a.   Renders assistance during any catastrophe or major emergency when
the ambulances authorized to operate in the city by certificate are
insufficient in number or for any other reason inadequate;
         b.   Operates from a location outside the city and transports any
patient from a point of origin outside the city to a destination inside the
city;
         c.   Operates from a location outside the city and transports any
patient from a point of origin within the city to a destination outside the
city;
         d.   Operates as a municipal service agency, including police and fire
rescue units; or
         e.   Private companies operating an ambulance solely for the
transportation of their employees for illness or injuries sustained while
performing their work.
      2.   Compliance With Rules And Standards: Any person having been issued
said certificate shall comply with all provisions of this chapter, and the
standards, rules and regulations adopted hereunder, as well as all other
applicable local, state and federal laws.
      3.   Existing Operators: Operators in business in the city on the date of
initial enactment of this chapter shall, upon application to the city council,
be issued a certificate covering the number of ambulances presently being
operated. These operators shall be granted ninety (90) days to comply with any
and all rules, regulations and standards adopted under this chapter.
   B.   Application For Certificate:
      1.   Filing Application: Applications for said certificate shall be filed
with the city clerk on forms provided by that officer.
      2.   Contents Of Application: Each application shall be signed and sworn
to by the applicant and shall contain at least the following:
         a.   The name and address of the applicant;
         b.   The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do
business;
         c.   If the applicant is an individual, the name, age and address of
the applicant, and the length of time the applicant has resided in the city;
         d.   If the applicant is a partnership or association, the business
name thereof, and the name, age and address of each partner, and the length of
time each partner has resided in the city;
         e.   If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of all
officers and directors of such corporation;
         f.   The number of ambulances for which the certificate is requested;
         g.   The locations at which the ambulances are to be stationed;
         h.   Whether or not the applicant has been finally convicted of any
felony or other offenses involving moral turpitude;
         i.   Whether or not the applicant has any claims or judgments against
him for damages resulting from the negligent operation of an ambulance;
         j.   The financial ability and responsibility of the applicant; and
         k.   Such other information as the city clerk may require in order to
evaluate the applicant. (1985 Code § 5-22)
   C.   Investigation Of Applicant; Issuance Of Certificate; Fee:
      1.   Upon receipt of an application for a certificate, the city clerk
shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and the proposed
application shall be referred to the board for evaluation and recommendation.
(1985 Code § 5-24)
      2.   The recommendations of the board shall then be submitted to the city
council for review. If the city council approves the application, a certificate
shall be issued by the city clerk, upon payment of a fee as established by
resolution of the city council. A copy of every certificate shall be filed with
the city clerk.
   D.   Term; Annual Fee; Revocation; Nontransferable:
      1.   A certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued
for a period of three (3) years, subject, however, to an annual renewal fee as
established by resolution of the city council and an annual review of the
Marlow emergency medical services board and city council. (1985 Code § 5-24;
amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   Said certificate may be suspended or revoked by the city council
only for a good cause. It may, however, be altered or amended by said council
on recommendation of the board.
      3.   A certificate shall not be transferable to any other person without
the approval of the city council. (1985 Code § 5-24)
   E.   Form And Contents Of Certificate: Every certificate issued shall be
signed by the mayor, attested by the city clerk and shall contain the name and
address of the applicant, and the number of vehicles authorized to be operated
pursuant to such certificate. (1985 Code § 5-28)
3-9-4: GENERAL AND VEHICLE INSURANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Insurance Required: Every operator shall carry general and auto
liability and property damage insurance with solvent and responsible insurers
authorized to transact business in the state of Oklahoma, to secure payment for
any loss or damage resulting from any occurrence arising out of, or caused by,
the operation or use of any of the operator's motor vehicles.
   B.   Amount Of Vehicle Insurance: Each vehicle shall be insured for the sum
of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries to, or
death of, any one person arising out of any one accident and the sum of at
least three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injuries to, or death of
more than one person in any one accident, and for the sum of at least fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for damages to property arising from any one
accident. Every insurance policy or contract for such insurance shall provide
for the operator and person insured, or any person driving in the insured
vehicle. Such insurance shall be obtained and certificates of insurance shall
be filed with the city clerk before a permit shall be issued.
   C.   Cancellation Notice: All such certificates of insurance shall provide
for a thirty (30) day cancellation notice to the licensing officer. (1985 Code
§ 5-25)
3-9-5: BOND REQUIRED:
Each operator shall furnish the city a performance bond in the amount of twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00) with sureties thereon agreeable to the city,
conditioned upon the operator complying with all the terms, conditions and
covenants of this chapter. (1985 Code § 5-26)
3-9-6: VEHICLE PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required; Fee; Inspection:
      1.   After an operator has secured a certificate hereunder, no vehicle
shall be operated under authority of such certificate until that operator has
made application to the city clerk on forms provided by that office, for a
permit for each motor vehicle desired to be operated under said certificate.
(1985 Code § 5-32)
      2.   Every application for a permit shall be in writing, verified by the
operator holding the certificate, and shall contain the name and address of the
operator, the number of the certificate and the make, type, year of
manufacture, motor number, serial number and state license number of each
vehicle. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as prescribed by
resolution of the city council for each permit. (1985 Code § 5-32; amd. 2004
Code)
      3.   The clerk shall cause an inspection of each vehicle to be made to
determine if it can conform to the standards, requirements and regulations as
adopted under this chapter.
      4.   The clerk shall issue permits to those ambulances found to be in
compliance; provided, that the number of permits issued to any operator shall
not exceed the number designated in his certificate or amended certificate.
(1985 Code § 5-32)
   B.   Term; Nontransferable; Revocation:
      1.   All permits issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 of the year
in which they are issued and must be renewed by January 31 of the following
year.
      2.   No permit issued hereunder shall be assignable or transferable by
the person to whom issued, unless said assignment or transfer be approved by
the city council.
      3.   Permits may be suspended or revoked for noncompliance with the
rules, regulations and standards adopted under this chapter. (1985 Code § 5-33)
3-9-7: REGISTRATION OF AMBULANCE DRIVERS AND ATTENDANTS:
   A.   Registration Required; Standards And Training:
      1.   No person shall be employed or act as a driver or attendant unless
such person shall have been registered as a driver, or attendant by the city.
      2.   Registration shall be dependent upon the driver or attendant meeting
the standards, requirements and regulations adopted hereunder.
      3.   Such standards must include minimal physical qualifications,
personal background and training requirements.
      4.   Minimum training requirements for drivers and attendants shall
include a basic background in anatomy and physiology, vital signs and their
significance, the handling of life threatening emergencies, management of
injuries, burns and environmental emergencies, as well as acute poisoning,
emergency childbirth, management of the emotionally disturbed and unruly, and
other medical emergencies.
      5.   Minimum training requirements for the drivers shall assure a
knowledge and ability of ambulance operation, ability to follow assigned
routes, maintenance of vehicle, and use of communications equipment. (1985 Code
§ 5-34)
   B.   Application For Registration; Fee; Investigation:
      1.   Application for registration as a driver or attendant shall be made
in writing to the city clerk on forms provided by that office. Each application
shall be accompanied by a fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council.
The application shall contain the full name and street address of the applicant
and such other information as may be required by the city clerk to properly
identify the applicant and disclose any information as to his character,
reputation or physical qualifications of the applicant for registration as a
driver or attendant. (1985 Code § 5-35; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   The city clerk shall be responsible for investigation of the
qualifications of the applicant and shall provide a copy of each application to
the Marlow police department. The department will investigate the police and
traffic record of the applicant and report to the city clerk. The city clerk
shall issue a registration card to those applicants found to qualify. (1985
Code § 5-35)
   C.   Accessibility Of Registration Cards: The registration card of each
driver and attendant shall be carried on the person of such driver or
attendant, or shall be immediately available in the central office of the
operator at all times while the driver or attendant is on duty. The
registration card shall be shown, upon request, to the city clerk, police or
other legal authority. (1985 Code § 5-36)
   D.   Term; Nontransferable; Revocation: All registrations issued hereunder
shall expire on June 30 next following their date of issuance and must be
renewed by the thirty first day of the following month. Registrations are
nonassignable and nontransferable, and may be revoked or suspended in
accordance with the standards, rules and regulations as adopted hereunder.
(1985 Code § 5-37)
3-9-8: APPEAL:
   A.   Right To Appeal; Time Limit: Any applicant and/or protestant shall have
the right to appeal any order relating to the issuance, denial, revocation,
alteration or suspension of the certificate, permit and/or registration to the
city council, by filing with the city clerk, within ten (10) days from the date
of said order, a written notice of appeal; said notice shall set forth the
grounds for the appeal.
   B.   Council Action: The city council may, after a hearing, sustain, reverse
or modify the order; provided however, that during the appeal taken from a city
council order upholding the denial, revocation, alteration or suspension of the
certificate, permit and/or registration, a protestant shall cease that activity
or conduct which was the subject matter of the hearing, pending a final
determination by an appellate tribunal. (1985 Code § 5-45)
3-9-9: FEES FOR AMBULANCE SERVICE:
   A.   Submit Schedule To Clerk: At the time an application is made for a
certificate, the operator shall submit to the clerk the schedule of fees which
he proposes to charge for ambulance service rendered under this chapter.
   B.   Review By Board: The fee schedule will be reviewed by the Marlow
emergency medical services board, and its recommendations concerning the
fairness and adequacy of the schedule will be made to the city council.
   C.   Council Approval: The fee schedule and any changes made therein must be
approved by the city council before it becomes effective. (1985 Code § 5-42)
3-9-10: DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE; NOTIFY CITY:
   A.   Notify City; Time Limit: An operator shall give at least forty five
(45) days' notice to the city council prior to discontinuing operations or
prior to the expiration of the certificate, if he does not intend to apply for
renewal of the certificate.
   B.   Certified Mail: Said notice shall be given by certified mail to the
city clerk. (1985 Code § 5-27)
3-9-11: CITY REGISTER OF OPERATORS AND VEHICLES:
   A.   Operators; Description Of Vehicles: The city clerk shall keep a
register containing the names and addresses of all operators, the description
of their vehicles with their license numbers and a complete record of all
inspections of vehicles and equipment.
   B.   Drivers And Attendants: He shall also maintain a complete register of
all drivers and attendants, together with their registration numbers and a
complete record of all suspensions and revocations of certificates, permits and
registrations.
   C.   Fees Transmitted To Clerk: All fees for certificates, permits and
registrations, collected under this chapter shall be transmitted to the city
clerk. (1985 Code § 5-39)
3-9-12: RIGHT TO INSPECT RECORDS AND EQUIPMENT:
The city council or its duly authorized agent shall have the right to inspect
all records, vehicles, and equipment utilized by the operator certified under
this chapter. (1985 Code § 5-43)
3-9-13: OPERATORS REPORT TO CITY; TRANSPORTING PATIENTS:
An operator shall, within one week after transporting any patient within the
city, or from one place within the city to another place within or beyond its
limits, file a written report of the same with the city clerk, upon such form
as approved by the city council. (1985 Code § 5-39)
3-9-14: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES MADE AVAILABLE:
The operator is strictly prohibited from withholding emergency medical services
to any patient because of inability to pay. Further, the operator shall
dispatch appropriate persons and equipment for each call received for emergency
medical service. (1985 Code § 5-44; amd. 2004 Code)
3-9-15: DEAD ON ARRIVAL PROCEDURE:
The following procedure shall be followed by all operators, drivers and
attendants when the subject of the emergency call is dead on arrival:
   A.   "Dead on arrival", as used herein, shall mean a determination of death
by a medical examiner, medical doctor, or doctor of osteopathy at the site of
the accident or upon arrival of the ambulance at its destination. The police
department must also be notified, and a police officer must be present at the
scene.
   B.   Operators and/or employees of operators providing an ambulance service
under the provisions of this chapter shall have no discretion over where such
body shall be delivered, except in accordance with the terms of this chapter
and they shall not recommend or suggest in any manner, direct or indirect, as
to where the body shall be delivered. (1985 Code § 5-40)
3-9-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
3-1A-5 of this title. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 10
TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definition
3-10-2: Operator's License
3-10-3: Taxicab Driver's License
3-10-4: Insurance Required
3-10-5: Reasonable Rate For Services
3-10-6: Inspection Of Vehicles
3-10-7: Loud Noises Prohibited
3-10-8: Revocation Of License
3-10-9: Penalty
3-10-1: DEFINITION:
The term "vehicle for hire" as used in this chapter shall be construed to mean
any and all motor vehicles used by any person, firm, or corporation within the
city for the purpose of conducting a general taxicab business for the purpose
of realizing a profit from the operation of the vehicles. (Ord. 289, 9-30-1986)
3-10-2: OPERATOR'S LICENSE:
   A.   License Required; Fee Generally: Any person, firm or corporation owning
or operating a vehicle for hire or a taxicab company in the city shall secure
an operator's license in the amount as set by the city council per annum. The
license fee shall include the operation of one car, and for each additional car
a separate annual license fee is levied. The fees shall be paid to the city
clerk.
   B.   Application For License: Application for such license shall be made in
writing to the city clerk showing the name of the applicant, and the number and
make of each vehicle, and the motor number of each vehicle. The license number
assigned to each vehicle by the city clerk shall be contained in the
application.
   C.   License Term; Annual Fee:
      1.   All licenses shall be for a period of one year ending September 30,
following, and no reduction in the established license rates shall be allowed
for fractional parts of a year.
      2.   All licenses shall be on condition that the same may be revoked at
any time by the city council. (Ord. 289, 9-30-1986)
      3.   An occupational license fee as prescribed by resolution of the city
council shall also be paid per annum. (Ord. 289, 9-30-1986; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Transfer Of Vehicle License: In the event any such vehicle for hire is
discontinued as such after a license is issued for such vehicle, such license
may be transferred to another vehicle owned or operated by the person to whom
the same is issued, provided an insurance policy is secured as provided in this
chapter, upon application to the city clerk. (Ord. 289, 9-30-1986)
3-10-3: TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE:
   A.   Municipal Driver's License; Fee: Every person who is in the service of
another or who shall operate any vehicle for hire shall first obtain a
municipal taxicab driver's license therefor. For such license, such driver
shall pay a fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council per annum.
(Ord. 289, 9-30-1986; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Application For License; Qualifications: No driver's license shall be
issued until the applicant shall make an application, setting out such matters
as may be prescribed by the city council, showing his/her qualifications as
such driver.
   C.   License Issuance; Conditions: Such application shall be made in writing
to the city clerk. The city clerk shall issue such license after he shall find
that such person is physically and mentally qualified as such driver, has
complied with the requirements in the application; but no person under the age
of twenty one (21) years shall be issued a driver's license.
   D.   Revocation Of Driver's License; Reasons: Such driver's license may be
revoked in the manner as provided herein for revoking the license of an owner
or operator of a vehicle for hire, at any time the city council shall find that
such person has made misrepresentations in his application for a license, or
that he has been found driving an automobile while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or controlled or illegal drugs, or shall find that such
driver for any reason is an improper person to drive a vehicle for hire. (Ord.
289, 9-30-1986)
3-10-4: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Requirement: Before any license shall be issued to and for any vehicle
for hire, the owner or operator thereof shall have first filed with the city
clerk a public liability insurance policy or a certified copy thereof to be
approved by the city clerk before issuing such license.
   B.   Liability Amounts: The liability under such insurance policy shall be
to the beneficiaries thereunder severally and jointly. Such policies shall
carry a personal injury liability to any person who may be insured, in the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more; and shall carry a
liability of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or more for the injuries and
damages resulting from a single accident to persons injured in such accident
and shall also provide for liability for property damage in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more which may result from any single
accident.
   C.   Company Requirements: No policy shall be accepted by the city clerk
unless the same is issued by a licensed insurance company doing business in the
state. (Ord. 289, 9-30-1986)
3-10-5: REASONABLE RATE FOR SERVICES:
   A.   Rate Charged: The owner or operator of any vehicle for hire shall not
charge an unreasonable rate for their services, and shall only charge such rate
as may be from time to time prescribed by the city council. The charges shall
be subject to applicable state and city sales tax regulations.
   B.   Discrimination: Any owner or driver or operator of any vehicle for hire
shall forfeit his license at any time he shall make any discrimination of rates
or charges or services to or against any person. (Ord. 289, 9-30-1986)
3-10-6: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Inspection By Police Officers: Vehicles for hire shall at all times be
subject to the inspections of the police officers of the city.
   B.   Defective Or Unsafe Condition: If the vehicles shall be found to be
defective or unsafe in any way for public use, the same shall not be operated
or used by such owner or operator as a vehicle for hire. (Ord. 289, 9-30-1986)
3-10-7: LOUD NOISES PROHIBITED:
No person shall, at any station or place, solicit any transportation business
by any loud noise or voice, instrument or other means. (Ord. 289, 9-30-1986)
3-10-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any such license so issued, as provided in this chapter, shall be subject to
revocation by the city council at any time the council shall find that the
vehicle has been or is being operated in a careless and dangerous manner, or in
violation of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state, or that the
owner or operator thereof is an improper person to operate the same. The owner
or operator of such vehicle shall have reasonable notice of the purported
revocation of such license, and may appear before the city council at a hearing
upon proposed revocation of such license. (Ord. 289, 9-30-1986)
3-10-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
3-1A-5 of this title. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 11
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: Certificate Of Compliance Required; General Provisions
3-11-3: Operational And Business Plan Requirements
3-11-4: Medical Marijuana Dispensary Requirements
3-11-5: Commercial Medical Marijuana Grower Requirements
3-11-6: Medical Marijuana Processor Requirements
3-11-7: Medical Marijuana Testing Requirements
3-11-8: Medical Marijuana Education And/Or Research Facility Requirements
3-11-9: Medical Marijuana Waste Disposal Requirements
3-11-10: Medical Marijuana Growing Facilities For Personal Use
3-11-11: Approval, Issuance, Denial And Appeal
3-11-12: Additional Regulations
3-11-13: Prohibited Acts
3-11-14: Violation; Penalty; Nuisance Abatement
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are defined as set forth for use in this chapter:
 
                                      A person that has been issued a medical
                                      marijuana license pursuant to title 63
                                      Oklahoma Statutes sections 420 et seq.,
CAREGIVER:                            as promulgated through the Oklahoma
                                      Medical Marijuana Authority or successor
                                      agency, section 310:681-1-1, chapter 681
                                      et seq., as amended from time to time.
                                      A current and valid certificate of
                                      compliance for a medical marijuana
                                      dispensary, commercial grower, marijuana
                                      processor, marijuana laboratory,
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:            marijuana educational facility or
                                      marijuana testing facility issued under
                                      this chapter, which shall be granted to a
                                      certificate of compliance holder only for
                                      and limited to a specific permitted
                                      premises and specific permitted property.
                                      The person that holds a current and valid
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE HOLDER:     certificate of compliance issued under
                                      this chapter.
                                      An entity that is licensed by the
                                      Oklahoma State Department of Health
                                      pursuant to title 63 Oklahoma Statutes
COMMERCIAL GROWER:                    section 422, which allows the entity to
                                      grow, harvest, and dry medical marijuana
                                      for the purpose of selling medical
                                      marijuana to a dispensary, processor or
                                      researcher.
COMMERCIAL WASTE DISPOSAL LICENSE:    A license issued to a medical marijuana
                                      waste disposal entity.
                                      An entity that is licensed by the
                                      Oklahoma State Department of Health
                                      pursuant to title 63 Oklahoma Statutes
                                      section 423, which allows the entity to
                                      purchase marijuana from a commercial
MARIJUANA PROCESSOR:                  grower; prepare, manufacture, package,
                                      sell to and deliver medical marijuana
                                      products to a dispensary licensee or
                                      other processor licensee; and may process
                                      marijuana received from a qualified
                                      patient into a medical marijuana
                                      concentrate, for a fee.
                                      An entity that is licensed by the
                                      Oklahoma State Department of Health
                                      pursuant to title 63 Oklahoma Statutes
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY:         section 421, which allows the entity to
                                      purchase medical marijuana from a
                                      commercial grower or processor and sell
                                      medical marijuana only to qualified
                                      patients and caregivers.
                                      An entity that is licensed by the
                                      Oklahoma State Department of Health
                                      pursuant to title 63 Oklahoma Statutes
MEDICAL MARIJUANA EDUCATION FACILITY: section 427.20, which allows a person to
                                      possess or cultivate marijuana for
                                      limited education and research purposes
                                      identified by law.
                                      A medical marijuana dispensary, medical
                                      marijuana commercial grower, medical
                                      marijuana processor, medical marijuana
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT:      laboratory testing facility, medical
                                      marijuana education facility, medical
                                      marijuana research facility, or medical
                                      marijuana waste disposal facility, all of
                                      which are established by law.
                                      The certificate of compliance from the
                                      City for a medical marijuana dispensary,
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT       medical marijuana commercial grower,
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:            medical marijuana processor, medical
                                      marijuana laboratory testing facility,
                                      medical
                                      marijuana education facility, medical
                                     marijuana research facility, or medical
                                      marijuana waste disposal facility, all of
                                      which are established by law.
                                      An entity that is licensed by the
                                      Oklahoma State Department of Health
                                      pursuant to title 63 Oklahoma Statutes
MEDICAL MARIJUANA RESEARCH FACILITY:  section 427.19, which allows a person to
                                      possess or cultivate marijuana for
                                      limited research purposes identified by
                                      law.
                                      An entity that is licensed by the
                                      Oklahoma State Department of Health
                                      pursuant to title 63 Oklahoma Statutes
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY:   section 427.17, which allows a person to
                                      possess medical marijuana for the purpose
                                      of conducting mandatory testing that is
                                      required by law.
                                      A license issued by the Oklahoma State
MEDICAL MARIJUANA WASTE DISPOSAL      Department of Health pursuant to the
LICENSE:                              Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Waste
                                      Management Act, set forth in title 63
                                      Oklahoma Statutes sections 427a et seq.
                                      The particular building or buildings
                                      within which the certificate of
                                      compliance holder will be authorized to
                                      conduct the facility's activities
PERMITTED PREMISES:                   pursuant to the certificate of
                                      compliance. Permitted property means the
                                      real property comprised of a lot, parcel
                                      or other designated unit of real property
                                      upon which the permitted premises is
                                      situated.
                                      As used herein includes a business entity
PERSON:                               whether corporation, limited liability
                                      company, partnership, or otherwise.
STRUCTURE:                            An enclosed building with walls, that is
                                      affixed to the ground.
                                      A person that has been issued a medical
QUALIFIED PATIENT:                    marijuana license pursuant to title 63
                                      Oklahoma Satutes sections 420 et seq.
                                      (Ord. 436, 12-16-2019)
 
3-11-2: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   No person shall operate a medical marijuana establishment at any time
or at any location within the City unless a currently effective certificate of
compliance for that person at that location has been issued under this chapter.
   B.   A medical marijuana dispensary, commercial marijuana grower, marijuana
processor, marijuana testing laboratory, marijuana education or research
facility shall operate only as allowed under this chapter.
   C.   The requirements set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to, and
not in lieu of, any other licensing or permitting requirements imposed by
applicable federal, state or local laws, regulations, codes or ordinances.
   D.   Permitting by the City shall only take place if the applicant is duly
licensed by the appropriate state agencies, including, but not limited to, the
Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority (OMMA) (or their successor agency), and
the Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Control (OBNDDC).
   E.   A certificate of compliance and renewal certificate of compliance shall
not confer any vested rights or reasonable expectation of subsequent renewal on
the applicant or certificate of compliance holder, and shall remain valid only
for a period of one (1) year following its approval.
   F.   It is the sole and exclusive responsibility of each certificate of
compliance holder or person applying to be a certificate of compliance holder
to immediately provide the City with all material changes in any information
submitted on an application and any other changes that may materially affect
any commercial establishment license or City certificate of compliance.
   G.   No certificate of compliance issued under this chapter may be assigned
or transferred to any person or location.
   H.   The original certificate of compliance issued under this chapter shall
be prominently displayed at the permitted premises in a location where it can
be easily viewed by the public, law enforcement and administrative authorities.
   I.   No certificate of compliance shall be granted or renewed for a medical
marijuana dispensary, commercial marijuana grower, marijuana processor,
marijuana laboratory, marijuana research facility or marijuana testing facility
in a residence.
   J.   Any marijuana establishment that is legally operating prior to the
enactment of this chapter may be required to comply with the requirements
herein; and shall be required to comply for annual renewal.
   K.   It is the intent of the City that nothing in this chapter be construed
to:
      1.   Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a public
nuisance;
      2.   Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or
      3.   Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by
state law. (Ord. 436, 12-16-2019)
3-11-3: OPERATIONAL AND BUSINESS PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Business And Operation Plan: All certificate of compliance applicants
for a medical marijuana establishment shall submit a business and operations
plan with their application showing in detail the establishment's proposed plan
of operation, including, without limitation, the following:
      1.   A description of the type of facility proposed and the anticipated
or actual number of employees;
      2.   A description by category of all products to be sold, processed,
tested or grown, including the estimated number of plants;
      3.   A list of material safety data sheets for all nutrients, pesticides
and other chemicals proposed for use in the facility;
      4.   A description and plan of all equipment and methods that will be
employed to stop any impact to adjacent uses, including enforceable assurances
that no odor will be detectable from outside of the permitted premises;
      5.   A plan for the disposal of marijuana and related by-products that
will be used in the facility;
      6.   A security plan which shall include a general description of the
security systems and confirmation that those systems will meet state
requirements and be approved by the state prior to commencing operations; and
      7.   A description of the state mandated inventory system that is
required by state law.
   B.   Operational Requirements: All certificate of compliance holders shall
at all times comply with the following operational requirements, which the City
may review and amend from time to time as it determines reasonable:
      1.   All permitted premises shall comply with all respective applicable
codes of the local zoning, building, health departments, and federal agencies
such as, but not limited to the Environmental Protection Agency. The facility
must hold a valid local certificate of compliance and commercial establishment
license for the type of facility intended to be carried out on the permitted
property. The facility operator, owner or licensee must have documentation
available that local and state sales tax requirements, including holding any
licenses, if applicable, are satisfied.
      2.   No certificate of compliance holder shall be permitted to operate
from a moveable, mobile or transitory location except as allowed under the
Oklahoma State Department of Health rules that authorize and license the
transportation of medical marijuana. No person under the age of eighteen (18)
shall be allowed to enter into the permitted premises without a parent or legal
guardian.
      3.   All activities of a medical marijuana establishment, including,
without limitation, distribution, growth, cultivation, sale of marijuana,
testing, education, research,  processing, and all other related activity
permitted under the certificate of compliance holder's license or certificate
of compliance, must occur indoors. The facility's operation and design shall
minimize any impact to adjacent uses, including the control of any odor by
maintaining and operating an air filtration system so that no odor is
detectable outside the permitted premises.
      4.   All applicants for a marijuana establishment certificate of
compliance shall implement and maintain appropriate security measures in order
to deter and prevent unauthorized access to or entrance into areas or spaces
containing marijuana by persons or entities not permitted to possess or
distribute marijuana under state law or regulation, and to prevent the theft or
diversion of marijuana.
      5.   Waste Disposal: The certificate of compliance holder, owner and
operator of the facility shall use lawful methods in controlling waste or by-
products from any activities allowed under the permit.
      6.   The City may impose such reasonable terms and conditions on a
medical marijuana establishment as may be necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare, and to obtain compliance with the requirements of
this chapter and applicable law.
      7.   The applicant shall make their marijuana establishment and all of
any required business records available for City inspection upon reasonable
request. (Ord. 436, 12-16-2019)
3-11-4: MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   State Licensing Requirement: All operators of a medical marijuana
dispensary within the City must maintain a valid commercial establishment
license from the Oklahoma Department of Health. Each person operating a medical
marijuana dispensary within the City shall provide the City with a copy of
their commercial establishment license issued by the Oklahoma Department of
Health prior to commencing operation and shall further provide the City with a
copy of any renewal of the commercial establishment license each calendar year.
   B.   City Certificate Of Compliance Requirement: All operators of a medical
marijuana dispensary within the City must obtain a medical marijuana dispensary
certificate of compliance prior to commencing operation. Prior to issuance of a
medical marijuana dispensary certificate of compliance, the physical address of
the proposed medical marijuana dispensary will be subject to a property
inspection by an authorized City inspector to insure compliance with all City
codes. The property inspection will occur at a time scheduled and approved by
both the applicant and City inspector. The applicant is required to be present
during the inspection. All structures, equipment and apparatuses shall comply
with all building and fire codes adopted by the State of Oklahoma and the City
of Marlow.
   C.   Applications For Medical Marijuana Dispensary Certificate Of
Compliance: Any person seeking to obtain a medical marijuana dispensary
certificate of compliance shall submit a written application to the City on a
City prescribed form to include, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The name of the establishment;
      2.   If the establishing is a legal entity, then a statement from the
Oklahoma Secretary of State stating that the establishing is operating in "Good
Condition";
      3.   Physical address of the establishment;
      4.   Phone number of the establishment;
      5.   Operating hours of the establishment;
      6.   The applicant's first name, middle name, last name and suffix if
applicable;
      7.   The applicant's residence address and mailing address;
      8.   The applicant's date of birth;
      9.   The applicant's preferred telephone number and email address;
      10.   An attestation that the information provided by the applicant is
true and correct;
      11.   An application submitted on behalf of a business organization shall
include an attestation that the applicant is authorized to make application on
behalf of the business organization, full name of the business organization,
type of business organization, mailing address for the business organization,
and the full names of all owners of the organization;
      12.   A statement signed by the applicant not to divert marijuana to any
individual or entity that is not lawfully entitled to possess marijuana; and
      13.   One (1) copy of all of the following:
         a.   All documentation showing the proposed certificate of compliance
holder's valid tenancy, ownership or other legal interest in the proposed
permitted premises. If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed permitted
premises, a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the
use of the property for a medical marijuana dispensary;
         b.   A valid, unexpired driver's license or state issued
identification for all owners, directors, officers and managers of the proposed
facility;
         c.   Evidence of a valid sales tax license for the business if such a
license is required by state law or local regulations; and
         d.   Any other information reasonably requested by the City to be
relevant to the marijuana dispensary for consideration of the application.
   D.   Application Fees: Application processing fees for a medical marijuana
dispensary certificate of compliance shall be as set forth by resolution
adopted by the City Council. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses
covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement
of medical marijuana dispensary establishments.
   E.   Renewal Fees: Annual renewal fees of any medical marijuana dispensary
certificate of compliance shall be as set forth by resolution. The fee shall be
used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing,
inspection, administration and enforcement of medical marijuana dispensary
establishments.
   F.   Application fees and annual renewal fees are non-refundable. The
application fees shall be paid at the time of the submission of an application
for a license and are not prorated.
   G.   Location Restrictions For Medical Marijuana Dispensaries:
      1.   A medical marijuana dispensary certificate of compliance will not be
granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within
one thousand feet (1,000') from any public or private school entrance. The
distance specified shall be measured from any entrance of the school to the
nearest property point of the dispensary.
      2.   A medical marijuana dispensary certificate of compliance will not be
granted to any applicant where the proposed location is not within C-2 General
Commercial District zoning.
   H.   Conditions Of Operation For Commercial Medical Marijuana Dispensaries:
      1.   All medical marijuana dispensaries shall be located within an
entirely enclosed and secured structure.
      2.   All medical marijuana dispensaries must be constructed in such a
manner that any marijuana plants cannot be seen by the public from the public
right-of-way.
      3.   All medical marijuana dispensaries and equipment shall comply with
all building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes adopted by the State of
Oklahoma and the City of Marlow.
      4.   All medical marijuana dispensaries must be properly secured with an
alarm system and have limited access.
      5.   All medical marijuana dispensaries shall be conducted in a manner
that does not constitute a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to
exist if the dispensary produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration
that is detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
      6.   Before annual renewal, the City shall inspect the premises and any
business records they deem reasonable to ensure compliance with all laws. (Ord.
436, 12-16-2019)
3-11-5: COMMERCIAL MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   State Licensing Requirement: All operators of a commercial grower
within the City must maintain a valid commercial establishment license from the
Oklahoma Department of Health. Each person operating a commercial grower within
the City shall provide the City with a copy of their commercial establishment
license issued by the Oklahoma Department of Health prior to commencing
operation and shall further provide the City with a copy of any renewal of the
commercial establishment license each calendar year.
   B.   City Certificate Of Compliance Requirement: All operators of a
commercial grower within the City must obtain a commercial grower certificate
of compliance prior to commencing operation. Prior to issuance of a commercial
grower certificate of compliance, the physical address of the proposed
commercial grower will be subject to a property inspection by an authorized
City inspector to insure compliance with all City codes. The property
inspection will occur at a time scheduled and approved by both the applicant
and City inspector. The applicant is required to be present during the
inspection. All structures, equipment and apparatuses shall comply with all
building and fire codes adopted by the State of Oklahoma and the City of
Marlow.
   C.   Applications For A Commercial Grower Certificate Of Compliance: Any
person seeking to obtain a commercial grower certificate of compliance shall
submit a written application to the City on a City prescribed form to include,
at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The name of the establishment;
      2.   If the establishing is a legal entity, then a statement from the
Oklahoma Secretary of State stating that the establishing is operating in "Good
Condition";
      3.   Physical address of the establishment;
      4.   Phone number of the establishment;
      5.   Operating hours of the establishment;
      6.   The applicant's first name, middle name, last name and suffix if
applicable;
      7.   The applicant's residence address and mailing address;
      8.   The applicant's date of birth;
      9.   The applicant's preferred telephone number and email address;
      10.   An attestation that the information provided by the applicant is
true and correct;
      11.   An application submitted on behalf of a business organization shall
include an attestation that the applicant is authorized to make application on
behalf of the business organization, full name of the business organization,
type of business organization, mailing address for the business organization,
and the full names of all owners of the organization;
      12.   A statement signed by the applicant not to divert marijuana to any
individual or entity other than a licensed and permitted dispensary, processor,
testing facility, education or research facility; and
      13.   One (1) copy of all of the following:
         a.   All documentation showing the proposed certificate of compliance
holder's valid tenancy, ownership or other legal interest in the proposed
permitted premises. If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed permitted
premises, a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the
use of the property for a medical marijuana commercial grower;
         b.   A valid, unexpired driver's license or state issued
identification for all owners, directors, officers and managers of the proposed
facility; and
         c.   Any other information reasonably requested by the City to be
relevant to the marijuana growing for consideration of the application.
   D.   Application Fees: Application processing fees for a commercial grower
certificate of compliance shall be as set forth by resolution adopted by the
City Council. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs
related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement of commercial
grower establishments.
   E.   Renewal Fees: Annual renewal fees of any commercial grower certificate
of compliance shall be as set forth by resolution. The fee shall be used to
offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection,
administration and enforcement of commercial grower establishments.
   F.   Application fees and annual renewal fees are non-refundable. The
application fees shall be paid at the time of the submission of an application
for a license and are not prorated.
   G.   Location Restrictions For Commercial Growers:
      1.   A medical marijuana grow facility certificate of compliance will not
be granted to any applicant where the proposed location is not within an
enclosed space that is two thousand (2,000) square feet or less and that is
located within C-2 General Commercial District zoning; or
      2.   A medical marijuana grow facility certificate of compliance will not
be granted to any applicant where the proposed location is not outside and
within A-2 Suburban District zoning; or
      3.   A medical marijuana grow facility certificate of compliance will not
be granted to any applicant where the proposed location is not within an
enclosed area that is two thousand one (2,001) square feet or more and that is
located within A-2 Suburban District zoning; and
      4.   A medical marijuana grow facility certificate of compliance will not
be granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within
one thousand feet (1,000') from any day care, church, park, public or private
school entrance. The distance specified shall be measure from any entrance of
the school to the nearest property point of the dispensary.
   H.   Conditions Of Operation For Commercial Medical Marijuana Growers:
      1.   All commercial medical marijuana grower facilities shall be located
within an entirely enclosed and secured structure.
      2.   All commercial medical marijuana grower facilities must be
constructed in such a manner that the growing of the medical marijuana plants
cannot be seen by the public from the public right-of-way.
      3.   All commercial medical marijuana grower facilities and equipment
shall comply with all building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes adopted by
the State of Oklahoma and the City of Marlow.
      4.   All commercial medical marijuana grower facilities must be properly
vented so as to not create humidity, mold or other related problems.
      5.   All commercial medical marijuana grower facilities shall be fully
secured by having limited access and locked doors. All medical marijuana grower
facilities must be properly secured with an alarm system.
      6.   If medical marijuana growers use any products, such as pesticides or
other chemicals used in the cultivation process, including certain solvents or
other chemicals used in the production of marijuana concentrate, and flammable
solvents for the purpose of producing a marijuana concentrate, such as, butane,
ethanol or other solvents, they are all considered hazardous waste. Hazardous
wastes must be disposed of properly by a registered hazardous waste transporter
shipping to a hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal facility (TSDF)
and comply with federal regulations.
      7.   All commercial medical marijuana grower facilities shall be
conducted in a manner that does not constitute a public nuisance. A public
nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing marijuana produces light, glare,
heat, noise, odor or vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety or
welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
      8.   Before annual renewal, the City shall inspect the premises and any
business records they deem reasonable to ensure compliance with all laws. (Ord.
436, 12-16-2019)
3-11-6:MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROCESSOR REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   State Licensing Requirement: All operators of a marijuana processor
within the City must maintain a valid commercial establishment license from the
Oklahoma Department of Health. Each person operating a marijuana processor
within the City shall provide the City with a copy of their commercial
establishment license issued by the Oklahoma Department of Health prior to
commencing operation and shall further provide the City with a copy of any
renewal of the commercial establishment license each calendar year.
   B.   City Certificate Of Compliance Requirement: All operators of a
marijuana processor within the City must obtain a marijuana processor
certificate of compliance from the City prior to commencing operation. Prior to
issuance of a marijuana processor certificate of compliance, the physical
address of the proposed marijuana processor will be subject to a property
inspection by an authorized city inspector to insure compliance with all City
codes. The property inspection will occur at a time scheduled and approved by
both the applicant and city inspector. The applicant is required to be present
during the inspection. All structures, equipment and apparatuses shall comply
with all building, electric, plumbing and fire codes adopted by the State of
Oklahoma and the City of Marlow.
   C.   Applications For A Marijuana Processor Certificate Of Compliance: Any
person seeking to obtain a marijuana processor certificate of compliance shall
submit a written application to the City on a City prescribed form to include,
at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The name of the establishment;
      2.   If the establishing is a legal entity, then a statement from the
Oklahoma Secretary of State stating that the establishing is operating in "Good
Condition";
      3.   Physical address of the establishment;
      4.   Phone number of the establishment;
      5.   Operating hours of the establishment;
      6.   The applicant's first name, middle name, last name and suffix if
applicable;
      7.   The applicant's residence address and mailing address;
      8.   The applicant's date of birth;
      9.   The applicant's preferred telephone number and email address;
      10.   An attestation that the information provided by the applicant is
true and correct;
      11.   An application submitted on behalf of a business organization shall
include an attestation that the applicant is authorized to make application on
behalf of the business organization, full name of the business organization,
type of business organization, mailing address for the business organization,
and the full names of all owners of the organization;
      12.   A statement signed by the applicant not to divert marijuana to any
individual or entity other than a licensed and permitted dispensary, testing
facility, education or research facility; and
      13.   One (1) copy of all of the following:
         a.   All documentation showing the proposed certificate of compliance
holder's valid tenancy, ownership or other legal interest in the proposed
permitted premises. If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed permitted
premises, a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the
use of the property for a medical marijuana processor;
         b.   A valid, unexpired driver's license or state issued
identification for all owners, directors, officers and managers of the proposed
facility; and
         c.   Any other information reasonably requested by the City to be
relevant to the processing of marijuana for consideration of the application.
   D.   Application Fees: Application processing fees for a medical marijuana
processor certificate of compliance shall be as set forth by resolution adopted
by the City Council. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses
covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement
of medical marijuana processor establishments.
   E.   Renewal Fees: Annual renewal fees of any medical marijuana processor
certificate of compliance shall be as set forth by resolution. The fee shall be
used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing,
inspection, administration and enforcement of medical marijuana processor
establishments.
   F.   Application fees and annual renewal fees are non-refundable. The
application fees shall be paid at the time of the submission of an application
for a license and are not prorated.
   G.   Location Restrictions For Medical Marijuana Processors:
      1.   A medical marijuana processor certificate of compliance will not be
granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within
one thousand feet (1,000') from any day care, church, park, public or private
school entrance. The distance specified shall be measure from any entrance of
the school to the nearest property point of the dispensary.
      2.   A medical marijuana processor permit will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location is not within I-1 Light Industrial
District zoning.
   H.   Conditions Of Operation For Medical Marijuana Processors:
      1.   All marijuana processor facilities must be constructed in such a
manner that the processing of the medical marijuana cannot be seen by the
public from the public right-of-way.
      2.   All marijuana processor facilities shall be located within an
entirely enclosed and secure structure, with locked doors at all times.
      3.   All medical marijuana processor facilities must be properly secured
with an alarm system and have limited access.
      4.   All marijuana processor facilities and equipment shall comply with
all building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes adopted by the State of
Oklahoma and the City of Marlow.
      5.   All marijuana processor facilities must be properly vented so as to
not create humidity, mold or other related problems.
      6.   If medical marijuana processors use any products, such as chemicals
used in the extraction or for processing marijuana products, including certain
solvents or other chemicals used in the production of marijuana concentrate,
and flammable solvents for the purpose of producing a marijuana concentrate,
such as, butane, ethanol or other solvents, they are all considered hazardous
waste. Hazardous wastes must be disposed of properly by a registered hazardous
waste transporter shipping to a hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal
facility (TSDF) and comply with federal regulations.
      7.   Buildings where marijuana processing occurs must be equipped with
commercial grade equipment for proper food preparation, handling, packaging and
labeling in accordance with current state and federal regulations. (See title
63 Oklahoma Statutes section 427.18 and DEQ Regulations.)
      8.   Buildings where marijuana processing occurs must be equipped with
ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off-
premises.
      9.   Medical marijuana processing facilities must remain locked at all
times. The facility must have an electronic security system.
      10.   All marijuana processor facilities shall be conducted in a manner
that do not constitute a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to
exist if processing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or
vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes
with the reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
      11.   Before annual renewal, the City shall inspect the premises and any
business records they deem reasonable to ensure compliance with all laws. (Ord.
436, 12-16-2019)
3-11-7: MEDICAL MARIJUANA TESTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   State Licensing Requirement: All operators of a medical marijuana
testing facility within the City must maintain a valid commercial establishment
license from the Oklahoma Department of Health. Each person operating a medical
marijuana testing facility within the City shall provide the City with a copy
of their commercial establishment license issued by the Oklahoma Department of
Health prior to commencing operation and shall further provide the City with a
copy of any renewal of the commercial establishment license each calendar year.
   B.   City Certificate Of Compliance Requirement: All operators of a medical
marijuana testing facility within the City must obtain a medical marijuana
testing certificate of compliance from the City prior to commencing operation.
Prior to issuance of a marijuana testing certificate of compliance, the
physical address of the proposed marijuana testing facility will be subject to
a property inspection by an authorized City inspector to insure compliance with
all City codes. The property inspection will occur at a time scheduled and
approved by both the applicant and City inspector. The applicant is required to
be present during the inspection. All structures, equipment and testing
apparatuses shall comply with all building, electric, plumbing and fire codes
adopted by the State of Oklahoma and the City of Marlow.
   C.   Applications For A Medical Marijuana Testing Certificate Of Compliance:
Any person seeking to obtain a marijuana testing certificate of compliance
shall submit a written application to the City on a City prescribed form to
include, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The name of the establishment;
      2.   If the establishing is a legal entity, then a statement from the
Oklahoma Secretary of State stating that the establishing is operating in "Good
Condition";
      3.   Physical address of the establishment;
      4.   Phone number of the establishment;
      5.   Operating hours of the establishment;
      6.   The applicant's first name, middle name, last name and suffix if
applicable;
      7.   The applicant's residence address and mailing address;
      8.   The applicant's date of birth;
      9.   The name, address, telephone number and email of the director of the
testing facility;
      10.   The applicant's preferred telephone number and email address;
      11.   An attestation that the information provided by the applicant is
true and correct;
      12.   An application submitted on behalf of a business organization shall
include an attestation that the applicant is authorized to make application on
behalf of the business organization, full name of the business organization,
type of business organization, mailing address for the business organization,
and the full names of all owners of the organization;
      13.   A statement signed by the applicant not to divert marijuana to any
individual or entity; and
      14.   One (1) copy of all of the following:
         a.   All documentation showing the proposed certificate of compliance
holder's valid tenancy, ownership or other legal interest in the proposed
permitted premises. If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed permitted
premises, a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the
use of the property for a medical marijuana testing.
         b.   A valid, unexpired driver's license or state issued
identification for all owners, directors, officers and managers of the proposed
facility; and
         c.   Any other information reasonably requested by the City to be
relevant to marijuana testing for consideration of the application.
   D.   Application Fees: Application processing fees for a medical marijuana
testing certificate of compliance shall be as set forth by resolution adopted
by the City Council. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses
covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement
of medical marijuana testing establishments.
   E.   Renewal Fees: Annual renewal fees of any medical marijuana testing
certificate of compliance shall be as set forth by resolution. The fee shall be
used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing,
inspection, administration and enforcement of medical marijuana testing
establishments.
   F.   Application fees and annual renewal fees are non-refundable. The
application fees shall be paid at the time of the submission of an application
for a license and are not prorated.
   G.   Location Restrictions For Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities:
      1.   A medical marijuana testing certificate of compliance will not be
granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within
one thousand feet (1,000') from any public or private school entrance. The
distance specified shall be measure from any entrance of the school to the
nearest property point of the dispensary.
      2.   A medical marijuana testing certificate of compliance will not be
granted to any applicant where the proposed location is not within I-1 Light
Industrial District zoning.
   H.   Conditions Of Operation For Medical Marijuana Testing:
      1.   All marijuana testing facilities must be constructed in such a
manner that the testing of the medical marijuana cannot be seen by the public
from the public right-of-way.
      2.   All marijuana testing facilities shall be located within an entirely
enclosed and secure structure, with locked doors at all times.
      3.   All medical marijuana testing facilities must be properly secured
with an alarm system and have limited access.
      4.   All medical marijuana testing facilities and equipment shall comply
with all building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes adopted by the State of
Oklahoma and the City of Marlow.
      5.   All medical marijuana testing must be properly vented so as to not
create humidity, mold or other related problems.
      6.   If medical marijuana testing uses any products, such as chemicals,
flammable solvents, butane, ethanol or any other chemicals used in the
marijuana testing procedures, then these are all considered hazardous waste.
Hazardous wastes must be disposed of properly by a registered hazardous waste
transporter shipping to a hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal
facility (TSDF) and comply with federal regulations.
      7.   Buildings where marijuana testing occurs must be equipped with
commercial grade testing equipment in accordance with current state
regulations. (See title 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 427.17.)
      8.   Buildings where marijuana testing occurs must be equipped with
ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off-
premises.
      9.   Medical marijuana testing facilities must remain locked at all
times. The facility must have an electronic security system.
      10.   All marijuana testing facilities shall be conducted in a manner
that do not constitute a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to
exist if testing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or
vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes
with the reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
      11.   Before annual renewal, the City shall inspect the premises and any
business records they deem reasonable to ensure compliance with all laws. (Ord.
436, 12-16-2019)
3-11-8:MEDICAL MARIJUANA EDUCATION AND/OR RESEARCH FACILITY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   State Licensing Requirement: All operators of a medical marijuana
education facility or medical marijuana research facility within the City must
maintain a valid commercial establishment license from the Oklahoma Department
of Health. Each person operating a medical marijuana education facility or
research facility within the City shall provide the City with a copy of their
commercial establishment license issued by the Oklahoma Department of Health
prior to commencing operation and shall further provide the City with a copy of
any renewal of the commercial establishment license each calendar year.
   B.   City Certificate Of Compliance Requirement: All operators of a medical
marijuana education facility or medical marijuana research facility within the
City must obtain a medical marijuana education facility certificate of
compliance or medical marijuana research facility certificate of compliance
from the City prior to commencing operation. Prior to issuance of a medical
marijuana education certificate of compliance or medical marijuana research
certificate of compliance, the physical address of the proposed facility will
be subject to a property inspection by an authorized City inspector to insure
compliance with all City codes. The property inspection will occur at a time
scheduled and approved by both the applicant and City inspector. The applicant
is required to be present during the inspection. All structures, equipment,
research, and testing apparatuses shall comply with all building, electric,
plumbing and fire codes adopted by the State of Oklahoma and the City of
Marlow.
   C.   Applications For A Medical Marijuana Education Facility Certificate Of
Compliance Or Medical Marijuana Research Facility Certificate Of Compliance:
   Any person seeking to obtain a medical marijuana education facility
certificate of compliance or medical marijuana research facility certificate of
compliance shall submit a written application to the City on a City prescribed
form to include, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The name of the establishment;
      2.   If the establishing is a legal entity, then a statement from the
Oklahoma Secretary of State stating that the establishing is operating in "Good
Condition";
      3.   Physical address of the establishment;
      4.   Phone number of the establishment;
      5.   Operating hours of the establishment;
      6.   The applicant's first name, middle name, last name and suffix if
applicable;
      7.   The applicant's residence address and mailing address;
      8.   The applicant's date of birth;
      9.   The name, address, telephone number and email of the director of the
facility;
      10.   The applicant's preferred telephone number and email address;
      11.   An attestation that the information provided by the applicant is
true and correct;
      12.   An application submitted on behalf of a business organization shall
include an attestation that the applicant is authorized to make application on
behalf of the business organization, full name of the business organization,
type of business organization, mailing address for the business organization,
and the full names of all owners of the organization;
      13.   A statement signed by the applicant not to divert marijuana to any
individual or entity; and
      14.   One (1) copy of all of the following:
         a.   All documentation showing the proposed certificate of compliance
holder's valid tenancy, ownership or other legal interest in the proposed
permitted premises. If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed permitted
premises, a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the
use of the property for a medical marijuana education or research.
      b.   A valid, unexpired driver's license or state issued identification
for all owners, directors, officers and managers of the proposed facility; and
      c.   Any other information reasonably requested by the City to be
relevant to marijuana education or research for consideration of the
application.
   D.   Application Fees: Application processing fees for a medical marijuana
education or research certificate of compliance shall be as set forth by
resolution adopted by the City Council. The fee shall be used to offset
municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection,
administration and enforcement of medical marijuana education and research
establishments.
   E.   Renewal Fees: Annual renewal fees of any medical marijuana education or
research certificate of compliance shall be as set forth by resolution. The fee
shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing,
inspection, administration and enforcement of medical marijuana education or
research establishments.
   F.   Application fees and annual renewal fees are non-refundable. The
application fees shall be paid at the time of the submission of an application
for a license and are not prorated.
   G.   Location Restrictions For Medical Marijuana Education And/Or Research
Facilities:
      1.   A medical marijuana education or research certificate of compliance
will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be
located within one thousand feet (1,000') from any day care, church, park,
public or private school entrance. The distance specified shall be measure from
any entrance of the school to the nearest property point of the dispensary.
      2.   A medical marijuana education or research certificate of compliance
will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location is not within
I-1 Light Industrial District zoning.
   H.   Conditions Of Operation For Medical Marijuana Education Or Research:
      1.   All marijuana education or research facilities must be constructed
in such a manner that the processing of the medical marijuana cannot be seen by
the public from the public right-of-way.
      2.   All marijuana education or research facilities shall be located
within an entirely enclosed and secure structure, with locked doors at all
times.
      3.   All medical marijuana education or research facilities must be
properly secured with an alarm system and have limited access.
      4.   All medical marijuana education or research facilities shall comply
with all building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes adopted by the State of
Oklahoma and the City of Marlow.
      5.   All medical marijuana education or research must be properly vented
so as to not create humidity, mold or other related problems.
      6.   If medical marijuana education or research owners use any products,
such as chemicals, flammable solvents, butane, ethanol or any other chemicals
used in the marijuana education or research procedures, then these are all
considered hazardous waste. Hazardous wastes must be disposed of properly by a
registered hazardous waste transporter shipping to a hazardous waste treatment,
storage and disposal facility (TSDF) and comply with federal regulations. (See
title 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 429(B).)
      7.   Buildings where marijuana education or research occurs must be
equipped with commercial grade equipment.
      8.   Buildings where marijuana education or research occurs must be
equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are
detectable off- premises.
      9.   Medical marijuana education or research facilities must remain
locked at all times. The facility must have an electronic security system.
      10.   All marijuana education or research facilities shall be conducted
in a manner that do not constitute a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be
deemed to exist if the education or research produces light, glare, heat,
noise, odor or vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety or
welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
      11.   Before annual renewal, the City shall inspect the premises and any
business records they deem reasonable to ensure compliance with all laws. (Ord.
436, 12-16-2019)
3-11-9:MEDICAL MARIJUANA WASTE DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   State Licensing Requirement: All operators of a medical marijuana waste
disposal facility within the City must maintain a valid commercial
establishment license from the Oklahoma Department of Health. Each person
operating a medical marijuana waste disposal facility within the City shall
provide the City with a copy of their commercial establishment license issued
by the Oklahoma Department of Health prior to commencing operation and shall
further provide the City with a copy of any renewal of the commercial
establishment license each calendar year.
   B.   City Certificate Of Compliance Requirement: A medical marijuana waste
disposal certificate of compliance shall not be required for an individual
grower unless the grow facility accommodates five thousand (5,000) plants per
planting cycle or more. Those facilities within the City must obtain a medical
marijuana waste disposal facility certificate of compliance from the City prior
to commencing operation. Prior to issuance of a medical marijuana waste
disposal certificate of compliance, the physical address of the proposed
facility will be subject to a property inspection by an authorized City
inspector to insure compliance with all City codes. The property inspection
will occur at a time scheduled and approved by both the applicant and City
inspector. The applicant is required to be present during the inspection. All
structures and equipment shall comply with all building, electric, plumbing and
fire codes adopted by the State of Oklahoma and the City of Marlow.
   C.   Applications For A Medical Marijuana Waste Disposal Certificate Of
Compliance: Any person seeking to obtain a medical marijuana waste disposal
certificate of compliance shall submit a written application to the City on a
City prescribed form to include, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The name of the establishment;
      2.   If the establishing is a legal entity, then a statement from the
Oklahoma Secretary of State stating that the establishing is operating in "Good
Condition";
      3.   Physical address of the establishment;
      4.   Phone number of the establishment;
      5.   Operating hours of the establishment;
      6.   The applicant's first name, middle name, last name and suffix if
applicable;
      7.   The applicant's residence address and mailing address;
      8.   The applicant's date of birth;
      9.   The name, address, telephone number and email of the director of the
facility;
      10.   The applicant's preferred telephone number and email address;
      11.   An attestation that the information provided by the applicant is
true and correct;
   12.   An application submitted on behalf of a business organization shall
include an attestation that the applicant is authorized to make application on
behalf of the business organization, full name of the business organization,
type of business organization, mailing address for the business organization,
and the full names of all owners of the organization;
   13.   A statement signed by the applicant not to divert marijuana to any
individual or entity; and
   14.   One (1) copy of all of the following:
      a.   All documentation showing the proposed certificate of compliance
holder's valid tenancy, ownership or other legal interest in the proposed
permitted premises. If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed permitted
premises, a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the
use of the property for a medical marijuana waste disposal facility.
      b.   A valid, unexpired driver's license or state issued identification
for all owners, directors, officers and managers of the proposed facility; and
      c.   Any other information reasonably requested by the City to be
relevant to marijuana waste disposal for consideration of the application.
   D.   Application Fees: Application processing fees for a medical marijuana
waste disposal certificate of compliance shall be as set forth by resolution
adopted by the City Council. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses
covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement
of medical marijuana waste disposal establishments.
   E.   Renewal Fees: Annual renewal fees of any medical marijuana waste
disposal certificate of compliance shall be as set forth by resolution. The fee
shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing,
inspection, administration and enforcement of medical marijuana waste disposal
establishments.
   F.   Application fees and annual renewal fees are non-refundable. The
application fees shall be paid at the time of the submission of an application
for a license and are not prorated.
   G.   Location Restrictions For Medical Marijuana Waste Disposal Facilities:
      1.   All commercial disposal facilities for medical marijuana waste or
medical marijuana by-products shall not be allowed within one thousand feet
(1,000') from any day care, church, park, public or private school entrance.
The distance specified shall be measure from any entrance of the school to the
nearest property point of the dispensary.
      2.   Residual tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), which is the chemical
responsible for most of marijuana's euphoric and medicinal effects, can poison
animals and have adverse effects on the local ecology if improperly disposed.
Furthermore, marijuana growers, processors, testing labs, educators or research
facilities may use products, such as pesticides or other chemicals used in the
cultivation process, certain solvents or other chemicals used in the production
of marijuana concentrate, and flammable solvents for the purpose of producing a
marijuana concentrate, which are all considered hazardous waste. Hazardous
wastes must be disposed of properly by a registered hazardous waste transporter
shipping to a hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal facility (TSDF).
Furthermore, if a licensee generates waste that are regulated hazardous wastes,
then the licensee must comply with all Environmental Protection Agency rules
and regulations before the wastes can be accepted for disposal by an
appropriate hazardous waste TSDF.
      3.   A medical marijuana waste disposal certificate of compliance will
not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location is not within I-
2 Heavy Industrial District zoning.
   H.   Conditions Of Operation For Medical Marijuana Waste Disposal
Facilities:
      1.   All marijuana waste disposal facilities must be constructed in such
a manner that the disposal of the medical marijuana waste cannot be seen by the
public from the public right-of-way.
      2.   All medical marijuana waste disposal shall be located within an
entirely enclosed and secure area with locked gates at all times.
      3.   All medical marijuana waste disposal facilities must be properly
secured with an alarm system and have limited access.
      4.   All medical marijuana waste disposal facilities shall comply with
all building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes adopted by the State of
Oklahoma and the City of Marlow.
      5.   All medical marijuana waste disposal shall be performed so that
plants and products are rendered unusable and unrecognizable.
      6.   All medical marijuana waste disposal shall be performed by burying,
mulching, or composting. Open burning and incineration shall not be allowed.
      7.   If medical marijuana waste being disposed of has any products, such
as chemicals, flammable solvents, butane, ethanol or any other chemicals used
in the marijuana education or research procedures, then these are all
considered hazardous waste. Hazardous wastes must be disposed of properly by a
registered hazardous waste transporter shipping to a hazardous waste treatment,
storage and disposal facility (TSDF) and comply with federal regulations.
      8.   No marijuana or marijuana derivatives which have been chemically
enhanced, shall be disposed of in the City; all marijuana products with
chemicals shall be considered medical waste and shall be properly disposed of
as red bag medical waste in a proper medical waste disposal facility.
      9.   No obnoxious odors or noises shall be permitted from medical
marijuana waste disposal facility.
      10.   All medical marijuana waste disposal facilities shall be operated
in a manner that does not constitute a public nuisance. A public nuisance may
be deemed to exist if the disposal produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor,
runoff substances, or vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety or
welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
      11.   Before annual renewal, the City shall inspect the premises and any
business records they deem reasonable to ensure compliance with all laws. (Ord.
436, 12-16-2019)
3-11-10: MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITIES FOR PERSONAL USE:
   A.   All medical marijuana grown at home by a qualified patient or caregiver
patient medical marijuana license holders can only be grown on residential real
property owned by the patient license holder or on rented real property for
which the patient license holder has the property owner's written permission to
grow medical marijuana on the property.
   B.   All homegrown medical marijuana plants must be grown so that the
marijuana is not accessible to a member of the general public and is only
accessible to the patient or caregiver. If grown outdoors, marijuana must be
grown behind an opaque fence that is at least six feet (6') in height. The
marijuana plants must be completely enclosed by the fence and the fence must be
secured with a lock and key. No marijuana plants may be visible from any street
or any adjacent property.
   C.   The primary use of the residential property in which marijuana is grown
shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking,
eating, sleeping and sanitation/bathing facilities with proper ingress and
egress. No room shall be used for growing marijuana where such cultivation will
impair or prevent the primary uses of cooking, eating, sleeping or sanitation/
bathing.
   D.   Growing marijuana for personal medical use shall be limited to a single
private residence.
   E.   Growing marijuana shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.
   F.   The growing area including any lighting, plumbing or electrical
components used shall comply with municipal building, electrical, plumbing, and
fire codes. The growing area must be properly ventilated so as not to create
humidity, mold or other related problems. Lighting shall not exceed one
thousand (1,000) watts per light.
   G.   The use of gas products (C02, butane, and the like) or C02 and ozone
generators in the growing area is prohibited.
   H.   Growing medical marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that
constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if
growing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is
detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of life and property. (Ord. 436, 12-16-2019)
3-11-11:APPROVAL, ISSUANCE, DENIAL AND APPEAL:
   A.   All inspections, review and process of any application under this
chapter shall be completed within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete
application and all required fees. The City Manager or the City Manager's
designee shall approve or deny the certificate of compliance within one hundred
twenty (120) days of receipt of the completed application and fees. The
processing time may be extended upon written notice by City Manager or the City
Manager's designee for good cause, and any failure to meet the required
processing times shall not result in the automatic grant of the certificate of
compliance.
   B.   Any denial must be in writing and must state the reason(s) for denial.
Any final denial of a certificate of compliance may be appealed to a court of
competent jurisdiction; provided that the pendency of an appeal shall not stay
or extend the issuance of, or expiration of any certificate of compliance.
   C.   Neither the City Manager nor the City Manager's designee has any
obligation to process or approve any incomplete application, and any times
provided under this chapter shall not begin to run until the City Manager or
the City Manager's designee receives a complete application as determined by
the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. A determination of a complete
application shall not prohibit the City from requiring supplemental
information.
   D.   Renewal applications shall require approval by City Manager or the City
Manager's designee and shall be submitted to and received by the City not less
than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the annual certificate of
compliance. A certificate of compliance holder whose certificate of compliance
expires and for which a complete renewal application has not been received by
the expiration date shall be deemed to have forfeited the certificate of
compliance under this chapter. Neither the City Manager nor the City Manager's
designee will accept renewal applications after the expiration date of the
certificate of compliance. The same requirements that apply to all new
applications for a certificate of compliance apply to all renewal applications.
   E.   Any marijuana establishment that applies for a certificate of
compliance shall not commence operations until the certificate of compliance
has been approved. (Ord. 436, 12-16-2019)
3-11-12:ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Smoking and vaping marijuana shall be prohibited on all City property
including vehicles, buildings, parks, City sidewalks, streets, or other
facilities.
   B.   Revocation Or Suspension Of Municipal Issued Marijuana License;
Hearing: The City Manager or designee shall revoke or suspend a license issued
under this chapter on any of the following grounds:
      1.   Violation of any City ordinance, state law, Department of Health
regulations, Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority regulations, the Oklahoma
Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Control regulations, or any other laws
governing medical marijuana.
      2.   The license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement,
or omission of a material fact or a fact concerning the applicant, the
facility, or the products being used at the facility was not properly disclosed
at the time of the application, and such fact(s) would have constituted just
cause for refusal to issue the license.
      3.   Prior to suspension or revocation the permittee shall be given
notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be
heard before the City Manager or designee. If an employee has been designated
by the City Manager, such designee shall make a report to the City Manager
together with a recommendation as to whether the license should be suspended or
revoked.
   C.   Revocation of any Department of Health marijuana license shall result
in the immediate revocation of any city issued certificate of compliance under
this chapter. Any person or entity applying for or issued a certificate of
compliance by the City under this chapter shall comply with all state laws,
rules and regulations. (Ord. 436, 12-16-2019)
3-11-13:PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   No commercial marijuana establishment shall allow the consumption of
alcohol, medical marijuana, or medical marijuana products on the premises.
   B.   The smell of noxious odor emitted from smoking or consumption of
medical marijuana by a person possessing a valid state issued medical marijuana
license shall constitute a public nuisance.
   C.   No commercial marijuana establishment shall employ any person under the
age of eighteen (18).
   D.   No grower, processor, tester, educator or researcher shall allow for,
or provide the delivery of medical marijuana products to patient license
holders or caregiver's license holders.
   E.   No commercial establishment shall engage in false advertising, as
prohibited by law. A medical marijuana business shall not engage in advertising
that is deceptive, false or misleading. Medical marijuana advertising shall not
contain any statement or illustration that:
      1.   Promotes over-consumption;
      2.   Represents that the use of marijuana has curative or therapeutic
effects; or
      3.   Depicts a child or other person under legal age to consume
marijuana, or includes:
         a.   Objects such as toys or cartoon or other characters, which
suggest the presence of a child, or any of the depiction designed in any manner
to be especially appealing to children or other persons under legal age to
consume marijuana; or
         b.   Any manner or design that would be especially appealing to
children or other persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
   F.   A medical marijuana business shall not include in any form of
advertising or signage any content that specifically targets individuals under
the age of eighteen (18), including but not limited to cartoon characters or
similar images. (See title 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 427.21(B).) (Ord. 436,
12-16-2019)
3-11-14:VIOLATION; PENALTY; NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
   A.   Any person convicted of violating sections 3-11-2 through 3-11-13 shall
be guilty of an offense, and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
   B.   The distribution, growing, processing, testing, researching or
possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition or display, in any place of
business without a valid certificate of compliance issued by the City is
declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the City. This remedy
shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by the law including the
penalty provision applicable for the violation of the terms and provisions of
this code. (Ord. 436, 12-16-2019)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
General Health Regulations   1
Civil Defense   2
Nuisances   3
  Condemnation Of Dilapidated Buildings   3A
  Boarding And Securing Dilapidated Buildings   3B
  Cleaning And Mowing Of Property   3C
  Graffiti   3D
Fireworks And Explosives   4
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Contagious Diseases
4-1-2: Throwing Medicine On Street
4-1-3: Penalty
4-1-1: CONTAGIOUS DISEASES:
   A.   Introducing Diseases:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person affected with, or exposed to,
any contagious or infectious disease to be upon any street or in any public
place in the city. The purpose of this requirement is to avoid exposing other
persons to such a disease.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or person having
charge of any child or children to allow, or permit, such child or children to
attend any classes, school or any gathering of people, or to appear upon any
street or in any public place in the city while infected with, or exposed to,
any contagious or infectious disease, or in any manner to allow other persons
to be exposed to such a disease. (1985 Code § 9-1)
      3.   No person suffering from, or infected with, a communicable form of
disease shall engage in any occupation involving intimate contact with persons,
food or food products. (1985 Code § 9-1; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Report Of Contagious Diseases:
      1.   Every physician practicing in the city shall report to the county
health official, within six (6) hours after the diagnosis of the same, the
appearance of any of the following diseases: diphtheria (including membranous
croup), scarlet fever, smallpox, yellow fever, typhoid fever, typhus fever,
Asiatic cholera, chicken pox, tuberculosis, undulant fever, acute anterior,
poliomyelitis (infantile paralysis), epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis,
whooping cough, mumps, or any other pestilential, infectious or contagious
disease.
      2.   Syphilis, gonococcus infection and chancroid are hereby and
hereinafter recognized and declared to be contagious, infectious, communicable
and dangerous to the public health.
      3.   The statutes of the state of Oklahoma governing the diseases stated
hereinbefore shall apply to all cases of this nature, after said report is
made. (1985 Code § 9-2; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Quarantine:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, or go upon, any ground
or premises under quarantine without first having obtained permission to do so
from the local or county health official.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person whom the local or county health
official shall have ordered to be detained in quarantine to neglect or refuse
to be so detained, or to wilfully violate any quarantine regulation thereof.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, remove, deface,
mutilate or destroy any order, notice or flag that may be posted or displayed
by the local or county health official.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully violate, or refuse
to comply with, any lawful order, direction, prohibition, rule or regulation of
any officer or official charged with enforcement of such order, direction,
prohibition, rule or regulation. (1985 Code § 9-3)
4-1-2: THROWING MEDICINE ON STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any person, company or corporation to leave, throw or
deposit, or cause to be left, thrown or deposited, upon any street, avenue,
alley, sidewalk, park or any other public place, or on any private property
within the city, any medicine of any kind or description whatever. (1985 Code §
9-28)
4-1-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or maintains or permits
to continue any public nuisance as defined by this chapter, shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. Every day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed
a separate offense. (1985 Code § 9-35; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
CIVIL DEFENSE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Liability
4-2-3: Accepting Federal, State Or Private Aid
4-2-4: Emergency Operations Center
4-2-5: Penalty
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
CIVIL DEFENSE: The preparation for, and carrying out of, all emergency
functions, other than functions for which primary responsibility is assigned
elsewhere by federal, state or local law or ordinance, to protect the public
peace, health and safety and to preserve lives and property in the city during
any emergency resulting from enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or
from any flood, drought, fire, hurricane, earthquake, storm or other
catastrophe in or near said community, and involving imminent or actual peril
to life and property. These functions include administration, organization,
planning, recruiting, training, education, information, welfare service, relief
service, police service, warden service, fire service, rescue service, medical
service, health service, transportation service, communications service,
streets and sewers service, utilities service, general engineering service,
plant protection service, supply service, mutual aid, mobile support,
evacuation and all other functions necessary or incidental to the preparation
for any carrying out of the foregoing functions.
ENEMY CAUSED EMERGENCY: Any state of emergency caused by actual or impending
attack, sabotage or other hostile action, anywhere within the United States and
involving imminent peril to lives and property in the city. Such emergency
shall be deemed to exist only when the mayor shall so declare any public
proclamation and such emergency shall be deemed to exist until the aforesaid
mayor shall declare its termination by public proclamation, or until the city
council shall declare its termination by resolution.
NATURAL EMERGENCY: Any state of emergency caused by any actual or impending
flood, drought, fire, hurricane, earthquake, storm or other catastrophe in or
near the city, and involving imminent peril to lives and property. Such
emergency shall be deemed to exist and to be terminated under the same
conditions as prescribed for an "enemy caused emergency". (1985 Code § 6-10)
4-2-2: LIABILITY:
   A.   Neither the city, nor any office, or member of the civil defense
organization provided for in this chapter shall be liable for personal injury
or property damage sustained by any person appointed or acting as a volunteer
civil defense worker or member of any agency engaged in civil defense activity
prior to, or during, either an enemy caused or a natural emergency.
   B.   Nor shall the city or any such officer or member be liable for the
death or injury of any persons, or damage to property, resulting from such
civil defense activity prior to, or during, either an enemy caused or a natural
emergency. (1985 Code § 6-11)
4-2-3: ACCEPTING FEDERAL, STATE OR PRIVATE AID:
Whenever the federal government, the state of Oklahoma, or any person, firm or
corporation shall offer to the city any services, equipment, supplies,
materials or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for purposes of civil
defense, the mayor may accept such offer and may authorize the civil defense
director to receive the same, subject to the terms of the offer and the rules
and regulations, if any, of the agency making the offer. (1985 Code § 6-12)
4-2-4: EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER:
   A.   Center Established: A civil defense emergency operations center is
hereby established for the city.
   B.   Operation Of Center: Operation of the center shall be in conformance
with appropriate rules and regulations adopted by motion of the city council.
(1985 Code § 6-13)
4-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (1985 Code § 6-20; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Nuisance Defined
4-3-3: Council Determine And Define Nuisances
4-3-4: Nuisance Unlawful
4-3-5: Possible Remedies
4-3-6: Person Liable
4-3-7: Hearing Officer Designated; Appeal By Property Owner
4-3-8: Procedures Cumulative
4-3-9: Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings listed
hereinbelow:
   OWNER: The owner(s) of record, as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
county treasurer.
   TRASH: Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible
materials, rubbish, offal, waste or other matter of any kind or form which is
uncared for, discarded or abandoned.
   WEEDS: A. Shall include, but not be limited to, poison ivy, poison oak,
poison sumac and all vegetation at any stage of maturity, which:
      1.   Exceeds twelve inches (12") in height, except healthy trees, shrubs
or produce for human consumption grown in a tended and cultivated garden,
unless such trees and shrubbery, by their density or location, constitute a
detriment to the health, benefit, safety and/or welfare of the public or
community, create a traffic or fire hazard, or otherwise interfere with the
mowing of said weeds;
      2.   Conceals or invites deposition or accumulation of refuse or trash,
regardless of the height of the vegetation;
      3.   Harbors rodents or vermin;
      4.   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
      5.   Constitutes a traffic or fire hazard; or
      6.   Is dead or diseased.
   B.   Provided, that, the term "weed" shall not include tended crops on land
zoned for agricultural use, which crops are planted more than one hundred fifty
feet (150') from a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use. (1985 Code §
12-1)
4-3-2: NUISANCE DEFINED:
A nuisance consists of unlawfully doing an act, omitting to perform a duty or
any thing or condition which:
   A.   Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of
others;
   B.   Makes, continues, or causes to be made or continued, within the limits
of the city, any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise or any noise
which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace, or safety of others;
   C.   Offends public decency;
   D.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or renders
dangerous for use, any lake, drainageway, stream, stream basin, public park,
street or other public property; or
   E.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property. (1985 Code § 12-4) (amd. Ord. 432, 8-27-2019)
4-3-3: COUNCIL DETERMINE AND DEFINE NUISANCES:
The city council has the power to determine what is and what shall constitute a
nuisance within the corporate limits of the city, and, for the protection of
the public health, parks and water supply outside of the corporate limits of
the city. (1985 Code § 12-3)
4-3-4: NUISANCE UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person (owner, lessee or other) to create or
maintain a nuisance, or to permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his
control, within the corporate limits of the city. (1985 Code § 12-2)
4-3-5: POSSIBLE REMEDIES:
   A.   Public Nuisances:
      1.   A "public nuisance" is one which affects, at the same time, an
entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although
the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be
unequal.
      2.   The possible remedies against a public nuisance are:
         a.   Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court;
         b.   Prosecution of information or indictment before another
appropriate court;
         c.   Civil action; and
         d.   Abatement:
            (1)   By the person injured; or
            (2)   By the city, in accordance with state law or ordinance.
      3.   No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an
actual obstruction of public right. (1985 Code § 12-5)
   B.   Private Nuisances:
      1.   Every nuisance not included in subsection A of this section is a
"private nuisance".
      2.   The possible remedies against a private nuisance are:
         a.   Civil action; and
         b.   Abatement:
            (1)   By the person injured; or
            (2)   By the city, in accordance with state law or ordinance. (1985
Code § 12-6)
4-3-6: PERSON LIABLE:
Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance
upon or in the use of such property created by a former owner is liable
therefor in the same manner as the person who first created it. (1985 Code §
12-7)
4-3-7: HEARING OFFICER DESIGNATED; APPEAL BY PROPERTY OWNER:
   A.   Hearing Officer Designated: For the purposes of this chapter, the city
has designated the fire chief or his designee as the hearing officer to conduct
all hearings as provided in this chapter (including articles A through D).
   B.   Right To Appeal:
      1.   Following any hearing by the hearing officer, the property owner or
any affected party shall have a right to appeal to the city council any finding
or order of the hearing officer.
      2.   Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with
the city clerk within ten (10) days after the administrative order is rendered.
(Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3-8: PROCEDURES CUMULATIVE:
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by
other provisions of state law and ordinances shall be cumulative one to the
other. The city council may elect to follow any such procedure which is
applicable in abating any particular nuisance. (1985 Code § 12-8)
4-3-9: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter by doing any act
prohibited, declared to be unlawful thereby or declared to be a nuisance, an
offense or misdemeanor thereby, or who fails to do any act required by any such
provision, who fails to do any act when such provision declares such failure to
be unlawful or to be an offense or misdemeanor, who violates any legal order or
regulation made pursuant to this chapter, or who maintains any "nuisance" as
defined in this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. Each day upon which any such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. (1985 Code § 12-30; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE A.  CONDEMNATION OF DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-3A-1: Definitions
4-3A-2: City Authority
4-3A-3: Procedure For Demolition Or Removal
4-3A-4: Abating As Nuisance
4-3A-5: Nonliability Of City
4-3A-6: Exception
4-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
DILAPIDATED BUILDING: A structure which through neglect or injury lacks
necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such
an extent that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of
the general public or a vacant structure which is unfit for human occupancy due
to the lack of necessary repairs and is considered uninhabitable and is a
hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county
treasurer. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3A-2: CITY AUTHORITY:
The city may cause dilapidated buildings within the city limits to be torn down
and removed in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 362, 4-25-
2000)
4-3A-3: PROCEDURE FOR DEMOLITION OR REMOVAL:
   A.   Notice Of Demolition Or Removal:
      1.   At least ten (10) days' notice that a building is to be torn down or
removed shall be given to the owner of the property before the hearing officer
holds a hearing. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to be
affected. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent by mail to the
property owner at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the
office of the county treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to any
mortgage holder as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk to
the last known address of the mortgagee.
      2.   At the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage
holder, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service,
which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of
the mailee.
      3.   However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be
located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property,
or by "publication", as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-102. The
notice may be published once not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing
by the hearing officer or action by city pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
   B.   Hearing To Determine Dilapidation: A hearing shall be held by the
hearing officer to determine if the property is dilapidated and has become
detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public and the
community, or if the property creates a fire hazard which is dangerous to other
property.
   C.   City Abatement; Lien For Costs:
      1.   Pursuant to a finding by the hearing officer that the condition of
the property constitutes a detriment or a hazard and that the property would be
benefited by the removal of such conditions, the city may cause the dilapidated
building to be torn down and removed. The city shall fix reasonable dates for
the commencement and completion of the work.
      2.   The city clerk shall immediately file a notice of dilapidation and
lien with the county clerk describing the property, the findings of the hearing
officer at the hearing, and stating that the city claims a lien on the property
for the destruction and removal costs and that such costs are the personal
obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing of the
notice.
      3.   The agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the
property for the performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function
of the city if the work is not performed by the property owner within dates
fixed by the city.
   D.   Determine Costs; Issue Statement:
      1.   The city shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and
removal of dilapidated buildings and any other expenses that may be necessary
in conjunction with the dismantling and removal of the buildings, including the
cost of notice and mailing.
      2.   The city clerk shall forward a statement of the actual cost
attributable to the dismantling and removal of the buildings and a demand for
payment of such costs, by mail to the property owner. In addition, a copy of
the statement shall be mailed to any mortgage holder at the address provided
for in subsection A1 of this section. At the time of mailing of the statement
of costs to any property owner or mortgage holder, the city shall obtain a
receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the
date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee.
      3.   If the city dismantles or removes any dilapidated buildings, the
cost to the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor,
maintenance, and equipment required for the dismantling and removal of the
dilapidated buildings. If dismantling and removal of the dilapidated buildings
is done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the
lowest and best bidder.
   E.   County Collection; Lien For Nonpayment:
      1.   When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city clerk
shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to the actual cost of
the dismantling and removal of the buildings is not made within six (6) months
from the date of the mailing of the statement to the owner of such property,
the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to
the county treasurer.
      2.   The costs shall be levied on the property and collected by the
county treasurer as are other taxes authorized by law. Until finally paid, the
costs and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property
owner from and after the date of the notice of dilapidation and lien is filed
with the county clerk.
      3.   In addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien
against the property from the date the notice of the lien is filed with the
county clerk. The lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and
all other taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and superior to all
other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall continue until the
cost is fully paid.
      4.   At the time of collection, the county treasurer shall collect a fee
of five dollars ($5.00) for each parcel of property. The fee shall be deposited
to the credit of the general fund of the county.
      5.   At any time prior to collection as provided for in this subsection,
the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and
interest thereon including an action in personam against the property owner and
an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property.
      6.   A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not
owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien
created pursuant to this section.
      7.   Upon receiving payment, the city clerk shall forward to the county
treasurer a notice of such payment and shall direct discharge of the lien.
(Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3A-4: ABATING AS NUISANCE:
Nothing in the provisions of this article shall prevent the city from abating a
dilapidated building as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power to
protect the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. (Ord. 362, 4-25-
2000)
4-3A-5: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The officers, employees or agents of the city shall not be liable for any
damages or loss of property due to the removal of dilapidated buildings
performed pursuant to the provisions of this article or as otherwise prescribed
by law. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3A-6: EXCEPTION:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any property zoned and used
for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
ARTICLE B.  BOARDING AND SECURING DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-3B-1: Definitions
4-3B-2: City Authority
4-3B-3: Procedure For Boarding Or Securing
4-3B-4: Exception
4-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   BOARDING AND SECURING OR BOARDED AND SECURED: The closing, boarding or
locking of any or all exterior openings so as to prevent entry into the
structure.
   UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY: A structure that due to lack of necessary repairs
is considered uninhabitable and is a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare
of the general public.
   UNSECURED BUILDING: Any structure which is not occupied by a legal or
equitable owner thereof, or by a lessee of a legal or equitable owner, and into
which there are one or more unsecured openings such as broken windows, unlocked
windows, broken doors, unlocked doors, holes in exterior walls, holes in the
roof, broken basement or cellar hatchways, unlocked basement or cellar
hatchways or other similar unsecured openings which would facilitate an
unauthorized entry into the structure. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3B-2: CITY AUTHORITY:
   A.   Securing Or Demolishing Building: After a building has been declared
dilapidated, as provided in article A of this chapter, and before the
commencement of the tearing down and removal of a dilapidated building, the
city may authorize that such a building be boarded and secured. However, if the
dilapidated building is vacant and unfit for human occupancy, the city may
authorize the structure to be demolished pursuant to article A of this chapter.
   B.   Cleaning Property: The city may cause the premises on which an
unsecured building is located to be cleaned of trash and weeds in accordance
with the provisions of article C of this chapter. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3B-3: PROCEDURE FOR BOARDING OR SECURING:
The city may cause an unsecured building to be boarded and secured in
accordance with the following procedures:
   A.   Notice; City Abatement; Costs:
      1.   Before the city orders such action, at least ten (10) days' notice
that such unsecured building is to be boarded and secured shall be given by
mail to any property owners and mortgage holders as provided in article A of
this chapter. At the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or
mortgage holder, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal
service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and
address of the mailee. A copy of the notice shall also be posted on the
property to be affected. However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage
holder can be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on
the property or by "publication", as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-
102. Such notice shall be published one time, not less than ten (10) days prior
to any hearing or action by the hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
      2.   If the city anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in
accordance with the provisions of subsection H of this section, the notice
shall state that:
Any subsequent need for boarding and securing the building within a six (6)
month period after the initial boarding and securing of the building pursuant
to such notice may be summarily boarded and secured by the city; that the costs
of such boarding and securing shall be assessed against the owner; and that a
lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further
prior notice to the property owner or mortgage holder.
   B.   Written Consent Of Owner: The owner of the property may give written
consent to the city authorizing the boarding and securing of such unsecured
building and to the payment of any costs incurred thereby. By giving written
consent, the owner waives any right the owner has to a hearing by the hearing
officer.
   C.   Hearing To Determine Necessity:
      1.   If the property owner does not give written consent to such actions,
a hearing may be held by the hearing officer to determine whether the boarding
and securing of such unsecured building would promote and benefit the public
health, safety or welfare. Such hearing may be held in conjunction with a
hearing on the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass on the
premises of such unsecured building. In making such determination, the hearing
officer shall apply the following standard: a) the hearing officer may order
the boarding and securing of the unsecured building when the boarding and
securing thereof would make such building less available for transient
occupation, b) decrease a fire hazard created by such building, or, c) decrease
the hazard that such building would constitute an attractive nuisance to
children.
      2.   Upon making the required determination, the hearing officer may
order the boarding and securing of the unsecured building.
   D.   Filing Notice And Lien With County: After the hearing officer orders
the boarding and securing of such unsecured building, the city clerk shall
immediately file a notice of unsecured building and lien with the county clerk
describing the property, stating the findings of the hearing officer at the
hearing at which such building was determined to be unsecured, and stating that
the city claims a lien on the property for the costs of boarding and securing
such building and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property
owner from and after the date of filing the notice.
   E.   Right Of Entry Of City: Pursuant to the order of the hearing officer,
the agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the property for the
performance of the boarding and securing of such building and for the
performance of all necessary duties as a governmental function of the city.
   F.   Determine Costs; Issue Statement:
      1.   After an unsecured building has been boarded and secured, the city
shall determine the actual costs of such actions and any other expenses that
may be necessary in conjunction therewith including the cost of the notice and
mailing. The city clerk shall forward a statement of the actual costs
attributable to the boarding and securing of the unsecured building and a
demand for payment of such costs, by mail to any property owners and mortgage
holders as provided in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-112. At the time of
mailing of the statement of costs to any property owner or mortgage holder, the
city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt
shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee.
      2.   If the city boards and secures any unsecured building, the cost to
the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, materials and
equipment required for the performance of such actions. If such actions are
done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest
and best bidder.
   G.   County Collection; Lien For Nonpayment:
      1.   When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city clerk
shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to the actual costs
of the boarding and securing of the unsecured building is not made within
thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the statement to the owner of
such property, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount
of the costs to the county treasurer. The costs shall be levied on the property
and collected by the county treasurer as are other taxes authorized by law.
Until fully paid, the costs and the interest thereon shall be the personal
obligation of the property owner from and after the date the notice of
unsecured building and lien is filed with the county clerk. In addition the
costs and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the
date the notice of the lien is filed with the county clerk. The lien shall be
coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special
assessments and shall be prior and superior to all other titles and liens
against the property. The lien shall continue until the costs and interest are
fully paid. At any time prior to collection as provided for in this subsection,
the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and
interest thereon including an action in personam against the property owner and
an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property.
      2.   A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not
owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien
created pursuant to this section.
      3.   Upon receiving payment, the city clerk shall forward to the county
treasurer a notice of such payment and shall direct discharge of the lien.
   H.   Subsequent Need For Securing: If the city or the hearing officer orders
or causes a structure within the city limits to be boarded and secured, any
subsequent need for boarding and securing within a six (6) month period
constitutes a public nuisance and may be summarily boarded and secured without
further prior notice to the property owner or mortgage holder. At the time of
each such summary boarding and securing, the city shall notify the property
owner and mortgage holder of the boarding and securing and the costs thereof.
The notice shall state that the property owner may request an appeal with the
city clerk within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notice. The notice and
hearing shall be as provided for in subsection A of this section. Unless
otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such boarding and securing
shall be determined and collected as provided for in subsections F and G of
this section.
   I.   Order Securing Before Determination: The city may determine that a
building is unsecured and order that such building be boarded and secured in
the manner provided for in this subsection even though such building has not
been declared, by the hearing officer, to be dilapidated. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3B-4: EXCEPTION:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any property zoned and used
for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
ARTICLE C.  CLEANING AND MOWING OF PROPERTY
SECTION:
4-3C-1: Definitions
4-3C-2: Procedure For Ordering Cleaning Or Removal
4-3C-3: Subsequent Accumulations; Summary Abatement
4-3C-4: Exception
4-3C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
   CLEANING: The removal of trash from property.
   OWNER: The term "owner" shall have the definition set forth in section
4-3-1 of this chapter.
   TRASH: The term "trash" shall have the definition set forth in section
4-3-1 of this chapter.
   WEED: The term "weed" shall have the definition set forth in section
4-3-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3C-2: PROCEDURE FOR ORDERING CLEANING OR REMOVAL:
The city may cause property within the city limits to be cleaned of trash and
weeds, or grass to be cut or mowed, in accordance with the following procedure:
   A.   Notice Of Order To Clean Property; City Abatement; Costs:
      1.   At least ten (10) days' notice shall be given to the owner of the
property by mail at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the
county treasurer's office before the hearing officer holds a hearing or the
city takes action. The notice shall order the property owner to clean the
property of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as
appropriate, and said notice shall further state that unless such work is
performed within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the work shall be
done by the city and a notice of lien shall be filed with the county clerk
against the property for the costs due and owing the city.
      2.   At the time of mailing of notice to the property owner, the city
shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall
indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. However,
if the property owner cannot be located within ten (10) days from the date of
mailing by the city, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the
property or by "publication", as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-102,
one time not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action by the
city.
      3.   If the city anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in
accordance with the provisions of section
 4-3C-3 of this article, the notice, whether by certified mail, posting or
publication, shall state that:
Any accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the owner's
property occurring within six (6) months from and after the date of this notice
may be summarily abated by the city; that the costs of such abatement shall be
assessed against the owner; and that a lien may be imposed on the property to
secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner.
   B.   Written Consent Of Owner: The owner of the property may give his
written consent to the city authorizing the removal of the trash or the mowing
of the weeds or grass. By giving said written consent, the owner waives his
right to a hearing by the hearing officer.
   C.   Hearing To Determine Hazardous Condition: A hearing may be held by the
hearing officer to determine whether the accumulation of trash or the growth of
weeds or grass has caused the property to become detrimental to the health,
benefit, and welfare of the public and the community or a hazard to traffic, or
creates a fire hazard to the danger of property.
   D.   Right Of Entry By City; Filing Notice Of Lien:
      1.   Upon a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or hazard, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of
such conditions, the agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the
property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or grass, and performance of
the necessary duties as a governmental function of the city.
      2.   Immediately following the cleaning or mowing of the property, the
city clerk shall file a notice of lien with the county clerk describing the
property and the work performed by the city, and stating that the city claims a
lien on said property for the cleaning or mowing costs.
   E.   Determine Costs; Issue Statement:
      1.   The city shall determine the actual cost of such cleaning and mowing
and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith, including
the cost of notice and mailing.
      2.   The city clerk shall forward by mail to the property owner specified
in subsection A of this section a statement of such actual cost and demanding
payment.
      3.   If the cleaning and mowing are done by the city, the cost to the
property owner for said cleaning and mowing shall not exceed the actual cost of
the labor, maintenance, and equipment required. If the cleaning and mowing are
done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest
and best bidder.
   F.   County Collection; Lien For Nonpayment:
      1.   If payment is not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the
mailing of the statement, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of
the amount of the cost to the county treasurer and the same shall be levied on
the property and collected by the county treasurer as other taxes authorized by
law.
      2.   Until fully paid, the cost and the interest thereon shall be the
personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date the cost is
certified to the county treasurer.
      3.   In addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien
against the property from the date the cost is certified to the county
treasurer, coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and
special assessments and prior and superior to all other titles and liens
against the property, and the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully
paid.
      4.   At the time of collection, the county treasurer shall collect a fee
of five dollars ($5.00) for each parcel of property. Said fee shall be
deposited to the credit of the general fund of the county.
      5.   At any time prior to the collection as provided in this subsection
F, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and
interest thereon including an action in personam against the property owner and
an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property.
      6.   A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not
owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien
created pursuant to this section.
      7.   Upon receiving payment, if any, the city clerk shall forward to the
county treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the lien.
(Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3C-3: SUBSEQUENT ACCUMULATIONS; SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
   A.   Declaration Of Nuisance: If notice is given by the city to a property
owner ordering the property within the city limits to be cleaned of trash and
weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the procedure provided for
in subsection
 4-3C-2A of this article, any subsequent accumulations of trash or excessive
weed or grass growth on the property occurring within a six (6) month period
may be declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated without further
prior notice to the property owner.
   B.   Notify Property Owner; Hearing: At the time of each such summary
abatement, the city shall notify the property owner of the abatement and the
costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may request a
hearing within ten (10) days after the date of mailing the notice. The notice
and hearing shall be as provided for in article A of this chapter.
   C.   Cost Determined And Collected: Unless otherwise determined at the
hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected as
provided for in subsections
4-3C-2E and F of this article. Provided, however, that this subsection shall
not apply if the records of the county clerk show that the property was
transferred after notice was given pursuant to subsection
4-3C-2A of this article. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3C-4: EXCEPTION:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any property zoned and used
for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
ARTICLE D.  GRAFFITI
SECTION:
4-3D-1: Definitions
4-3D-2: Graffiti Removal; Procedure
4-3D-3: Subsequent Accumulations; Summary Abatement
4-3D-4: City Expense; Restoration Of Property
4-3D-5: Abatement As Nuisance
4-3D-6: Nonliability Of City
4-3D-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   ADVERTISING: Any letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message,
drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind lawfully placed on
property by an owner or tenant of the property, or an agent of such owner or
tenant, for the purpose of promoting products or services or conveying
information to the public.
   GRAFFITI: Any letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing,
picture, writing, or other mark of any kind visible to the public that is
drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched or etched on a rock, tree, wall, bridge,
fence, gate, building or other structure; provided, that this definition shall
not include advertising or any other letter, word, name, number, symbol,
slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind lawfully
placed on property by an owner of the property, a tenant of the property, or by
an authorized agent for such owner or tenant.
   OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
county treasurer.
   REMOVAL, REMOVE OR REMOVED: When used in relation to the eradication of
graffiti, means the act of taking graffiti off of, or masking the presence of
graffiti on, a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other
structure.
   TENANT: Any person shown by the records of the county clerk's office as a
lessee of property, or any person lawfully in actual physical possession of
property. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3D-2: GRAFFITI REMOVAL; PROCEDURE:
The city may cause graffiti to be removed from property within the city limits
in accordance with the following procedures:
   A.   Consent Of Property Owner:
      1.   The property owner and the tenant, if any, may give their written
consent to the city authorizing removal of the graffiti. By giving such written
consent, the owner and the tenant each waives the right to notice and a hearing
by the hearing officer as otherwise required by this article.
      2.   If the consent of the property owner and the tenant, if any, to
remove graffiti from the property cannot be obtained, the city may remove the
graffiti without such consent pursuant to the procedures set forth in this
article.
   B.   Notice Of Removal; City Abatement:
      1.   To remove graffiti from property without the consent of the property
owner and the tenant, if any, at least ten (10) days' notice shall be given by
mail directed to the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the
county treasurer's office. Notice to the tenant, if any, shall be given by mail
directed to the property address. The notice shall order the property owner and
the tenant, if any, to remove graffiti from the property and shall further
state that unless such work is performed within twenty (20) days of the date of
the notice, the work shall be done by the city.
      2.   At the time of mailing of notice to the property owner and the
tenant, if any, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal
service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and
address of the mailee(s). In addition, notice shall be given by posting a copy
of the notice on the property at least one time not less than ten (10) days
prior to any hearing by the hearing officer or action by the city.
      3.   If the city anticipates summary abatement of graffiti in accordance
with the provisions of section
4-3D-3 of this article, the notice shall state that any accumulations of
graffiti on the property occurring within one year from and after the date of
the notice may be summarily abated by the city without a hearing and further
prior notice to the property owner or the tenant, if any, except by posting of
notice at least one time on the property not less than two (2) business days
prior to such summary abatement.
   C.   Hearing To Determine Detrimental Condition: A hearing may be held by
the hearing officer to determine whether the accumulation of graffiti on the
property has caused the property to become detrimental or a hazard to the
health, safety, or general welfare of the public and the community.
   D.   Right Of Entry By City: Upon finding that the condition of the property
constitutes a detriment or hazard, and that the property, the public, and the
community would be benefited by removal of such conditions, the agents of the
city are granted the right of entry onto the property for the removal of the
graffiti thereon and for performance of the necessary duties as a governmental
function of the city. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3D-3: SUBSEQUENT ACCUMULATIONS; SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
   A.   Abatement Without Notice To Owner: If a notice is given by the city to
a property owner and tenant, if any, ordering graffiti to be removed from
property within the city limits in accordance with the procedures provided for
in section
4-3D-2 of this article, any subsequent accumulations of graffiti on the
property occurring within a one year period may be summarily abated without
further prior notice to the property owner or the tenant, if any.
   B.   Posting Notice On Property: However, prior to the summary abatement by
the city, notice thereof shall be posted at least one time on the property not
less than two (2) business days prior to such summary abatement.
   C.   Exception: This subsection shall not apply if the records of the county
clerk show that the ownership and/or tenancy of the property was transferred
after notice was given pursuant to section
4-3D-2 of this article. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3D-4: CITY EXPENSE; RESTORATION OF PROPERTY:
   A.   City Expense: Removal of graffiti by the city pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be performed at the sole expense of the city.
   B.   Restoration Of Property: In removing the graffiti, the city shall
restore the property as nearly as possible to the condition as it existed
immediately prior to the graffiti being placed on the property. (Ord. 362, 4-
25-2000)
4-3D-5: ABATEMENT AS NUISANCE:
Nothing in the provisions of this article shall prevent the city from abating
graffiti as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power to protect the
health, safety, or general welfare of the public. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
4-3D-6: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The city and its officers, employees or agents shall not be liable for any
damages or loss of property due to the removal of graffiti performed pursuant
to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 362, 4-25-2000)
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Fireworks; Discharge, Public Displays
4-4-2: Explosives, Storage
4-4-3: Penalty
4-4-1: FIREWORKS; DISCHARGE, PUBLIC DISPLAYS:
   A.   Definition: The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any composition
or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and which is defined as
common or special fireworks by the United States department of transportation
(DOT). Fireworks are further classified as class C or class B. The term
"fireworks" shall not include toy cap pistols and caps, blank cartridges,
railroad flares and model rockets.
      1.   Class C fireworks (DOT common fireworks) shall mean any devices
suitable for use by the public that conform with the requirements of the United
States consumer products safety commission (CPSC) and are designed primarily to
produce visible effects by combustion, and some small devices designed to
produce an audible effect.
      2.   Class B display fireworks (DOT special fireworks) shall mean all
articles of larger fireworks designed primarily to produce visible or audible
effects by combustion or explosion. Class B fireworks include, but are not
limited to, firecrackers and salutes containing more than two (2) grains (130
mg) of explosive composition and other exhibition display items that exceed the
limits for classification as class C fireworks according to the United States
department of transportation. (2004 Code)
   B.   Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm
or corporation to sell or to discharge, ignite or in any manner aid, assist or
abet in the discharging or igniting of any firecrackers of any size, type or
description, skyrockets, pistols, torpedoes, Roman candles, flash salutes,
flash crackers, balloons or other fireworks or substances designed and intended
for pyrotechnic display, or small display ground pieces, canes, cap pistols,
cannons or other appliances using caps containing chlorate of potash mixture
within the corporate limits of the city; provided, that, the firing and
discharging of such fireworks may be permitted within any city park when the
same is supervised by a city official; and provided further, that the city
administrator may order or permit public display of fireworks by properly
qualified individuals under the direction of experts in the handling of such
fireworks. (1985 Code § 7-25)
4-4-2: EXPLOSIVES, STORAGE:
   A.   Compliance With State Law:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, keep, have on their
premises or in their possession any explosive materials of any kind or nature
without first having complied with the laws of the state of Oklahoma for the
purpose of selling, storing or keeping such articles.
      2.   Any person storing explosives for sale to the general public must
comply with the laws of the state of Oklahoma concerning the sale and storage
of said explosives.
   B.   Dwelling Or School: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or
store any explosive on any premises which is occupied as a dwelling or school.
(1985 Code § 7-26)
4-4-3: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (1985 Code § 7-35; amd. 2004 Code)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
General Offenses   1
  Offenses Against Public Decency, Morality   1A
  Offenses Against The Peace, Persons   1B
  Offenses Against Property   1C
  Offenses Against Public Authority   1D
Minors   2
Animal Control   3
  Licensing Animals; Kennels   3A
Fair Housing   4
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-1-1: Offense Defined
5-1-2: Attempts To Commit An Offense
5-1-3: Effect Of Intoxication
5-1-4: Penalty
5-1-1: OFFENSE DEFINED:
An "offense" is hereby defined as the doing of any act or thing which, by this
chapter or any ordinance of the city is prohibited, forbidden or declared to be
unlawful, or the failure or refusal to do any act or perform any duty which, by
any provision of this chapter or by any ordinance of the city, is commanded or
required to be done. (1985 Code § 13-1)
5-1-2: ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE:
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against this city code, and in
such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense, but fails, is
prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof shall be guilty of an
offense and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the offense itself.
(1985 Code § 13-2)
5-1-3: EFFECT OF INTOXICATION:
No act committed by any person while in a state of voluntary intoxication,
whether from alcoholic beverages or drugs, shall be deemed less an offense by
reason of his being in such condition. (1985 Code § 13-3)
5-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
 1-5-1 of this code. Each day's continuation of any such violation shall be a
separate offense. (1985 Code § 13-95; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE A.  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY, MORALITY
SECTION:
5-1A-1: Gambling
5-1A-2: False Or Bogus Checks
5-1A-3: Harmful Deception
5-1A-4: Loitering
5-1A-5: Controlled Dangerous Substances
5-1A-6: Illicit Use Of Certain Chemical Compounds
5-1A-7: Immoral Conduct Or Shows; Nudity
5-1A-8: Prostitution; Immoral Acts
5-1A-9: School Grounds, Certain Conduct Prohibited
5-1A-10: Offenses Involving Alcoholic Beverages
5-1A-11: Bicycles, Skateboards, Rollerblades, Similar Devices
5-1A-1: GAMBLING:
No person, firm or corporation (or agent or employee thereof) shall play, open
or cause to be opened, operate, carry on or conduct any game of roulette,
craps, or any percentage game played with dice, for money, checks, chips,
credit or any other things of value; or shall set up, operate or permit to be
operated any slot machine or other device whatsoever where money, checks,
chips, credit or any other things of value are played, when the act of playing
the same might result in a gain or loss to the party playing; or shall gamble
knowingly in any other similar manner; or knowingly shall permit his or its
premises, houses, lot or other property to be used in connection with or for
any act declared unlawful in this chapter. (1985 Code § 13-10)
5-1A-2: FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS:
   A.   Definition: The term "false or bogus check" shall include checks or
orders given for money or property which are not honored on account of
insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, as against the maker or drawer
thereof.
   B.   Prohibited Act: It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to
cheat or defraud, to obtain, or attempt to obtain, from any person, firm or
corporation, any money, property or valuable thing, of the value of twenty
dollars ($20.00) or less, by means of any false or bogus check or by any other
written, printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin.
   C.   Evidence Of Intent: The making, drawing, issuing or delivering of a
check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be
prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient
funds in, or credit with, such bank or other depository; provided, such maker
or drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with
the protest fees, within five (5) days from the date the same is presented for
payment; and, provided further, that said check or order is presented for
payment within thirty (30) days after the same is delivered and accepted. (1985
Code § 13-11)
5-1A-3: HARMFUL DECEPTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another (whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation or otherwise), when such deception results in,
or contributes to, the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or
of a third party, or results in, or contributes to, the benefit of the
deceiver. (1985 Code § 13-12)
5-1A-4: LOITERING:
   A.   Sleeping On Streets, Public Places: It shall be unlawful for any
person, without lawful reason, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., to sleep upon any street or in any other
public place or on any property of another person, without expressed or tacit
consent of the owner or person in charge of such place.
   B.   Public Buildings: It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or
about any public building, in or about the station or depot of a public carrier
or on or about the premises of a public or private school.
   C.   Gambling Places: No person shall loiter in the immediate vicinity where
a person or persons are gambling by the use of any means or device.
   D.   Obstructing Public Streets, Businesses: It shall be unlawful for any
person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle, either alone or in
consort with others, in a public place or building, in such a manner as to:
      1.   Obstruct any public street, highway, sidewalk or any other public
place or building by hindering, impeding or tending to hinder or impede the
free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; or
      2.   Commit in or upon any public street, highway, sidewalk or any other
public place or building, any act or thing which is an obstruction or
interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or any business
lawfully conducted by anyone in, upon, facing or fronting on any such public
street, highway, sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which
prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress therein,
thereon and thereto. (1985 Code § 13-13)
5-1A-5: CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   A.   Under the influence of any narcotic, or other controlled dangerous
substance, to appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business or
other public place within the city; or
   B.   To use any narcotic or other controlled dangerous substance upon or in
any street, alley, place of business or other public place within the city; or
   C.   To use any narcotic or other controlled dangerous substance in any
place within the city, except as legally prescribed by a physician licensed to
practice in the state; or
   D.   To loiter about a place where any narcotic or other controlled
dangerous substance is sold or furnished illegally; or
   E.   To sell or furnish illegally to another person any narcotic or other
controlled dangerous substance. (1985 Code § 13-14)
5-1A-6: ILLICIT USE OF CERTAIN CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS:
   A.   Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to deliberately
smell, inhale, breathe, drink or otherwise consume any compound, liquid,
chemical, narcotic, drug or any other substance or chemical containing any
ketones, aldehydes, organic acetones, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons, such as
gasoline, glue, fingernail polish, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope or any other
substance or combination thereof containing solvents releasing toxic vapors,
with the intent to cause conditions of intoxication, inebriation, excitement,
elation, paralysis, irrationality, dulling of the brain or nervous system or
any other changing, distorting or disturbing of the eyesight, thinking
processes, judgment, balance or coordination of such person.
   B.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not pertain to any
person who inhales, breathes, drinks or otherwise consumes such material or
substance pursuant to the direction or prescription of any licensed doctor,
physician, surgeon, dentist or podiatrist, nor to the consumption of
intoxicating liquor. (1985 Code § 13-15)
5-1A-7: IMMORAL CONDUCT OR SHOWS; NUDITY:
   A.   Lewd Conduct: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself in
a lewd or immoral manner in any public place within the city.
   B.   Obscene Shows: It shall be unlawful to show obscene or immoral motion
pictures or present any kind of a show or exhibition within the city, which is
obscene or immoral.
   C.   Nudity; Indecent Exposure: It shall be unlawful for any person to
appear in any public place within the city in a state of total nudity, or for
any person to make an indecent public exposure of his or her person.
   D.   Pornography: It shall be unlawful to publicly display pornographic
magazines or books for sale in any store within the corporate limits of the
city.
   E.   Urination, Defecation: It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate
or defecate in any publicly exposed place within the corporate limits of the
city. (1985 Code § 13-16)
5-1A-8: PROSTITUTION; IMMORAL ACTS:
   A.   Lewd Or Immoral Acts For Money: It shall be unlawful for any person to
offer, submit or give himself or herself to a lewd or immoral use, such as
illicit sexual relations, or to engage in any lewd or immoral act for money or
any other thing of value.
   B.   Illicit Acts In Public: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage
in illicit sexual relations or any other immoral act, to knowingly consort with
a prostitute or other person of immoral vocation, or to consort with another
for an immoral purpose, in any public place within the City.
   C.   Keeping House Of Prostitution: It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, to keep, or assist in
keeping, a house of prostitution or a house or place within the City, where
persons meet or assemble for illicit sexual relations or for any other lewd or
immoral purpose, or to permit a known prostitute or other person of a known
immoral vocation to become or remain a guest in a hotel or rooming house.
   D.   Procure For House Of Prostitution: It shall be unlawful and an offense
for any person to act as a procurer for any house or place of prostitution or
for any prostitute or other person engaged in an immoral vocation, or to
procure, assist in procuring or attempt to procure any person for another for
illicit sexual relations or any other immoral purpose. (1985 Code § 13-17; amd.
2004 Code)
5-1A-9: SCHOOL GROUNDS, CERTAIN CONDUCT PROHIBITED:
No person shall engage in any conduct or commit any of the acts enumerated
herein, around or on the grounds of any school in the City or in any street or
alley adjacent to a school:
   A.   Loitering by any person not having lawful business in connection with
the school, an employee thereof or student therein;
   B.   Any conduct that disturbs the orderly conduct of the school;
   C.   Annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school;
   D.   Lewd or wanton conduct; or
   E.   Moving or parking any vehicle in the vicinity of any school or in any
street or alley adjacent thereto, in such a manner as to annoy or molest any
student or employee of the school. (1985 Code § 13-18)
5-1A-10: OFFENSES INVOLVING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 1 :
   A.   Alcoholic Or Intoxicating Beverages:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of
age to misrepresent his age through false documentation, for the purpose of
inducing any person to sell him alcoholic beverages.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of
age to have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverages, while such person
is upon any street, alley, road or highway, or in any public place within the
City.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to open a retail container or
consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a retail package store.
      4.   No person drunk or in a state of intoxication shall appear, or be
upon or in, any street, alley, place of business or other public place, nor
shall any person drink any alcoholic beverage upon or in any street, alley,
place of business or other public place within the City.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport in any vehicle upon
any street, alley, or other public way within the City, any alcoholic beverage,
except in the original container which shall not have been opened and the seal
of which shall not have been removed, unless the opened container be in the
trunk or any closed compartment or other container out of public view and out
of reach of the driver or any occupant of the vehicle.
      6.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to buy,
receive, possess, sell, barter, give away, manufacture or use any alcoholic
beverages in violation of the State Constitution and laws or this Code. (1985
Code § 13-19)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 3 of this Code.
5-1A-11: BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERBLADES, SIMILAR DEVICES 1 :
   A.   Business District:
      1.   For the purpose of this section, "Business District of the City" is
defined as: the area south of Comanche Street, north of Seminole Street, east
of the east boundary of Fifth and west of the west boundary of First Street.
      2.   No person shall operate, ride upon, or propel any bicycle,
skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades, or similar devices on or over any
sidewalk, balcony, walkway, path, plaza, staircase, or parking area within the
Business District of the City.
   B.   Outside Business District: Outside of the Business District of the
City, no person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades,
or similar devices upon the sidewalks or parking lots of any property open to
public invitees if a posted sign prohibits the use of such devices on the
sidewalks or parking lots of that property.
   C.   Yield To Pedestrians: Where the use of skateboards, rollerblades,
roller skates, bicycles, or similar devices is permitted, any person riding
such a device upon a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
   D.   Exceptions:
      1.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any police
officer, security officer, or employee authorized by the City, and acting
within the scope of their employment.
      2.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any public area
within the Business District of any City street which has been closed and/or
set aside for the purpose of a community event, celebration, or festival for
which a revocable permit delineating an express exception to this section has
been approved by the City. (Ord. 372, 11-26-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  6-7-4F of this Code.
ARTICLE B.  OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE, PERSONS
SECTION:
5-1B-1: Weapons; Firearms; Bow And Arrows
5-1B-2: Offenses Involving Assemblies
5-1B-3: Disturbing The Peace; Obscene Gestures
5-1B-4: Harassing Phone Calls
5-1B-5: Assault And Battery
5-1B-6: Abandoned Refrigerators, Containers
5-1B-1: WEAPONS; FIREARMS; BOW AND ARROWS:
   A.   Carrying Concealed Weapons: It shall be unlawful for any person to
carry upon or about his person any pistol, revolver, knife, dagger, metal
knuckle or other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument, except when doing so
in the line of duty or as may be permitted by law. (1985 Code § 13-30)
   B.   Discharging Firearms; Air Rifles Or BB Guns:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within
the corporate limits of the city, except when doing so in the line of duty,
when lawfully doing so in defense of oneself or of another person or property,
when otherwise authorized by state law or ordinance, when doing so for the
preservation of the peace, health or safety of residents or the abatement of
nuisances, or when engaged in authorized hunting or other related activities.
      2.   It shall also be unlawful to discharge an air rifle or BB gun within
the city, in such a manner as to harm or damage persons or property. (1985 Code
§ 13-31)
   C.   Shooting Of Bow And Arrows: It shall be unlawful for any person to
shoot a bow and arrow within the corporate limits of the city, except when
lawfully doing so in defense of oneself or of another person or property, when
otherwise authorized by state law or ordinance, when doing so for the
preservation of the peace, health or safety of residents, or the abatement of
nuisances, or when engaged in authorized hunting or other related activities.
(Ord. 310, 11-29-1988)
5-1B-2: OFFENSES INVOLVING ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   Unlawful Assembly: It shall be unlawful for three (3) or more persons
to assemble together to act in concert to do any unlawful act against the
peace, to the terror of others, to make any movement thereto or any preparation
therefor, or otherwise to assemble together for other unlawful purposes. (1985
Code § 13-32; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Disturbing Lawful Assemblies: It shall be unlawful for any person to
disturb any lawful gathering by making noise; by rude, indecent or improper
behavior; by profane, improper or loud language; or in any other manner, either
within the place of assembly or within hearing distance thereof. (1985 Code §
13-33)
5-1B-3: DISTURBING THE PEACE; OBSCENE GESTURES:
   A.   Disturbing The Peace: It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb
the peace of another or others by violent or improper conduct; by loud or
unusual noise; by unseemly, obscene, insulting, offensive or abusive language;
or by conducting oneself in a disorderly manner.
   B.   Obscene Gestures: It shall be unlawful for any person to make,
demonstrate or otherwise symbolize any obscene gesture by use of said person's
extremities, toward any other human being or object within the corporate limits
of the city. (1985 Code § 13-34)
5-1B-4: HARASSING PHONE CALLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a telephone to:
   A.   Make any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent comment,
suggestion or proposal;
   B.   Make a telephone call without disclosing his identity and with intent
to annoy, abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number;
   C.   Knowingly permit any telephone under his control to be used for any
purpose prohibited in this subsection; or
   D.   In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, make repeated or
continuous calls solely to harass any person at the called number. (1985 Code §
13-34)
5-1B-5: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
   A.   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply in this section:
   ASSAULT: Any wilful and unlawful attempt or offer, with force or violence,
to do a corporal hurt to another.
   BATTERY: Any wilful and unlawful attempt or offer, with force or violence,
upon the person of another.
   B.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery
within the city.
      2.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, without
justifiable or excusable cause, to knowingly commit any assault, battery or
assault and battery upon the person of a police officer or officer of the law,
while said person is performing his duties. (1985 Code § 13-45)
5-1B-6: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS, CONTAINERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave, in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded ice box, refrigerator or
other container of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more
which has an airtight door with a lock or other fastening device which cannot
be easily released for opening from the inside of the ice box, refrigerator or
container, without first removing the door, lock or fastener. (1985 Code § 9-
25; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE C.  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-1C-1: Petty Larceny
5-1C-2: Receiving Stolen Property
5-1C-3: Damaging Property
5-1C-4: Unlawful Entry
5-1C-5: Intrusion Upon Land
5-1C-6: Posting Of Advertising Matter
5-1C-7: Throwing Or Shooting Of Objects
5-1C-8: Littering; Distributing Handbills
5-1C-1: PETTY LARCENY:
   A.   Definition: "Petty larceny" is the taking of personal property of value
not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), accomplished by fraud or stealth, or with
intent to deprive another thereof when the property is not taken from the
person of another.
   B.   Unlawful Act: Petty larceny is unlawful and any person who commits
petty larceny shall be guilty of an offense. (1985 Code § 13-55)
5-1C-2: RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive or bring into the city, any
property which he knows has been stolen. (1985 Code § 13-56)
5-1C-3: DAMAGING PROPERTY:
   A.   Destruction Of Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to
destroy, injure, deface, besmear or molest any structure, building,
outbuilding, fence or any other property, real or personal, public or private,
belonging to another, including automobiles or other vehicles; to use any such
property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to
its use; or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its
owner or any other person entitled to its use. (1985 Code § 13-57)
   B.   Damaging Utility Poles:
      1.   The word "pole" shall be construed to mean any pole supporting
telephone, television, electric or power wires or braces, and any device used
to support or brace such a pole.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to mark, write, print, paint
upon, or otherwise make any signs or marks, by indentation or otherwise; or by
posting signs or posters upon any telephone, television, electric or power
pole, either wood, concrete, steel or of any other substance, within the
corporate limits of the city.
      3.   This subsection B shall not apply to the owners of such poles who
may make such necessary or authorized marks or signs thereon. (1985 Code § 13-
61)
5-1C-4: UNLAWFUL ENTRY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of another or
into an area or structure on such property (whether such property, area or
structure is public or private), when such entrance is plainly forbidden by
signs or otherwise, or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except
when such entrance is in the line of duty, with the expressed or tacit consent
of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of state law or
ordinance. (1985 Code § 13-58)
5-1C-5: INTRUSION UPON LAND:
Every person who intrudes or squats upon any lot or piece of land within the
city, without a license or authority from the owner thereof, or who erects or
occupies thereon any hut or other structure without such license or authority,
and every person who places, erects or occupies within the bounds of any
street, alley or avenue of the city, any structure whatever, shall be guilty of
an offense. (1985 Code § 13-59)
5-1C-6: POSTING OF ADVERTISING MATTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, post, paint, mark, write or print
any sign, poster, picture, announcement, advertisement, device or inscription
upon any public or private building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, automobile, other
vehicle or other property of another, without the consent of the owner or
person in charge thereof. (1985 Code § 13-60)
5-1C-7: THROWING OR SHOOTING OF OBJECTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot or other
object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he is likely
to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property; or to throw or shoot
any stone, shot or other object at any person, vehicle, structure, electric
light or other property of another, whether public or private, except in the
case where such is done in defense of oneself, of another person or of
property. (1985 Code § 13-62)
5-1C-8: LITTERING; DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS 1 :
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, "litter" is defined to be
any garbage, refuse, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, paper, wrappings, cigarette butts, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, leaves, wood, grass, bedding or crockery and similar materials
commonly referred to as rubbish or trash.
   B.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any open or
vacant property within the city, irrespective of the ownership of such
property.
      2.   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city, except in public
receptacles, authorized private receptacles or in the city sanitary landfill.
      3.   No person shall sweep into, or deposit in, any gutter, street or
other public place within the city, the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises
free of litter.
      4.   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
city, unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto, or deposit in, any
street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind, in excessive or damaging amounts.
   C.   Distributing Handbills:
      1.   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill on or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city;
nor shall any person hand out, distribute or sell commercial handbills in
public places.
      2.   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; however, it shall not be unlawful, in any
public place, for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the
receiver, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing
to accept it.
      3.   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which is temporarily or continuously
vacant.
      4.   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested not to do so or
if signs are posted bearing the words "no trespassing", "no peddlers or
agents", "no advertisements", or similar notice, indicating that the occupants
do not desire to have their privacy disturbed.
      5.   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except
by transmitting them directly to the owner, occupant or person present upon
such private premises. In cases of inhabited private premises which are not
posted, handbills must be distributed to prevent them from blowing on sidewalks
or other public places.
      6.   The provisions of subsection C5 of this section shall not apply to
the distribution of mail by the United States or to newspapers, except that
newspapers shall be placed on private property so as to prevent being carried
or deposited upon any street, sidewalk or public place, or on other private
property.
      7.   No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the
city, any litter, handbill or any other object. (1985 Code § 13-63)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 8, chapter 5 of this code.
ARTICLE D.  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
SECTION:
5-1D-1: Resisting Arrest
5-1D-2: Impersonating City Officer Or Employee
5-1D-3: False Representation To City Officials
5-1D-4: Offenses Involving Prisoners
5-1D-5: Flight From An Officer
5-1D-6: Refusing Or Failing To Assist Police Officer
5-1D-7: Fire Alarms
5-1D-8: Removal Of Barricades
5-1D-1: RESISTING ARREST:
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or wilfully to resist, oppose or
obstruct the chief of police, any police officer, the municipal judge or other
city officer or employee in the discharge of his official duties; or, by
threats or otherwise, to intimidate, or attempt to intimidate, any such officer
or employee from the discharge of his official duties; or to assault, beat,
revile, abuse, be disrespectful to or use abusive or indecent language toward
or about, any such officer or employee, while such officer or employee is in
the discharge of his official duties. (1985 Code § 13-76)
5-1D-2: IMPERSONATING CITY OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate any municipal officer or
employee, or exercise, or attempt to exercise, any of the duties, functions or
powers of any city officer or employee, without being duly authorized to do so.
(1985 Code § 13-76)
5-1D-3: FALSE REPRESENTATION TO CITY OFFICIALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to make any material
misrepresentation to any city officer, employee or agency in any official
application to, or official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or
agency, or to commit perjury before any tribunal or office of the city. (1985
Code § 13-77)
5-1D-4: OFFENSES INVOLVING PRISONERS:
   A.   Escape Of Prisoners: It shall be unlawful for any person confined in
the city jail or other place of confinement, working upon the streets or other
public places pursuant to any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by
authority of the city, to escape, or attempt to escape, from any such city
jail, prison or custody. (1985 Code § 13-78)
   B.   Assisting Prisoners To Escape: It shall be unlawful for any person, in
any unlawful manner, to set at liberty, rescue or attempt to set at liberty or
rescue, any prisoner from any officer or employee of the city, having legal
custody of such prisoner, or from the city jail or other place of confinement;
or to assist such prisoner in any manner to escape from such prison or custody;
or to give such prisoner any weapon or object which might be used as a weapon
or instrument to assist him in escape; or to give such prisoner any alcoholic
beverages, narcotics or other controlled dangerous substances. (1985 Code § 13-
79)
5-1D-5: FLIGHT FROM AN OFFICER:
A person commits the offense of flight from an officer, if:
   A.   He is the operator of a vehicle and refuses to stop his vehicle as soon
as is safely possible, when signaled to do so by a law enforcement officer; or
   B.   Upon stopping his vehicle at the signal of a law enforcement officer,
abandons said vehicle and leaves, or attempts to leave, the immediate area
without the permission of the law enforcement officer; or
   C.   He is a passenger in a vehicle and abandons the vehicle after a law
enforcement officer has signaled the vehicle to stop; or
   D.   After the vehicle has stopped, leaves the immediate area without the
permission of the law enforcement officer; or
   E.   He is a pedestrian and leaves, or attempts to leave, the immediate area
after being directed by a law enforcement officer to stop or to remain in said
area for a reasonable length of time. (1985 Code § 13-81)
5-1D-6: REFUSING OR FAILING TO ASSIST POLICE OFFICER:
   A.   Authority To Request Aid: Any police officer of the city, making or
about to make an arrest, or executing or about to execute a warrant or other
process, in accordance with this city code or with state or federal law, or
suppressing or about to suppress a riot, affray or unlawful assembly, may call
upon any person or persons to assist him in making such arrest, executing such
process or suppressing such riot, affray or unlawful assembly.
   B.   Refusing To Assist: No person lawfully called upon thus to assist any
police officer of the city, shall refuse or fail to do so, whenever such
assistance is reasonably possible. (1985 Code § 13-82)
5-1D-7: FIRE ALARMS:
   A.   Interference With Fire Alarm Systems: No person shall cut or sever, or
cause to be cut or severed, or interfere with in any manner, any wire of any
fire alarm system in the city; or remove or change the same, or cut, injure,
change, alter or remove any pole, crossarm, bracket or other support upon which
said wires rest or in which said wires are enclosed; or disconnect said wires
or any of them from the gongs, alarm boxes or instruments connected with said
fire alarm system; or cause, in any manner, the working of the same to become
obstructed or interfered with without being first duly authorized so to do by
the chief of the fire department; nor shall any person deface or in any manner
injure any of the fire alarm boxes or any instruments or appliances connected
with or belonging to said fire alarm system; or tamper with said fire alarm or
obstruct in any manner whatever, the boxes, keys or glass upon any of said
boxes; or make or cause to be made, without authority from the chief of the
fire department, keys to any alarm box or boxes; or to use, or cause to be
used, any such key so made; nor shall any person place or fasten over or upon
any fire alarm box a handbill, notice or sign of any kind, except the signs
placed upon the same at the direction of the chief of the fire department and
pertaining to the firebox; or cause to be hitched any horse or animal to any
pole on which is situated a fire alarm box. (1985 Code § 13-83)
   B.   False Fire Alarms: No person shall turn in a false fire alarm, or in
any manner shall deceive or attempt to deceive the fire department or any
officer or employee with reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, or
knowingly shall cause the fire department or its officers or employees to make
a useless run. (1985 Code § 13-84)
5-1D-8: REMOVAL OF BARRICADES:
No person, unless authorized by proper authority, shall remove any barricade or
obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off any pavement,
street, curb, sidewalk or other area. (1985 Code § 13-80)
CHAPTER 2
MINORS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Curfew For Minors
5-2-2: Contributing To Delinquency Of Minors
5-2-1: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
   A.   Title: This section shall be known and may be cited as the ORDINANCE
REGULATING THE PRESENCE AND CONDUCT OF MINORS ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES.
   B.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
   CITY: The city of Marlow, Stephens County, Oklahoma.
   MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a minor: 1) as a natural or
adoptive parent; 2) as a legal guardian; 3) as a person who stands in loco
parentis; or 4) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of
the court.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or
place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for
business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A "public place" shall
include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling
alley, cafe, theater, drugstore, pool room, shopping center and any other place
devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also
include the front or immediate area of such public place.
   REMAIN: To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets,
including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling four
(4) or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using the streets
for ordinary or serious purposes, such as mere passage or going home.
   STREET: A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public
as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel, or in the case of a
sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal
right of way, including, but not limited to, the cartway or traffic lanes, the
curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other
grounds found within the legal right of way of a street.
   TIME OF NIGHT: Shall be based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether
central standard time or central daylight saving time, generally observed at
that hour by the public.
   YEARS OF AGE: Shall continue from one birthday, such as the seventeenth to
(but not including the day of) the next, such as the eighteenth birthday,
making it clear that seventeen (17) or less years of age is herein treated as
equivalent to the phrase "under eighteen (18) years of age".
   C.   Age And Hour Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person
seventeen (17) or less years of age (under 18) to be or remain in or upon the
streets within the city at night during the period ending at six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and beginning:
      1.   At ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. for minors fifteen (15) years of age or
younger.
      2.   At twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight for minors more than fifteen (15)
years of age on Sunday through Thursday.
      3.   At one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Saturday morning and Sunday morning
for minors more than fifteen (15) years of age.
   D.   Exceptions: In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a city
street, during the nocturnal hours for which subsection C of this section is
intended to provide the maximum limits of regulation, shall not, however, be
considered in violation of this section:
      1.   When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
      2.   When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor,
to take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated period
of time and purpose, within a specified area.
      3.   When exercising first amendment rights protected by the United
States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech
and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona fides of such
exercise by processing a written communication, signed by such minor and
countersigned by a parent of such minor, with their home address and telephone
number, specifying when, where and in what manner said minor will be on the
streets at night (during hours when the curfew provisions are otherwise
applicable to said minor) in the exercise of a first amendment right specified
in such communication.
      4.   In case of reasonable necessity, but only if the minor has in said
minor's possession a written communication signed by the minor, countersigned
by a parent of such minor, evidencing their home address and telephone number,
and establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified streets, at a
designated time, for a described purpose, including points of origin and
destination.
      5.   When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor
resides, or on the sidewalk of either next door neighbor not communicating an
objection to the police officer.
      6.   When returning home, by a direct route from (and within 30 minutes
of the termination of) a school activity, or an activity of a religious or
voluntary association; provided, that the minor has a written communication in
the minor's possession, countersigned by the parent, indicating the home
address and telephone number, the purpose for the event, when, where and in
what manner said minor will be on the streets at night.
      7.   When authorized by a regulation issued by the city council, in other
similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled, but adapted to
necessary nighttime activities, or more minors than can readily be dealt with
on an individual special permit basis. Normally such regulation by the city
council permitting use of the streets should be issued sufficiently in advance
to permit appropriate publicity through news media and through other agencies,
such as the schools, and shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the
streets permitted, the period of time involved (not to extend more than 30
minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity), and the reason for
finding that such regulation is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the
public interest and the purpose of this section. (Ord. 329, 10-25-1994)
      8.   When the minor carries a certified card of employment, briefly
identifying the minor, the addresses of his home and his place of employment,
and his hours of employment, or carries a valid proof of employment which may
include the latest payroll receipt, not over thirty (30) days old, and when
said minor is either appropriately engaged in the duties of his employment or
is, by a direct route, going to or returning home from his place of employment.
(Ord. 330, 11-22-1994)
      9.   When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel and clearly exempts bona fide interstate movement
through the city, particularly on normal routes.
   E.   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal
custody of a minor to knowingly permit, or by inefficient control to allow,
such minor to be, or remain upon, any public street under circumstances not
constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this section.
The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal
custody. It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up
to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall, a fortiori, be no defense that a parent was
completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
minor.
   F.   Police Procedures: A police officer of the city, upon finding or having
attention called to any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of this
section, normally shall take the minor to the city police station, or other
place designated by the chief of police, where a parent shall immediately be
notified to come for such minor, whereupon they shall be interrogated. This is
intended to permit ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant
facts, and to centralize responsibility in the personnel then on duty for
accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement and recording,
thus making available to experienced supervisory personnel, the best of
facilities and access to information and records. In the absence of convincing
evidence such as a birth certificate, a police officer on the street shall, in
the first instance, use his best judgment in determining age.
      1.   Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of
experience, and may provide, inter alia, that the police officer may deliver to
a parent thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances; for example, a minor
of tender age, near home, whose identity may readily be ascertained or is
known.
      2.   In any event, such police officer shall, within twenty four (24)
hours, file a written report with the chief of police, or shall participate to
the extent of the information for which he is responsible. Said report shall be
treated for purposes of juvenile records in accordance with state statutes.
      3.   When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the
minor, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be
released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located, or
fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to the
juvenile authorities. The minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative,
neighbor or other person who will, on behalf of a parent, assume the
responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or arrival of a
parent.
      4.   In the case of a first violation by a minor, the chief of police
shall cause to be personally delivered or by certified mail, sent to a parent,
written notice of said violation with a warning that any subsequent violation
will result in full enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable
penalties.
   G.   Responsibility Of Owners Of Public Places: It shall be unlawful for any
person operating or having charge of any public place to knowingly allow,
permit or suffer the presence of minors in violation of the curfew established
by this section. (Ord. 329, 10-25-1994)
   H.   Penalty: If after the warning notice, pursuant to subsection F4 of this
section, of the first violation by a minor, a parent violates subsection F4 of
this section (in connection with a second violation by said minor), this shall
be treated as an offense by the parent. The penalty upon a plea of guilty, nolo
contendere, or finding of guilt shall be as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. (Ord. 329, 10-25-1994; amd. 2004 Code)
5-2-2: CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF MINORS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   DELINQUENT CHILD: Includes a minor who shall have been or is violating any
penal statute of the state or who commits any offense listed in this city code.
   MINOR OR CHILD: Includes male or female persons who shall not have arrived
at the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of the commission of the offense.
   B.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and
wilfully cause, aid, abet or encourage a minor to be, to remain, or to become a
delinquent child, as defined herein. (Ord. 283, 12-30-1985)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Applicability Of State Laws
5-3-3: Running At Large Prohibited; Pen Or Leash Required
5-3-4: Disturbances By Animals; Public Nuisance Abatement
5-3-5: Conditions For Keeping Certain Animals
5-3-6: Responsibilities Of Owners
5-3-7: Cruelty To Animals
5-3-8: Turning Confined Animals At Large
5-3-9: Pasturing In Public Areas
5-3-10: Rabies Control; Vaccination Requirements
5-3-11: Killing Certain Dogs Running Loose
5-3-12: Inspections To Enforce Chapter
5-3-13: Zoning Regulations To Prevail
5-3-14: Bird Sanctuary
5-3-15: Vicious Or Dangerous Animals
5-3-16: Animal Impoundment, Redemption, Disposition
5-3-17: Adoption; Dog And Cat Sterilization; Deposit
5-3-18: Penalty
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings prescribed in this section, except in those cases where the context
clearly indicates, or specifically provides for, a different meaning:
   ANIMAL: All vertebrate and invertebrate animals, whether domesticated or
wild, including, but not limited to, bees, birds and fowl (including
parakeets), cattle, cats, chickens, dogs, ducks, geese, goats, horses,
livestock of all types, mammals (including elephants), rabbits, all reptiles,
rodents, sheep, swine and turkeys.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The poundmaster or the person(s) responsible for
enforcement of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma, ordinances and regulations
pertaining to animal control in said community.
   ANIMAL SHELTER OR MUNICIPAL POUND: Any premises formally designated by the
city council for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under
the authority of this chapter, regardless of whether or not said premises are
within or without the city corporate boundaries, and regardless of whether or
not said premises are under actual city ownership or provided for under a
contractual arrangement between the city of Marlow, Oklahoma, and private owner
(s).
   AT LARGE: Not securely confined by a fence or other means, on premises under
the control of, or occupied by, the owner, and not under the control of the
owner, a member of his immediate family over twelve (12) years of age or an
agent of the owner, by leash or otherwise, whether on the owner's premises or
not.
   DANGEROUS BIRDS: Any warm-blooded, feathered vertebrate which may constitute
a physical threat to human beings.
   DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that has inflicted injury on a human being without
provocation on public or private property, or has been previously found to be
potentially dangerous, the owner having received notice of such by the animal
control officer, in writing, and the dog thereafter aggressively bites, attacks
or endangers the safety of humans.
   HARBORING: Allowing any animal to habitually remain, or be fed, on premises
under his control.
   KENNEL: Any structure or place where three (3) or more dogs, over six (6)
months of age, are kept, bred or trained, or temporarily boarded, at any single
time.
   LIVESTOCK: All animals, other than dogs, cats, small caged birds or small
aquatic or amphibian animals.
   NEUTER: To render a male dog or cat unable to reproduce.
   NUISANCE: The conduct or behavior of any animal which molests passers-by or
passing vehicles; attacks other animals; damages private or public property;
barks, whines, howls, crows or makes other noises in an excessive, continuous
fashion which annoys the comfort, repose, health or safety of the people in the
community; unconfined in season; or a vicious animal not confined as required
by this chapter.
   OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping an
animal. Occupants of any premises to which a domesticated or tamed animal
customarily returns for a period of ten (10) days or more shall be deemed to be
harboring or keeping the animal, and thereby considered to be an "owner" of
said animal.
   PET: Any animal kept for pleasure, rather than utility.
   PROPER ENCLOSURE OF A VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS DOG: Means, while on the owner's
property, the dog shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed
and locked pen or structure, with at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet
of space for each dog kept therein which is over six (6) months of age, and
which is suitable to prevent the entry of children and designed to prevent the
animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a
secure top, and shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.
   PROVOKE OR PROVOCATION: Means, with respect to an attack by an animal, that
the animal was hit, kicked, or struck by a person with an object or part of a
person's body or that any part of the animal's body is pulled, pinched or
squeezed by a person.
   RESTRAINT: An animal shall be deemed to be under "restraint" if confined on
the premises of its owner, if on a leash and accompanied by a responsible
person, or in the case of a hunting dog, if accompanied by its owner engaged in
the act of hunting.
   SPAY: To remove the ovaries of a female dog or cat, in order to render said
animal unable to reproduce.
   STERILIZATION: To spay or neuter a dog or cat.
   UNALTERED: Any cat or dog over the age of six (6) months, which has not been
neutered or spayed.
   VACCINATION: An injection of United States department of agriculture
approved rabies vaccine administered every twelve (12) calendar months by a
licensed veterinarian.
   VICIOUS DOG OR ANIMAL: Any dog or animal which has bitten or attempted to
bite any person without undue provocation, or which attacks, barks or growls at
and acts as if it intended to attack or bite, any person or persons when not
unduly provoked.
   WILD ANIMAL: Any animal which can normally be found living in a naturally
wild state and is not ordinarily tamed or domesticated. The term shall include
such animals (hereinabove described) which may be owned by a circus or wild
animal show or exhibition. (1985 Code § 3-1; amd. Ord. 285, 5-27-1986; 2004
Code)
5-3-2: APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAWS:
No person owning or having in his custody any animal shall violate any laws,
rules or regulations of the state applicable thereto. Where the provisions of
the rules and regulations of the state are less restrictive than the provisions
of this chapter, the latter shall govern. (2004 Code)
5-3-3: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED; PEN OR LEASH REQUIRED:
   A.   Running At Large: It shall be unlawful and an offense for the owner of
any animal, domestic or wild (including dogs), to permit the same to run at
large or trespass upon the premises of another person, or be unlawfully at
large at any time within the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   Pen Or Leash Required: It shall be unlawful and an offense for any
person to:
      1.   Keep, own, harbor or possess any dog within the corporate limits of
the city without providing a substantial and secure pen in which said dog shall
be confined (which pen shall be sufficient in size so that no sanitation or
health problem shall be involved); or
      2.   Allow a dog to be placed under the control of, and on an adequately
sized leash so that it can reach or bite any person who may be using the public
thoroughfares of the city, so the dog can reach beyond the limits of the lot or
premises upon which said dog is kept and confined, or so the dog may reach any
person who may be rendering necessary services to the house of such owner, upon
the premises where said dog may be kept, harbored or possessed; or
      3.   Allow a dog, cat or any animal, domestic or wild, to be placed under
the control of a leash, chain, cable, or any other type of tether as the
primary mode of containment. (Ord. 404, 5-28-2013)
5-3-4: DISTURBANCES BY ANIMALS; PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
   A.   Nuisances Described:
      1.   It shall be a public nuisance for any person to keep any dog or
other animal which, by barking, howling or otherwise, disturbs the peace and
quiet of, or creates a nuisance for, any person or persons.
      2.   It shall also be a public nuisance for any person to keep any dog or
other animal which attacks other animals or damages private or public property.
   B.   Abatement: Abatement of such public nuisances shall be handled in
accordance with the provisions of title 4, chapter 3 of this code. (1985 Code §
3-3)
   C.   Complaint To Court: Any person with knowledge thereof may file a
complaint in the municipal court against the owner or keeper of an animal which
disturbs the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity or which is in
violation of this chapter. If the court finds that an animal is a nuisance or
in violation of this chapter, then the court may order the owner or keeper to
prevent and abate the nuisance, or order the animal impounded with the owner or
keeper to pay impoundment costs. (2004 Code)
5-3-5: CONDITIONS FOR KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS:
   A.   Compliance With Chapter: It shall be unlawful and an offense for any
person to keep any animals within the corporate limits of the city, except
under those conditions and provisions which may hereinafter specifically
regulate the keeping of certain types of animals.
   B.   Keeping Prohibited In Absence Of Regulations: If no specific provisions
are listed in this code for keeping of a particular type of animal, said animal
type shall not be kept at all within the corporate limits of the city.
   C.   Structure Requirements; Sanitation; Number Of Animals Limited:
      1.   Construction; Maintenance: Every structure wherein any authorized
animal is kept within the corporate limits of the city shall be constructed of
such material and in such a manner that it can be kept clean and sanitary at
all times, and it shall be maintained in said condition, devoid of rodents and
vermin and free from objectionable odors, in order to avert the creation of a
nuisance to the public health.
      2.   Receptacle For Manure Required; Disposal Of Manure:
         a.   Every such structure, if located within two hundred feet (200')
of any tenement, apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail
food store, building used for educational, religious or hospital purposes, or
residence (other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises
upon which such animal is kept) shall be provided with a watertight and
flytight receptacle for manure of such size as to hold all accumulations of
manure.
         b.   Such receptacle shall be hauled outside the city limits and
disposed of properly, and shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such
manner as to prevent it from being or becoming a nuisance, and shall be kept
covered at all times, except when open during the deposit or removal of manure
or refuse.
         c.   No manure shall be allowed to accumulate on such premises except
in such receptacle.
      3.   Number Of Animals Per Lot: There shall not be kept more than one
animal, excluding chickens (or similar fowl), dogs and cats, per each fifty
foot by one hundred sixty five foot (50' x 165') lot.
   D.   Livestock: No swine, bulls, stallions or jacks shall be kept within the
corporate limits of the city, with the exception of FFA and/or 4-H projects
kept on public school property, or in appropriately zoned areas.
   E.   Bees:
      1.   The keeping or raising of bees within the corporate limits of the
city shall be permitted only in those areas zoned for agricultural or large lot
(over 2 acres) residential uses, and in accordance with zoning ordinance
provisions.
      2.   No license or permit shall be required to keep or raise bees. (1985
Code § 3-4)
   F.   Sheep; Fowl:
      1.   The keeping or raising of sheep and chickens (or similar fowl) shall
be permitted in agricultural zones throughout the city as long as the premises
are maintained in accordance with the provisions of subsection C of this
section and state and county health department requirements and standards.
(1985 Code § 3-4; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   Additional restrictions on the raising and/or keeping of sheep and
chickens may be imposed by the zoning ordinance without conflicting with this
subsection.
   G.   Wild Animals: The keeping or raising of any wild animals shall be
prohibited within the city, except for those wild animals which may be under
the care of travelling shows or circuses, and for which the license
requirements of article A of this chapter are met and a permit obtained.
   H.   Poisonous Snakes: No snakes, which are poisonous in their natural
state, may be kept within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or raise such snakes
within the city.
   I.   Other Animals: The keeping of other animals not specifically mentioned
or regulated within this chapter as pets shall be subject only to such
generally applicable provisions which may exist to require the maintenance of
sanitary conditions and the avoidance of nuisance creation. (1985 Code § 3-4)
5-3-6: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS:
In addition to any duties previously outlined, the owner of any animal shall
have the following additional responsibilities:
   A.   Owners shall exercise proper care and control of their animals to
prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
   B.   Owners shall provide proper care and treatment of their animals.
   C.   Owners shall not abandon their animals.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal for breeding
purposes within the corporate limits of the city, except in private, enclosed
locations, entirely out of the public view, or to permit any such animals to
have sexual intercourse in any place except a private, enclosed place. (This
shall not be construed as permitting the conditional keeping of any animals
otherwise prohibited or regulated by this city code. See subsection
5-3-5D of this chapter.) (1985 Code § 3-5)
5-3-7: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Food And Shelter: All dogs, cats and other animals kept as house pets
within the corporate limits of the city shall be housed, fed and protected from
the weather in such a manner as not to create a nuisance.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly,
wilfully or maliciously to:
      1.   Deposit any animal with the intention of abandoning the same.
      2.   Pour on or apply to an animal, any drug or other thing which
inflicts pain.
      3.   Improperly use any collar, leash, harness, etc., resulting in pain
or damage to animal.
      4.   Treat an animal belonging to him or in his custody in a cruel or
inhumane manner.
      5.   Neglect an animal belonging to him or in his custody in a cruel or
inhumane manner.
      6.   Kill, or attempt to kill, any animal in an inhumane manner.
      7.   Poison, or expose to poison, any dog or other animal, except a
noxious, nondomesticated animal.
      8.   Torture, cruelly beat, injure, maim, mutilate or unjustly destroy or
kill any animal belonging to him or to another.
      9.   Deprive any animal of food, drink or shelter.
      10.   Unjustly expose any drug or substance with the intent that the same
shall be taken by an animal, whether such animal be the property of that owner
or another person.
      11.   Cause any other person to do any of the above acts.
   C.   Issuance Of Citation For Violation:
      1.   If an animal is found by the animal control officer to be in one of
the conditions described in subsection B of this section, the officer may issue
a citation to the offender and shall issue a notice to the offender warning him
that if the animal's condition is not improved, another citation may be issued.
      2.   If within three (3) days the condition of the animal is not improved
to the satisfaction of the animal control officer, a citation shall be issued.
   D.   Confining In Vehicle: No dogs, cats or other animals shall be confined
within or in a motor vehicle under such conditions as may endanger the health
or well being of the animal, including, but not limited to, dangerous
temperature, lack of food or water. (2004 Code)
   E.   Encouraging Animal Fights: It shall be unlawful for any person to
instigate or encourage a fight between animals, or to keep a house, pit or
other place used for fights between animals. (1985 Code § 3-6)
   F.   Providing Medical Attention: Owners and keepers of animals shall
provide medical attention to such animals, including, but not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Sufficient wholesome food that is nutritious for the species.
      2.   Fresh, potable drinking water.
      3.   Medical attention to relieve such animals from suffering.
      4.   Shelter to allow the animal to remain dry and protected from the
elements.
   G.   Care Given By City; Costs Assessed: Any peace officer or animal control
officer finding an animal so maltreated or abused shall cause the same to be
taken care of, and the charges therefor shall be a lien upon such animal, to be
collected thereon as upon a pledge or a lien.
   H.   Mistreatment Of Police Dogs: It shall be unlawful for any person to
wilfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure,
disable or kill any dog used by the police department, whether or not said dog
is, at the time, off duty or on duty, in the performance of the functions or
duties of said department, or to interfere with, or meddle with, any such dog
while being used by said department or any officer or member of said
department. (2004 Code)
5-3-8: TURNING CONFINED ANIMALS AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to open any enclosure in which an animal is
confined (as required by ordinance), so as to turn such animal at large, or to
in any other manner turn such animal at large. (1985 Code § 3-7)
5-3-9: PASTURING IN PUBLIC AREAS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stake, confine or pasture any animal on
any public property (federal, state, municipal or other), or on any railroad
right of way, without the consent of the person owning or controlling such
property. (1985 Code § 3-8)
5-3-10: RABIES CONTROL; VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Vaccination And Certificate Required: Any warm blooded animal, capable
of transmitting the virus rabies, maintained or harbored at any time in the
city shall be vaccinated against rabies with an approved vaccine administered
by a veterinarian who shall maintain a record of vaccination for a period of at
least three (3) years, and who shall issue the owner of such animal a
vaccination certificate (which shall be retained by said owner until it expires
and is renewed). The failure to procure such certificate when so requested by
the animal control officer shall be prima facie evidence that such animal has
not been so vaccinated.
   B.   Report Biting Incident; Quarantine; Costs:
      1.   The identity and address of the owner of any animal that bites a
person shall be promptly furnished to the animal control officer and county
health department.
      2.   The animal control officer shall securely quarantine such animal
until reasonable determination has been made that the animal is not infected
with rabies. At the discretion of the animal control officer, such quarantine
may be on the premises of the owner, at a veterinary hospital of the owner's
choice (at the owner's expense), or at the municipal pound or animal shelter.
In case of animals whose ownership is unknown, such quarantine shall be at the
municipal pound or animal shelter. Said animal may be reclaimed by the owner,
if adjudged free of rabies; such owner shall then pay any related charges for
confinement.
   C.   Death Of Animal; Examination By State: When an animal under quarantine
has been diagnosed as being rabid, or is suspected of having rabies by a
licensed veterinarian, and dies while under such observation, the animal
control officer, veterinarian or other designated person shall immediately send
the necessary part of such animal to the state health department for
pathological examination and shall notify the proper health officer of any
reports of human contact.
   D.   City Order For Quarantine:
      1.   When a report gives a positive diagnosis of rabies and the county
health director feels that a rabies crisis may be imminent, the health
department may recommend to the city council a communitywide quarantine.
      2.   Upon the invoking of such quarantine by the city council, no animal
shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets, except for
short periods of exercise (under leash and control of a competent adult).
During such quarantine, no animal may be taken or removed from the city without
written permission of the animal control officer.
   E.   Disposition Of Animals Bitten By Rabid Animal: During such period of
rabies quarantine, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall
be forthwith destroyed; or, at the owner's expense and option, shall be treated
for a rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian; or, held under six (6) month
quarantine by the owner in the same manner as a female in season. The period of
quarantine may be extended from time to time.
   F.   Removing Animal From City Prohibited; Other Prohibited Acts:
      1.   No person shall remove from the city any animal suspected of having
been exposed to rabies, or any animal which has bitten a human, except as
herein provided.
      2.   The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall be
surrendered to the animal control officer upon demand; the animal control
officer shall direct disposition of said animal.
      3.   No person shall refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or
destruction when such demand is lawfully made by the animal control officer.
   G.   Rabies Vaccination And Certificate Required:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every person owning or harboring any dog or
cat which is six (6) months old or older within the corporate limits of the
city to procure a rabies vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian,
or agent authorized by the city council, showing that the vaccination has been
made, date of vaccination, by whom and the date when such vaccination shall
expire.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to not abide by the municipal vaccination
requirements after fifteen (15) days of residency. (1985 Code § 3-9)
5-3-11: KILLING CERTAIN DOGS RUNNING LOOSE:
The animal control officer, his designated representatives, or any law
enforcement officer of the city shall be required to kill any dog running loose
within the corporate limits of the city, which is determined by the animal
control officer or law enforcement officer to be vicious or crazed and a threat
to the public health and safety, and which dog is found running at large
without being restrained in a pen or on a leash (as provided by this chapter),
without keeping said dog in the municipal pound for any period of time. (1985
Code § 3-11)
5-3-12: INSPECTIONS TO ENFORCE CHAPTER:
   A.   Inspection Upon Complaint: The local or county health officer, or a
city authorized representative, upon complaint of any person or on his own
initiative, shall inspect any structure or place wherein an animal is kept.
(1985 Code § 3-12; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Issue Order Of Compliance To Owner: The local or county health officer
may issue any such reasonable order as he may deem necessary to the owner of
such animal, to cause such animal to be kept as provided in this chapter or in
a manner so as not to constitute a nuisance.
   C.   Complaint Before Municipal Judge: The local or county health officer
may make a complaint before the municipal judge against any person for
violation of any provision of this chapter or for any such reasonable order,
but this shall not abridge the right of others to make such complaints. (1985
Code § 3-12)
5-3-13: ZONING REGULATIONS TO PREVAIL:
In case of conflict between this chapter and the present or any future zoning
ordinance, the provisions of the zoning ordinance shall prevail and supersede
the provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code § 3-13)
5-3-14: BIRD SANCTUARY:
   A.   City Designated As Sanctuary: The entire area within the corporate
limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.
   B.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful and an offense to trap, shoot, hunt
or molest in any manner, any bird or fowl, or to rob the nests of any bird or
fowl.
   C.   Report Nuisance Conditions To Garden Club:
      1.   If starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such
numbers in a particular locality as to constitute a nuisance or a menace to
health or property, in the opinion of the local or county health official, said
official(s) shall meet with representatives of the Marlow garden club to
develop a solution to the problem.
      2.   Said meeting shall be preceded by three (3) days' notice by posting.
(1985 Code § 3-14)
5-3-15: VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS 1 :
   A.   Confining Animals:
      1.   Confining Required: The owner shall confine within a building or
secured enclosure any dangerous or vicious dog or other animal, and not take
such dog or other animal out of such building or secured enclosure unless such
animal is securely muzzled. Vicious or dangerous animals shall not be, or
permitted to be, at large.
      2.   Impoundment And Redemption:
         a.   Any vicious, wild or dangerous animal found at large shall be
impounded by the city and shall not be redeemed by the owners until such
redemption is authorized by a court having jurisdiction.
         b.   Any animal described in subsection A1 or A2a of this section
found at large shall be impounded by the city and may be redeemed by the owners
as provided in section
5-3-16 of this chapter.
      3.   Destruction Of Animal: When in the judgement of the animal control
officer, an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not
be redeemed.
   B.   Confiscation Of Dangerous Dog; Other Remedies:
      1.   Reasons For Confiscation; Penalty: Any dangerous dog shall be
immediately confiscated by the animal control officer if:
         a.   The dog is not validly registered under section
5-3A-4 of this chapter.
         b.   The owner does not secure the liability insurance coverage or
surety bond required under section
5-3A-4 of this title.
         c.   The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure.
         d.   The dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner, or outside the
proper enclosure and not under the physical restraint of a responsible person.
The owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. Any such fine, at the discretion of the court, may be
offset by payments made by the dog owner to any victim of an attack by the dog;
however, insurance payments may not be considered as an offset.
      2.   Additional Remedies: It is the purpose of this article to provide
additional and cumulative remedies to control dangerous and potentially
dangerous dogs in the corporate limits of the city. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to abridge or alter rights of action or remedies of victims
under the common law or statutory law, criminal or civil.
   C.   Court Authority Regarding Dogs Attacking Persons:
      1.   Authority To Order Hearing: If any dog within the city shall bite,
scratch, chase, or otherwise attack any person; and, if the person so attacked
was not at the time trespassing upon the property of the owner of such dog;
and, if it cannot be proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the person so
attacked was provoking or teasing such dog, the municipal court shall have the
authority to order and hold a hearing.
      2.   Court Order: If the court determines that such dog is vicious or
dangerous to persons or other animals, the court may order that such dog be
kept muzzled, or that such dog be kept within a sufficient enclosure, or that
such dog be delivered to the animal control officer and by him destroyed. (2004
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-3A-4 of this title for registration.
5-3-16: ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION, DISPOSITION:
   A.   Municipal Pound Authorized; Poundmaster:
      1.   The city council is hereby authorized to establish a municipal
pound, under the jurisdiction of the poundmaster, who shall be appointed and
discharged by the city administrator. He shall provide proper sustenance for
all animals impounded and shall treat them in a humane manner.
      2.   The municipal pound may be established on a shared or contractual
basis with other units of government or with a private individual or firm, and
need not be physically located within the city. (1985 Code § 3-35)
   B.   Impoundment Of Animals:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer (or any other
designated officer or employee of the city), to take into custody and impound
any animal running at large in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The animal control officer shall also proceed to impound any dog
that is running at large within the corporate limits of the city, or that is
not confined with a secure and suitable sized leash (as provided in this
chapter), regardless of whether or not the owner may have a permit, the dog has
been vaccinated or the dog bears a tag.
      3.   The animal control officer shall immediately pick up and impound any
and all dogs which are kept, owned, possessed or harbored in violation of any
of the terms and provisions of this code.
      4.   Any person appearing at the municipal pound who shall satisfy the
keeper of the same of the fact of ownership or the right to the possession of
any dog therein impounded shall have such dog returned to him, upon the payment
of the charges due, as authorized by the provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code
§ 3-36)
      5.   Animals which are of no apparent value, taken into custody as
provided in this chapter, may be destroyed in a humane manner by the animal
control officer; provided, that no animal taken into custody shall be destroyed
until such animal shall have been impounded at least five (5) days. During such
time, the owner may reclaim the animal or a proper home may be established for
such animal by any person desiring the animal as a pet and willing to pay
applicable license fees and expenses incurred in the animal's detention. (1985
Code § 3-36; amd. 2004 Code)
      6.   Should any licensed institution request of the animal control
officer that animals be delivered to it for scientific or educational research,
such animals may be released to said institution; provided, that no animal
taken into custody shall be delivered to such institution until such animal
shall have been impounded for at least five (5) days and remain unclaimed and
unredeemed by their owners or any other person desiring such animal as a pet.
      7.   It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner, obstruct the
duties and activities of the city official or employee responsible for
impounding animals. (1985 Code § 3-36)
   C.   Fees For Impounding And Keeping:
      1.   The fees for impounding and keeping an animal, to be paid upon
redemption, shall be as determined by resolution of the city council.
      2.   All fees shall be paid to the city clerk. Receipt for payment of
fees on an impounded animal shall be presented to the animal control officer
before the animal shall be released. (1985 Code § 3-37)
   D.   Claiming Of Impounded Animals:
      1.   An owner of an impounded animal, or his agent, may claim or redeem
the animal prior to its sale, destruction or delivery to an institution, by
paying the required fees against the animal and meeting any other requirements
prescribed by this chapter.
      2.   Any person claiming an unlicensed dog shall pay the required license
fee to the city clerk, secure a tag and present the receipt therefor and a tag
to the animal control officer before the latter releases the dog. If a dog is
licensed, but not wearing the tag, the animal control officer shall require
adequate evidence of proper licensing before the animal's release. (1985 Code §
3-38)
   E.   Sale Of Impounded Animals Of Value:
      1.   As soon as practicable after any animal of apparent value has been
impounded, the animal control officer or the chief of police shall thereupon
post a conspicuously visible notice thereof at the city hall. Such notice shall
describe the animal, notify the owner to pay charges thereon and remove said
charges prior to the time fixed for the sale thereof, and also state that,
unless the animal is claimed, the animal will be sold at public auction at the
time and place named in the notice. The time of holding such sale of dogs and
fowl shall not be before the third day after posting of the notice, and the
time of holding such sale for all other animals shall not be before the tenth
day after the posting of the notice. (1985 Code § 3-39)
      2.   Sales provided herein shall be for cash to the highest bidder. The
minimum bid shall cover fees for impounding and keeping the animal until the
date of sale, plus a fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council to
reimburse the city for the sale expense, and shall be conducted by, or under
the direction of, the chief of police. If there is no bid, the chief of police
shall provide for and conduct another sale for the sale of such animal by
posting notice thereof at the city hall, if he believes that a bid would be
made at a later time. Otherwise, after any offering of an impounded animal at a
sale without a bidder, the animal shall be disposed of by the animal control
officer as provided in this chapter. (1985 Code § 3-39; amd. 2004 Code)
      3.   A purchaser of an animal at a sale held as provided herein shall
acquire absolute title to the animal purchased.
      4.   The chief of police shall pay to the city clerk all money received
from the sale of impounded animals on the day it is received or on the next day
upon which the office of the city clerk is open for business. (1985 Code § 3-
39)
      5.   The owner of an impounded animal sold as provided herein may claim
the excess of the sale price of the animal above the fees for impounding and
keeping the animal and a fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council to
reimburse the city for the expense it has incurred in making the sale. Such
claim may be made at any time within ninety (90) days after the sale. If a
claim is so made and approved by the city council, the city clerk shall pay the
claimant the excess. If a claim is not so made, the excess shall belong to the
city. (1985 Code § 3-39; amd. 2004 Code)
5-3-17: ADOPTION; DOG AND CAT STERILIZATION; DEPOSIT:
   A.   Requirement; Deposit: No dog or cat may be released for adoption from a
releasing agency in the corporate limits of the city unless said animal has
been surgically spayed or neutered, or unless the adopting party signs an
agreement to have the animal sterilized, and deposits funds with the releasing
agency to ensure that the adopted animal will be spayed or neutered. The amount
of the deposit shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   B.   Refund Of Deposit: The funds deposited with the releasing agency shall
be refunded to the adopting party upon the adopting party's presentation of a
written statement signed by a licensed veterinarian that the adopted animal has
been spayed or neutered. However, no refunds shall be made unless said animal
was spayed or neutered within sixty (60) days of adoption, in the case of adult
animals, or in the case of infant animals, within thirty (30) days of the date
a female animal attained the age of six (6) months, or a male animal attained
the age of eight (8) months.
   C.   Additional Rules Of Releasing Agencies: Releasing agencies may adopt
any additional rules to implement the state dog and cat sterilization act 1 ;
provided, that said rules do not conflict with the provisions or purpose of the
state dog and cat sterilization act to require the spaying and neutering of all
dogs and cats adopted from releasing agencies.
   D.   Extension Of Deadline: Upon presentation of a written report from a
licensed veterinarian stating that the life or health of an adopted animal may
be jeopardized by surgery, the releasing agency shall grant a thirty (30) day
extension of the period within which the spay or neuter surgery would otherwise
be required. Further extensions may be granted upon additional veterinary
reports stating their necessity.
   E.   Death Of Adopted Animal: If requested to do so, releasing agencies
shall refund deposited funds to the adopting party upon reasonable proof being
presented to the releasing agency by the adopting party that the adopted animal
died before the expiration of the period during which the spaying or neutering
was required to be completed.
   F.   Disposition Of Forfeited Funds: Funds which have been forfeited by
adopting parties shall be placed in a separate account, which shall be an
interest bearing account whenever feasible, and releasing agencies shall
allocate funds from said account to programs which directly promote, subsidize
or otherwise reduce the cost of spaying or neutering animals of the releasing
agency. The releasing agency shall maintain accurate records of accounts, which
fund spay/neuter programs.
   G.   Adoption Standards: Subject to the provisions and purposes of the state
dog and cat sterilization act and other laws of the state of Oklahoma,
releasing agencies may establish adoption standard for pets in their care;
provided, that in the case of public facilities, said standard must be
reasonably related to the prevention of cruelty to animals, the responsible
management of dogs and cats in the interest of preserving public health and
welfare, and shall be applied in a fair and equal manner to all potential
adopters.
   H.   Exceptions: The provisions of the state dog and cat sterilization act
shall not be construed to require the sterilization of dogs and cats which are
being held in releasing agencies which might be claimed by their rightful
owners, nor shall it be construed to require the sterilization of dogs and cats
held pursuant to the provisions of 4 Oklahoma Statutes sections 391 through
402. (2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 4 OS § 499 et seq.
5-3-18: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter, or
who violates or neglects to carry out any reasonable order made by any health
officer, the chief of police or the animal control officer, pursuant to this
chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code, and shall be subject to revocation of any license or
operating permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Every day's
violation of any provision of this chapter or of such order of the health
officer, animal control officer or chief of police, shall constitute a separate
offense. (1985 Code § 3-50; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE A.  LICENSING ANIMALS; KENNELS
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Licenses And Tags For Dogs
5-3A-2: Licenses For Wild Circus Animals
5-3A-3: Licensing Requirements For Kennels, Pet Shops
5-3A-4: Dangerous Dogs; Registration And Fee; Requirements
5-3A-1: LICENSES AND TAGS FOR DOGS:
   A.   License Required; Exception:
      1.   No person, without first obtaining a written license from the city
clerk, shall own, keep, harbor or have custody of any dog over six (6) months
of age, for any length of time longer than seven (7) days. (1985 Code § 3-25)
      2.   No license shall be required for animals temporarily brought and
kept within the city, or for seeing eye or hearing dogs, when such dogs are
actually used to aid blind or hearing impaired persons. (1985 Code § 3-25; amd.
2004 Code)
   B.   Rabies Vaccination, Proof Required: Licenses shall be issued only upon
presentation of proof of current vaccination for rabies, as required by this
chapter.
   C.   Registration Information: The owner of the dog shall, at the time of
paying the license fee, register the dog by giving the city clerk the name and
address of the owner, the name, breed, color and sex of the dog and such other
reasonable information as the city clerk may request.
   D.   Tag Issuance; Requirements:
      1.   The city clerk shall deliver an appropriate tag for the dog, in
addition to the written receipt. The tag shall constitute the license.
      2.   The owner shall cause the tag received from the city clerk to be
affixed to the collar or harness of the dog upon which the license fee has been
paid and the owner shall see that the tag is so worn at all times.
      3.   Dog license tags shall not be transferable, from one dog to another,
and no refunds shall be made for any dog license fee because of the death of
the dog or the owner's departure from the community.
      4.   No person shall counterfeit, or attempt to counterfeit, any tag
issued for a dog, as provided in this chapter. (1985 Code § 3-25)
   E.   License Fees:
      1.   A license tax of five dollars ($5.00) per year for every dog more
than six (6) months of age is hereby levied upon the owner of any such dog kept
or harbored within the city. (1985 Code § 3-25; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   All license fees shall be paid to the city clerk, and shall be due
not later than July 1 of each year, or within one week after bringing such an
animal into the city after such date.
      3.   In the event of loss of the tag before the end of the year for which
it was issued, the owner may secure another for the dog by presenting the
original receipt and the sum of one dollar ($1.00) to the city clerk. (1985
Code § 3-25)
5-3A-2: LICENSES FOR WILD CIRCUS ANIMALS:
   A.   License Required: All wild animals owned by a circus or travelling
animal show shall not be permitted within the corporate limits of the city,
unless the owner or person in charge of said circus or show, or his designated
representative, has first obtained a license for said animals from the city
clerk.
   B.   Safeguards For Protection Of Public: Said license shall be issued by
the city clerk upon submission of a written, signed statement by the applicant
that he has provided ample safeguards to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
   C.   Fee: To cover issuance and enforcement costs, the applicant shall pay a
fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) to the city clerk. The written receipt may
constitute the license.
   D.   License Term: Said license, so issued, shall be valid for a term of one
month. (1985 Code § 3-26)
5-3A-3: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS FOR KENNELS, PET SHOPS:
   A.   License Required; Fee; Term:
      1.   No person, firm or corporation shall own, maintain or operate a
kennel within the corporate limits of the city, unless such kennel is licensed
as hereinafter provided. (See the definition of "kennel" in section
5-3-1 of this title.)
      2.   The annual kennel license fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) and such
license shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place on the premises.
      3.   Licenses shall be issued for a period of one year beginning on July
1 of each year. Licenses may be issued starting thirty (30) days before July 1,
and for thirty (30) days thereafter.
   B.   Application For License; Compliance With Zoning Regulations:
      1.   Application for such license shall be made to the city clerk and
shall state the name and address of the owner or operator of said kennel, with
the street address and legal description of the property upon which the kennel
is located.
      2.   Said kennel must be in compliance with any applicable portions of
any present or future zoning ordinance adopted by the city.
   C.   Rabies Vaccination Proof Required: A kennel owner must show proof of
rabies vaccination on all animals over six (6) months of age when applying for
a license.
   D.   Kennel Premises Requirements:
      1.   Any person, firm or corporation maintaining a kennel, whether for
profit or not, shall maintain such kennel in a sanitary condition and shall be
subject to the provisions of this code and any present or future zoning
ordinance.
      2.   Nonconforming kennels shall be deemed a public nuisance.
      3.   No kennel or other establishment wherein animals are kept shall be
maintained closer than forty feet (40') to any tenement or apartment house,
hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, building used for
educational, religious or hospital purposes, or residence, other than that
occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such animal is
kept.
   E.   Records; Premises Requirements: All pet shops, catteries and kennels
shall:
      1.   Maintain records and retain such records for a two (2) year period
on all dogs and cats maintained in such facility. Such records shall show
breed, color, markings, sex, age, date and source of the animal, period for
which the animal is maintained, date and disposition of the animal (including
name and address of the new owner), and disease prevention and/or treatment and
by whom.
      2.   Provide general environmental conditions to assure adequate physical
space for each animal, control of parasites, clean food and water, weather
protection and clean and sanitary facilities.
      3.   Provide cages and pens of easily cleanable materials, if used for
confinement, and keep such cages and pens clean and sanitary. Said cages and
pens shall be constructed with concrete floors and an adequate number of floor
drains.
   F.   Pet Shops: Pet shops shall be subject to the same requirements for
licensing as kennels. In addition, any other requirements of this code or of
the zoning ordinance which may involve specific animals sold in a pet shop
shall also be included in the regulations applicable to pet shops. (1985 Code §
3-27)
5-3A-4: DANGEROUS DOGS; REGISTRATION AND FEE; REQUIREMENTS 1 :
   A.   Certification Of Registration Required; Exception:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for an owner to have a dangerous dog in the
corporate limits of the city without a certificate of registration issued under
this section.
      2.   This section shall not apply to dogs used by law enforcement
officials for police work.
   B.   Conditions For Issuance: The city clerk shall issue a certificate of
registration to the owner of a dangerous dog if the owner presents the city
with sufficient evidence of:
      1.   Proper Enclosure; Warning Sign: A proper enclosure to confine a
dangerous dog and the posting of the premises with a clearly visible warning
sign that there is a dangerous dog on the property. In addition, the owner
shall conspicuously display a sign with a warning symbol that informs children
of the presence of a dangerous dog.
      2.   Liability Insurance: A policy of liability insurance, such as
homeowner's insurance, or surety bond, issued by an insurer qualified under 36
Oklahoma Statutes, in the amount of not less than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous dog.
   C.   Annual Fee: The city may charge an annual fee not to exceed ten dollars
($10.00) in addition to regular dog licensing fees. Fees shall be retained by
the city. (2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-3-15 of this title.
CHAPTER 4
FAIR HOUSING 1
SECTION:
5-4-1: Certain Acts Prohibited
5-4-2: Certain Acts Exempted
5-4-3: Fair Housing Board
5-4-4: Grievance Procedures
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 4 of this code for fair housing board.
5-4-1: CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or the authorized
agents or representatives of said person, firm or corporation, to:
   A.   Refuse to sell, lease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer the title or
other interest in any housing, or real property upon which residential housing
is to be constructed, to any person, or to discriminate in the terms or
conditions of the sale, rental or leasing of any residential housing unit,
because of race, color, religion, national origin, gender, age, handicap, or
familial status.
   B.   Refuse to negotiate with any person for the sale, rental or leasing of
any residential property, or to represent that such property is not available
for inspection, sale, rental or lease, when in fact it is so available, because
of such person's race, color, religion, age, national origin, gender, handicap,
or familial status.
   C.   Solicit or induce, or attempt to solicit or induce, any person owning
any interest in any residential housing to sell, rent or lease, or not to sell,
rent or lease such housing to any person on the grounds of loss of value due to
the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons
of another race, color, religion, age, national origin, gender, handicap, or
familial status either by direct solicitation or inducement, or by the purchase
of other property in the neighborhood for the purpose of such inducement, or to
distribute, or cause to be distributed, material or statements designed to
induce a residential property owner to sell or lease his property, due to such
change in a neighborhood.
   D.   File a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, with knowledge
that such complaint is false in any material respect, or to file such complaint
for the sole purpose of harassment. (1985 Code § 5-10; amd. 2004 Code)
5-4-2: CERTAIN ACTS EXEMPTED:
Nothing herein shall apply to:
   A.   Prohibiting persons from giving preference to prospective buyers or
tenants for any reason other than race, color, religion, age, national origin,
gender, handicap, or familial status. (1985 Code § 5-11; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   The sale of a dwelling which is, or was at the time when first offered
for sale, the residence of its owner.
   C.   The rental of rooms in an owner-occupied residence or in a dwelling
used exclusively as a rooming house.
   D.   The rental or leasing of a housing unit in a building containing not
more than eight (8) housing units.
   E.   The rental or leasing of a dwelling or housing unit owned by any
religious or fraternal organization, or private club used and occupied for such
organizational purposes. (1985 Code § 5-11)
5-4-3: FAIR HOUSING BOARD:
See title 2, chapter 4 of this code for creation of the fair housing board.
(1985 Code § 5-12)
5-4-4: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Complaint Filed With Board: Any person aggrieved by a discriminatory
housing practice prohibited by city ordinance may file a written, signed
complaint with the fair housing board.
   B.   Contents Of Complaint: Said complaint shall state the name and address
of the person alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter, or any
other city ordinance, and shall set forth the particulars of said violation.
   C.   Investigation Of Complaint; Set Hearing Date: The fair housing board
shall receive such complaint, investigate its allegations and set a date for a
hearing to be held on the complaint. Said hearing shall be held within sixty
(60) days of the date of receipt of the complaint.
   D.   Notice Of Complaint And Hearing: At least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing, the person named in the complaint and the complainant shall be
notified, in writing, of the time and place of such hearing.
   E.   Actions At Hearing: The fair housing board shall take, and may allow,
such actions at the hearing, as may be necessary to ensure that all parties are
afforded the opportunity to fairly present their cases.
   F.   Findings Of Board:
      1.   If the fair housing board, by majority vote at the conclusion of the
hearing, finds that the person has not engaged in any discriminatory housing
practice, it shall state its findings and dismiss the case.
      2.   If the fair housing board, by majority vote at said hearing, finds
that the person has engaged in discriminatory housing practices, it shall state
its findings in writing and submit them to the respondent and the city attorney
for consideration. Unless the complaint is withdrawn or the city attorney finds
that there is insufficient information upon which to base a charge, the charge
shall be filed in the Marlow municipal court within twenty (20) days of said
hearing. (1985 Code § 5-13)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
State Traffic Code; Traffic Regulations   1
Vehicle Licensing; Security Verification   2
Traffic Control Devices   3
Parking Regulations   4
Vehicle Equipment And Condition   5
Pedestrians   6
Bicycles   7
Vehicle Impoundment   8
CHAPTER 1
STATE TRAFFIC CODE; TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: State Highway Safety Code Adopted
6-1-2: City Authority For Enforcement Of Regulations
6-1-3: Public Officials And Employees
6-1-4: Obedience To Regulations
6-1-5: Necessity Of Signs
6-1-6: Speed Regulations
6-1-7: Citation Tags; Failure To Comply
6-1-8: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
6-1-9: Duties Of Police And Fire Officials
6-1-10: Stopped School Bus
6-1-11: Accident Reports; Leaving Accident Scene
6-1-12: Driving By Unauthorized Persons
6-1-13: Reckless Driving
6-1-14: Driving Under The Influence
6-1-15: Driving On Sidewalks Prohibited
6-1-16: Following Too Closely
6-1-17: Backing
6-1-18: Riding Motorcycles, Motor Scooters Or Motor Bicycles
6-1-19: Construction Zones
6-1-20: Persons Working On Streets
6-1-21: Riding On Or Clinging To Vehicles
6-1-22: Dangerous Objects In Streets
6-1-23: Funeral, Other Processions
6-1-24: Eluding Police Officer
6-1-25: Fire Apparatus; Fire Hose
6-1-26: Obstruction Of Driver's View Or Control
6-1-27: Seat Belts, Mandatory Use
6-1-28: U-Turns
6-1-29: Penalty
6-1-30: Manually Composing, Sending Or Reading Electronic Text Messages
6-1-1: STATE HIGHWAY SAFETY CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   State Statute Adopted: The Oklahoma highway traffic safety code 1  is
hereby adopted and incorporated into this code, as if set out at length herein,
for the purposes of establishing locally appropriate rules and regulations for
the control of traffic within the city.
   B.   Definitions: The definitions of words used in this title shall be the
same as those definitions in 47 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1-101 through 1-186,
as amended. (1985 Code § 18-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS, as amended, and every 10 years' recodification thereof.
6-1-2: CITY AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   Council Authority: The city council is hereby empowered to adopt and
provide for the enforcement of regulations necessary to make the provisions of
this title and any other traffic or related ordinances of the city effective,
and to adopt and provide for the enforcement of temporary regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions.
   B.   Compliance With Directions Of City Officials: No person shall wilfully
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the chief of
police, any police officer, firefighter or any other authorized municipal
employee. (1985 Code § 18-5)
6-1-3: PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Applicability Of Provisions: The provisions of this title shall apply
to the driver of any vehicle owned by, or used in the service of, the United
States government, and any state, county, municipal or other governmental unit
or agency, as well as to other vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any said
driver to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise
permitted in this title or by state laws.
   B.   Exceptions: This title shall not apply to the military forces of the
United States and organizations of the national guard when performing military
duty. (1985 Code § 18-106)
6-1-4: OBEDIENCE TO REGULATIONS:
   A.   Compliance With Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to authorize or knowingly to permit any vehicle registered in
his or its name to be driven or be parked in violation of any provisions of
this title.
   B.   Parental Responsibility: The parent or guardian of any child or ward
shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any
of the provisions of this title. (1985 Code § 18-105)
6-1-5: NECESSITY OF SIGNS:
No provisions of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation,
an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs
are erected or in place. (1985 Code § 18-107)
6-1-6: SPEED REGULATIONS:
   A.   Driving In Reasonable And Prudent Manner: No person shall drive a
vehicle on any street within the corporate limits of the city at a speed
greater or less than is reasonable or prudent under the conditions then
existing (including, among other things, the condition of the vehicle, roadway,
weather, visibility, amount of traffic, presence of pedestrians and any
obstruction of view).
   B.   Speed Limits Established: No person shall drive any vehicle, except an
authorized emergency vehicle (as provided in this chapter), at a speed greater
than:
      1.   Adjacent To Schools: Twenty (20) miles an hour on any street
adjacent to any school, or in any school zone, between seven thirty o'clock (7:
30) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on days when school is in session.
      2.   Other Areas: Twenty five (25) miles per hour on other streets and on
streets adjacent to schools, at other times than that specified in subsection
B1 of this section, unless otherwise posted. (1985 Code § 18-6; amd. 2004 Code)
6-1-7: CITATION TAGS; FAILURE TO COMPLY:
   A.   Issuance Of Citation:
      1.   Police officers are hereby authorized to give notice to persons
violating provisions of this title by delivering citation tags to violators or,
in cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped in violation of
this title, by affixing such tags to the vehicles by means of which the
violation occurred.
      2.   Such citation tags shall indicate briefly the charge, shall bear the
registration number of the vehicle and shall direct the violator to present the
tag at the police station or other designated place within five (5) days, or
such other reasonable time as may be specified thereon.
      3.   Nothing in this section shall abridge the power to arrest any
violator, to take him into custody, or to file a complaint against him at any
time. (1985 Code § 18-7)
   B.   Numbering And Use Of Tags: Police officers shall use serially numbered
citation tags furnished by the city clerk. (1985 Code § 18-7; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Failure To Appear; Filing Of Complaint: If a violator of any provision
of this title who has been given a citation tag as provided in this section
fails to appear in accordance with the instructions of such tag, the chief of
police or his authorized agent shall send a letter or other written notice to
the owner of the vehicle involved, informing him of the violation, warning him
to appear and directing that, in the event such letter or notice is disregarded
for a period of five (5) days, a complaint will be filed and a warrant of
arrest issued; provided, that nothing in this section shall abridge the power
to file a complaint against him prior to the expiration of such time.
   D.   Issuance Of Arrest Warrant: In the event any person fails to comply
with a citation tag given to such person, or attached to a vehicle, the chief
of police shall have a complaint entered against such person before the
municipal judge, and said judge shall issue a warrant for his arrest. (1985
Code § 18-7)
6-1-8: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
   A.   Driver Privileges: The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of a law or ordinance, or when responding to, but not upon returning
from, a fire alarm, may exercise the following privileges:
      1.   Park or stand (irrespective of the provisions of this title);
      2.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or sign (slowing down as may be
necessary for safe operation);
      3.   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life
or property; or
      4.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specific directions.
   B.   Audible Or Visual Signal: The exemptions herein granted to an
authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such
vehicle is making use of audible and/or visual signals, except that an
authorized emergency vehicle, operated as a police vehicle, need not be
equipped with, or display, a red light visible from the front of the vehicle.
   C.   Yield Right Of Way: Upon the immediate approach of any authorized
emergency vehicle making required use of audible and/or visual signals, or of a
police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the
driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way, immediately drive
to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or
curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, or shall clear the roadway in
the safest possible manner, and shall stop and remain in such position until
the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by
a police officer.
   D.   Drive Safely: This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway, nor shall such provisions protect the
driver from the consequences of reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1985 Code § 18-8)
6-1-9: DUTIES OF POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS:
   A.   Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the chief of police and any police
officers to enforce the traffic regulations of the city, and all of the state
vehicle laws applicable to traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic
violations, to investigate accidents, to cooperate with other city officials in
the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways to improve
traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specifically imposed upon
said officers by this title and any other traffic or related ordinances of the
city.
   B.   Directing Traffic During Emergency: The chief of police and his
assistants are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or
signal, in conformance with traffic laws and ordinances. In the event of a
fire, other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, such
officers may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances.
   C.   Firefighters Assisting Police: Firefighters, when at the scene of a
fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic. (1985 Code § 18-9)
6-1-10: STOPPED SCHOOL BUS:
   A.   Passing Prohibited: No person shall pass any school bus (as defined by
state law) when such bus is stopped for the purpose of discharging or taking on
passengers, and is displaying flashing red lights, as required by state law.
   B.   Stopping Upon Approach: All persons shall stop upon approaching a
stopped school bus (as described in subsection A of this section) regardless of
the direction of said approach. (1985 Code § 18-10)
6-1-11: ACCIDENT REPORTS; LEAVING ACCIDENT SCENE:
   A.   Report Required: The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner
involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to, or death of, any person,
or damage to any vehicle or other property in such amount as prescribed by 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 10-108 shall, as soon as practicable, report such
accident to the chief of police or to the police department. Making out a
written report of the accident in the police department, as soon as practicable
after the accident (to be forwarded to the state department of public safety in
accordance with state law), shall be deemed compliance with this section. (1985
Code § 18-11; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Leaving Scene: Leaving the scene of an accident, as defined by current
state law, shall be unlawful within the corporate limits of the city. (1985
Code § 18-11)
6-1-12: DRIVING BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS:
   A.   Driver's License: It shall be unlawful for any person who does not have
a valid driver's license, as required by state law, to operate a motor vehicle
within the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   Permitting Unlicensed Driver To Drive: It shall also be unlawful and an
offense for any person to permit an unlicensed driver to operate a motor
vehicle within the corporate limits of the city.
   C.   Allowing Unauthorized Person To Drive: It shall be unlawful and an
offense for any person to authorize, or knowingly permit, any vehicle owned by
him or under his control, to be driven upon any of the streets or highways of
the city by any person who is not authorized, under the laws of the state of
Oklahoma, to operate such vehicle. (1985 Code § 18-12)
6-1-13: RECKLESS DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle within the corporate
limits of the city in a careless, negligent or reckless manner, without regard
for the safety of persons, property or the lawful use of the streets. Such
person shall be guilty of reckless driving. (1985 Code § 18-13)
6-1-14: DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the influence of alcoholic
beverages, narcotic drugs or other controlled, dangerous substances, to drive,
or be in actual physical control of, any vehicle within the corporate limits of
the city. (1985 Code § 18-14)
6-1-15: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED:
The driver of any vehicle shall not drive upon any sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except at a permanent or temporary driveway. (1985 Code § 18-15)
6-1-16: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
The driver of any vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is
reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of both vehicles and
the traffic upon, and the condition of, the roadway. (1985 Code § 18-16)
6-1-17: BACKING:
   A.   Safety: The driver of any vehicle shall not back the same unless such
movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other
traffic.
   B.   Distance Restriction: The driver of any vehicle shall not back the same
a greater distance than is necessary to permit it to enter the immediately
available proper driving lane. No extended backing shall be permitted. (1985
Code § 18-17)
6-1-18: RIDING MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR SCOOTERS OR MOTOR BICYCLES:
A person operating a motorcycle, motor scooter or motor bicycle shall ride only
upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto and shall not carry any
other person, nor shall any other person ride on the vehicle, unless it is
designed to carry more than one person, in which event, a passenger may ride
only upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or
upon another seat firmly attached to the vehicle at the rear or side of the
operator. (1985 Code § 18-110; amd. 2004 Code)
6-1-19: CONSTRUCTION ZONES:
   A.   Authority To Close Streets; Barricades Required: City personnel,
contractors or utility companies, while repairing or improving the streets of
the city, or when installing, improving or repairing lines or other utility
facilities in the streets, are hereby authorized, subject to control by the
city council, to close any street, or section thereof, to traffic during such
activity and shall erect or cause to be erected, proper control devices and
barricades to warn the public that such street has been closed to traffic.
   B.   Driving On Closed Streets Prohibited; Exception: When any street has
been closed to traffic under the provisions of subsection A of this section and
traffic control devices or barricades have been erected, it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive any vehicle under, over, around or through such traffic
control devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter the closed area (except
that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons while engaged
in such construction, maintenance and repair, to persons entering therein for
the protection of lives or property or to persons having their places of
residence or business within such closed area, who may travel through such area
at their own risk).
   C.   Streets Not Closed; Warning Devices Required: Whenever construction,
repair or maintenance of any street, utility line or facility is being
performed, and the street is not closed to traffic in accordance with this
section, the city personnel, contractor or utility company concerned shall
erect warning devices for the public. Every person using such street shall obey
such warning devices. (1985 Code § 18-111)
6-1-20: PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS:
   A.   Workers Exempted From Regulations: Unless specifically made applicable,
the provisions of this title, except those relating to reckless driving and
driving while intoxicated, shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles and other
equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to
persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in
construction, maintenance or repair of public utilities; provided, that all
highway and public utility operations shall be protected by adequate warning
signs, signals, devices or flagmen. (1985 Code § 18-112; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Compliance With Regulations: However, the provisions of this title
shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work.
(1985 Code § 18-112)
6-1-21: RIDING ON OR CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
   A.   Prohibition; Exception: No person shall ride upon any vehicle or
portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This
provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of
a duty or persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
   B.   Bicycles, Roller Skates: No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, skateboard, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself
to any vehicle upon a roadway. (1985 Code § 18-113)
6-1-22: DANGEROUS OBJECTS IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, cause to be placed, or let fall
and remain, in or upon any street, any scrap iron, nail, tack, glass, stick or
other thing which is likely to injure persons, damage property or render a
street unsafe for traffic. (1985 Code § 18-114)
6-1-23: FUNERAL, OTHER PROCESSIONS:
   A.   Driving Between Vehicles: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are
in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated.
   B.   Exception: This provision shall not apply at intersections where
traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. (1985 Code
§ 18-115)
6-1-24: ELUDING POLICE OFFICER:
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any operator of a motor vehicle who has
received a visual and/or an audible signal (red light and/or a siren) from a
police officer driving a motor vehicle, with insignia showing the same to be an
official police, sheriff or highway patrol car, directing the operator to bring
his vehicle to a stop, to wilfully increase his speed or extinguish his lights
in an attempt to elude such police officer, to wilfully attempt, in any other
manner, to elude the police officer, or to elude such police officer. (1985
Code § 18-116)
6-1-25: FIRE APPARATUS; FIRE HOSE:
   A.   Following Fire Apparatus: The driver of any vehicle, other than when on
official business, shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to
a fire alarm, closer than five hundred feet (500'), or drive into or park such
vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire
alarm. (1985 Code § 18-117)
   B.   Crossing Fire Hose: No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected
hose of any fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to
be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire
department official in command. (1985 Code § 18-118)
6-1-26: OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW OR CONTROL:
   A.   Driver Restricted: No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so
loaded, or when there are, in the front seat, such a number of persons
exceeding three (3) as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides
of the vehicle, or, as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving
mechanism of the vehicle.
   B.   Passenger Restriction: No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such
position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to
interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. (1985
Code § 18-119)
6-1-27: SEAT BELTS, MANDATORY USE:
   A.   Use Of Seat Belt Required: Every operator and front seat passenger of a
passenger car operated in the city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened
safety seat belt system, required to be installed in the motor vehicle when
manufactured pursuant to 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 12-417. For the purposes
of this section; "passenger car" shall mean "vehicle" as defined in 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 1102, as it may be amended from time to time, except that
"passenger car" shall not include trucks, truck-tractors, recreational
vehicles, motorcycles, motorized bicycles or vehicles used primarily for farm
use and licensed pursuant to the provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes section
1134, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 347, 12-16-1997; amd. 2004
Code)
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a
passenger car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written
verification from a physician licensed in this state that he is unable to wear
a safety seat belt system for medical reasons. Provided, that the issuance of
such verification by a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor
shall such physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in damages or
otherwise, to any person injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety
seat belt system.
      2.   This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who
is a route carrier of the United States postal service.
   C.   Fine For Violation: Notwithstanding any provision contained in this
code providing for penalties under this title, fine and court costs for
violating the provisions of this section shall not exceed twenty dollars
($20.00). (Ord. 347, 12-16-1997)
6-1-28: U-TURNS:
   A.   Allowed At Intersection: The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the
vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the city,
except at an intersection.
   B.   Prohibited Turns: It is unlawful to make a U-turn at the following
locations:
      1.   An intersection controlled by traffic control devices or signals,
unless such turns are specifically authorized;
      2.   When a police officer is directing traffic, except at the latter's
direction;
      3.   At any other location where an official "No U-Turn" sign has been
placed and is maintained; or (Ord. 311, 12-27-1988)
      4.   For the purpose of parking on the opposite side of the street. (2004
Code)
6-1-29: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this title,
performs any unlawful act as defined in this title or fails to perform any act
required in this title, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (1985 Code § 18-140; amd. 2004 Code)
6-1-30: MANUALLY COMPOSING, SENDING OR READING ELECTRONIC TEXT MESSAGES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any
street or highway within the city while using a handheld electronic
communication device to manually compose, send or read an electronic text
message while the motor vehicle is in motion.
   B.   Any person who violates the provisions of subsection A of this section
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
   C.   The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply if the
person is using the cellular telephone or electronic communication device for
the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an
imminent emergency situation:
      1.   An emergency response operator;
      2.   A hospital, physician's office or health clinic;
      3.   A provider of ambulance services;
      4.   A provider of firefighting services; or
      5.   A law enforcement agency.
   D.   For the purpose of this section:
   CELLULAR TELEPHONE: An analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by
the federal communications commission to operate in the frequency bandwidth
reserved for cellular telephones.
   COMPOSE, SEND OR READ: With respect to a text message means the manual
entry, sending or retrieval of a text message to communicate with any person or
device.
   ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE: An electronic device that permits the user
to manually transmit a communication of written text by means other than
through an oral transfer or wire communication. This term does not include a
device that is physically or electronically integrated into a motor vehicle or
a voice operated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a
motor vehicle, or hands free device that allows the user to write, send or read
a text message without the use of either hand except to activate, deactivate or
initiate a feature or function.
   TEXT MESSAGE: Includes a text based message, instant message, electronic
message, photo, video or electronic mail. (Ord. 412, 9-22-2015, eff. 11-1-2015)
CHAPTER 2
VEHICLE LICENSING; SECURITY VERIFICATION
SECTION:
6-2-1: Proper Equipment
6-2-2: License Plate
6-2-3: Security Verification Form
6-2-1: PROPER EQUIPMENT:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which is not equipped as required by
law upon any street within the city. It shall also be unlawful to fail to use
such equipment in the manner required by law, use it in a manner prohibited by
law or to operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by law upon any
street within the city. (1985 Code § 18-108)
6-2-2: LICENSE PLATE:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the
city, unless such vehicle is licensed and displays a valid license plate
thereon, as required by state law. (1985 Code § 18-108)
6-2-3: SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM:
   A.   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
   COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW: The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state, as found in 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 7-600 et seq.
   OPERATOR'S POLICY: An "operator's policy" of liability insurance shall
insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him by law
for damages arising out of the operation or use by him of any motor vehicle not
owned by him, subject to the same limits of liability required in an owner's
policy.
   OWNER'S POLICY: An "owner's policy" of liability insurance:
      1.   Shall designate, by explicit description or by appropriate
reference, all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be
granted;
      2.   Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other person,
except as provided in subparagraph 3 of this definition, using an insured
vehicle with the express or implied permission of the named insured, against
loss from the liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the
ownership, maintenance, operation or use of such vehicle;
      3.   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with existing
laws; and
      4.   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 7-204.
   SECURITY: 1. A policy or bond meeting the requirements of 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 7-204.
      2.   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 7-204 as acceptable limits for a
policy or bond; or
      3.   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes
section 7-503, having the equivalency of limits required under 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 7-204 as acceptable limits for a policy or bond.
   SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM: A form, approved by the state board of property
and casualty rates, verifying the existence of security required by the
compulsory insurance law of the state of Oklahoma. Said form shall contain the
following minimum information:
      1.   Name and address of carrier;
      2.   Name and address where security may be verified, if other than
carrier;
      3.   Name of insured;
      4.   Notice that an owner's policy has been issued pursuant to compulsory
insurance law;
      5.   Year, make, and at least the last three (3) digits of VIN of each
insured vehicle (not required if owner's form states "fleet coverage");
      6.   Inclusive dates liability policy is in effect; and
      7.   A warning to the owner of state law requirements. (1985 Code § 18-
108)
   B.   Security Verification Form Required: The owner of a motor vehicle
registered in this state and operating said vehicle within the boundaries of
the city shall carry in such vehicle at all times a current owner's security
verification form listing the vehicle (or an equivalent form which has been
used by the state department of public safety), which shall be produced by any
driver thereof, upon request, for inspection by any law enforcement officer
and, in case of a collision, the form shall be shown, upon request, to any
person affected by said collision.
   C.   Exceptions: The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or
operator's security verification form (or an equivalent form) from the state
department of public safety during operation of the vehicle and shall not be
required to surrender such form for vehicle registration purposes:
      1.   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof;
      2.   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of a business,
corporation or utility on the exterior, and which is in compliance with the
compulsory insurance law according to records of the state department of public
safety, which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance, or fleet policy;
      3.   Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a permit number issued
by the interstate commerce commission, or the Oklahoma corporation commission;
      4.   Any licensed taxicab; and
      5.   Any vehicle owned by a licensed, used motor vehicle dealer.
   D.   Carrying Form: Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in this
state shall, while operating or using such vehicle within the boundaries of the
city, carry either an operator's or an owner's security verification form
issued by a carrier (provided the operator is not excluded from coverage
thereon) or an equivalent form issued by the state department of public safety,
reflecting liability coverage. An owner or operator who fails to produce for
inspection a valid and current security verification form (or equivalent form)
which has been issued by said state department, upon request of any peace
officer of the city police department, shall be guilty of an offense.
   E.   Suspended Sentence: A sentence imposed for any violation of this
section may be suspended or deferred in whole or in part by the court.
   F.   Dismissal Of Charges: Any person producing proof in court that a
current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by
the state department of public safety reflecting this liability coverage for
such person was in force at the time of the alleged offense, shall be entitled
to dismissal of such charge.
   G.   Forward Abstract To State: Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral
of sentence, the court clerk shall forward an abstract to the state department
of public safety within ten (10) days reflecting the action taken by the court.
(1985 Code § 18-108; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Installation Of Traffic Control Devices
6-3-2: Specifications For Traffic Control Devices
6-3-3: Turn Signs And Indicators
6-3-4: Designation And Marking Of One-Way Streets
6-3-5: Marking Of Traffic Lanes
6-3-6: Designation And Marking Of Crosswalks
6-3-7: Unauthorized Signs Or Devices
6-3-8: Classification Of Streets
6-3-1: INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The city administrator and/or his/her designee shall have traffic control
signs, signals and devices placed and maintained, when and as required under
the ordinances of the city, to make the provisions of such ordinances
effective. (1985 Code § 18-55; amd. 2004 Code)
6-3-2: SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and
specifications approved by the Oklahoma state highway department. All signs and
signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as
practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All
traffic control devices so erected, and not inconsistent with the provisions of
state law or this title, shall be official traffic control devices. (1985 Code
§ 18-56)
6-3-3: TURN SIGNS AND INDICATORS:
   A.   Authority To Post Signs: The city administrator is hereby authorized to
determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left or U-turn, and shall have placed proper signs at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours
of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event, the same shall be
plainly indicated on said signs. (1985 Code § 18-57; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Obedience By Drivers: Whenever authorized signs are erected, indicating
that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the directions of any such sign.
   C.   Right Turn On Red: Unless otherwise indicated by such signs, a right
turn on red or stop shall be permitted after the vehicle has come to a complete
stop. (1985 Code § 18-57)
6-3-4: DESIGNATION AND MARKING OF ONE-WAY STREETS:
Whenever the city administrator designates any street, alley or part thereof as
a one-way street or alley, the city administrator shall have signs placed,
giving notice thereof. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the
opposite direction is prohibited. (1985 Code § 18-58; amd. 2004 Code)
6-3-5: MARKING OF TRAFFIC LANES:
   A.   Authority To Have Lanes Marked: The city administrator is hereby
authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway of any street where a
regular alignment of traffic is necessary. (1985 Code § 18-59; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Compliance By Drivers: Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall
be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such
vehicle within the boundaries of any such lanes, except when lawfully passing
another vehicle, preparing to make a lawful turning movement or as otherwise
authorized by ordinance. (1985 Code § 18-59)
6-3-6: DESIGNATION AND MARKING OF CROSSWALKS:
The city administrator shall have the authority to designate, by appropriate
devices or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections
or other places where, in its opinion, there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway. (1985 Code § 18-60; amd. 2004 Code)
6-3-7: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS OR DEVICES:
   A.   Unauthorized Signs: No person shall place, maintain or display, upon or
in view of any highway, an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic control
device or railroad sign or signal, which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, which projects any flashing or revolving beams of light, or which
hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic
control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   B.   Commercial Advertising: No person shall place or maintain, nor shall
any public authority permit, upon any highway, any traffic sign, signal or
device bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
   C.   Exception; Private Property, Information: This section shall not be
deemed to prohibit the placement, upon private property, of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official
signs.
   D.   Nuisance; Abatement: Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or
device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the city administrator
is hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed. (1985 Code §
18-61)
6-3-8: CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS:
   A.   Adoption Of System: The city administrator may adopt, by resolution, a
street classification system for the city. Whenever such a system is adopted,
it shall be the duty of the city administrator to have stop signs placed and
maintained, or if deemed more appropriate at any intersection, yield signs, on
each and every street involved in the implementation of the classification
system (unless traffic at any intersection is controlled at all times by
traffic control signals).
   B.   Designation Of Hazardous Intersections: The city administrator is
hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular
hazard exists and to determine: (1985 Code § 18-62; amd. 2004 Code)
      1.   Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such
intersection, in which event it shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every
such place where a stop is required; or
      2.   Whether vehicles shall yield the right of way to vehicles on a
different street at such intersection, in which event, it shall cause to be
erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required.
   C.   Placement Of Signs: Every stop or yield sign shall be erected as near
as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the
nearest line of the intersecting roadway. (1985 Code § 18-62)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Stopping Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
6-4-2: Angle Parking
6-4-3: Standing Or Parking Close To Curb; Brakes
6-4-4: Parking On Private Property
6-4-5: Presumption In Reference To Illegal Parking
6-4-6: Loading Zones
6-4-7: Parking Certain Vehicles On Streets In Residential Areas
6-4-1: STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Prohibited Parking Places: No person shall stop or park a vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with state law, ordinance, the directions of a police officer or traffic
control device, or in an emergency situation, in any of the following places:
      1.   On any sidewalk;
      2.   In front of, or obstructing any driveway;
      3.   Within an intersection;
      4.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant (except in an officially
marked parking space);
      5.   Within or on a crosswalk;
      6.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station;
      7.   Near any street work or excavation, when stopping or parking would
obstruct traffic;
      8.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street (double parking or double stopping);
      9.   In any alley where less than ten feet (10') of the roadway will be
left available for the movement of vehicular traffic;
      10.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; or
      11.   In any manner in violation of any other city ordinance. (Ord. 364,
3-27-2001)
   B.   Time Limit Parking: The city administrator is hereby authorized to
establish parking time limits, and to prohibit parking on designated streets
and parts of streets by having appropriate signs placed thereon. (Ord. 364, 3-
27-2001; amd. 2004 Code)
6-4-2: ANGLE PARKING:
   A.   Determination: The city administrator may determine upon what streets
and parts of streets angle parking shall be permitted, and shall have such
streets marked or signed. (1985 Code § 18-71; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Compliance With Street Markings: On those streets which have been so
signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such
signs or markings or outside of the area enclosed by said markings. (1985 Code
§ 18-71)
6-4-3: STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB; BRAKES:
   A.   Parallel Parking, Distance From Curb: Except as otherwise provided in
this chapter, or where such parking is entirely prohibited by operation of any
other city ordinance, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where
there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand
wheels of such vehicle parallel to, and within eighteen inches (18") of, the
right hand curb; provided, that every vehicle stopped or parked upon the left
hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or
stopped with the left hand wheels parallel to, and within eighteen inches (18")
of, the left hand curb.
   B.   Setting Brakes: Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles.
(Ord. 364, 3-27-2001)
6-4-4: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Permission To Park On Property Of Another: It shall be unlawful to
place or park a motor vehicle or a trailer upon the posted private property of
another without first obtaining permission from the person in charge of such
property, except where said placing or parking is involuntary.
   B.   Removal And Impoundment Of Vehicle Or Trailer:
      1.   A landowner, or other person in charge of the land, may cause any
motor vehicle or trailer which is left on private property after posted hours
to be removed and impounded by an appropriate wrecker service.
      2.   The police department or any police officer is also authorized to
remove any unauthorized vehicles from private property upon direction of the
owner of the property or persons in charge of the property.
      3.   The city, any landowner or person in charge of the property shall
not be liable for any damages which may occur to the trespassing vehicle or
trailer under the terms of this section, while the same is trespassing, while
it is being removed from his property, or while it is in storage. (1985 Code §
18-73)
6-4-5: PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING:
   A.   Registered Owner; Prima Facie Evidence: In any prosecution charging a
violation of any law or ordinance governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was
parked in violation of any such law or ordinance, together with proof that the
defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the
registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked
or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred.
   B.   Issuance Of Citation: The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only
when the procedure of giving a citation tag has been followed. (1985 Code § 18-
74)
6-4-6: LOADING ZONES:
   A.   Authority To Designate: Except as otherwise provided herein, the city
administrator is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and
freight curb loading zones, and shall have appropriate signs placed, indicating
the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are
applicable. By the same authority, such loading zones may be changed or
discontinued.
   B.   Request For Zone And Sign; Payment Of Cost: When such a loading zone is
established upon the request of any person, firm or corporation, the city
administrator shall not have signs placed until the applicant has paid to the
city clerk an amount of money estimated by said city administrator to be
adequate to reimburse the city for all costs of establishing and signing the
same. (Ord. 364, 3-27-2001; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Restricted Use: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any
purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery
or pick up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb
loading zone, during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in
effect.
   D.   R-1 And R-2 Zoning Classifications: The terms of this section shall not
apply to R-1 or R-2 zoning classifications. Loading and unloading in R-1 and R-
2 zoning classifications shall be governed by section
6-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 364, 3-27-2001)
6-4-7: PARKING CERTAIN VEHICLES ON STREETS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
Trucks containing more than two (2) axles, recreational vehicles, boats and
trailers are prohibited from parking on a street or alley in R-1 or R-2 zoning
classifications, except for a reasonable period of time for loading and
unloading. Under no circumstances shall an above described vehicle remain
parked overnight on a street or alley in an R-1 or R-2 zoning classification.
(Ord. 364, 3-27-2001)
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
SECTION:
6-5-1: Injurious Vehicles; Oversized Vehicle Permits
6-5-2: Size And Weight Of Vehicles; Truck Routes
6-5-3:Use Of Dynamic Braking Services Prohibited
6-5-1: INJURIOUS VEHICLES; OVERSIZED VEHICLE PERMITS:
   A.   Injurious Vehicles Or Objects Prohibited: No vehicle or object which
injures, or is likely to injure, any street within the city shall be driven or
moved on any street within the city.
   B.   Oversized Vehicle Permit Required: No person shall drive any vehicle
which is in such condition, so constructed or so loaded as to cause, or be
likely to cause, a delay in traffic or constitute a hazard to persons or
property, without having obtained an oversized vehicle permit from the office
of the city clerk. (1985 Code § 18-45)
6-5-2: SIZE AND WEIGHT OF VEHICLES; TRUCK ROUTES:
   A.   State Permit Required: No person shall drive or convey through any
street any vehicle, the width, height, length, weight or load of which exceeds
that authorized by state laws, except in accordance with a permit issued by
state authority. (1985 Code § 18-46)
   B.   Authority To Prescribe Routes; Signs:
      1.   The city administrator may prescribe routes through the city for the
use of trucks in general or trucks of particular kinds and/or other vehicles,
which are not ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing through the city.
      2.   The city administrator shall see that appropriate and adequate signs
are placed along such routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the
routes. (1985 Code § 18-46; amd. 2004 Code)
      3.   When such signs are erected and in place, the driver of a truck or
other vehicle for which a route has been so prescribed, while passing through
the city, shall keep on such route and shall not deviate therefrom, except in
case of emergency. (1985 Code § 18-46)
6-5-3:USE OF DYNAMIC BRAKING SERVICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   A dynamic braking device (commonly referred to as exhaust brakes, jake
brakes, jacobs brake, engine brake or compression brake) means a device,
primarily on trucks, that converts the engine from an internal combustion
engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel
brakes.
   B.   No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device
engaged within the municipal boundaries of the City of Marlow, except for
emergency situations for the purpose of avoiding a collision with another
object or vehicle. (Ord. 431, 8-27-2019)
CHAPTER 6
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Application Of Chapter
6-6-2: Driver And Pedestrian Requirements
6-6-3: Drivers To Exercise Due Care
6-6-1: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals, but, at all other
places, shall be granted those rights and be subject to those restrictions as
provided in this chapter. (1985 Code § 18-95)
6-6-2: DRIVER AND PEDESTRIAN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Driver To Yield: When traffic control signals are not in place or in
operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down
or stopping if need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within
a crosswalk.
   B.   Pedestrian Entering Path Of Vehicle: No pedestrian shall suddenly leave
any place of safety, and walk or run into the path of a vehicle.
   C.   Driver Behind Stopped Vehicle: Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a
marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a
pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (1985 Code §
18-96)
6-6-3: DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE:
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway, shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway. (1985 Code § 18-97)
CHAPTER 7
BICYCLES
SECTION:
6-7-1: Traffic Laws Applicable To Persons Riding Bicycles
6-7-2: Bicycle Equipment
6-7-3: Obedience To Traffic Control Devices
6-7-4: Riding On Bicycles
6-7-1: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLICABLE TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by the laws of this state declaring the rules of the road applicable to
vehicles, or by the ordinances of the city applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except as to special regulations in this title and to those provisions
of state law or ordinances which, by their nature, can have no application.
(1985 Code § 18-85)
6-7-2: BICYCLE EQUIPMENT:
Every bicycle in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front
which shall emit a white light visible from all distances, up to five hundred
feet (500') to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear, of a type which
shall be visible from all distances up to three hundred feet (300') to the
rear, when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle. (1985 Code § 18-86)
6-7-3: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   Obey Signs And Signals: Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the
instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control
devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   Turning Movements: Wherever authorized signs are erected indicating
that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall
disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from
the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey
the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (1985 Code § 18-87)
6-7-4: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
   A.   Carrying Persons: No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at a
time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
   B.   Right Side Of Roadway: Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising
due care when passing a vehicle standing or proceeding in the same direction.
   C.   Use Of Bicycle Paths: Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been
provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and not the
roadway.
   D.   Speed: No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
   E.   Emerging From Alley, Driveway: The operator of a bicycle emerging from
an alley, driveway or building shall yield the right of way to all approaching
pedestrians, and upon entering a roadway, shall yield the right of way to all
vehicles approaching on such roadway. (1985 Code § 18-88)
   F.   Riding On Sidewalks 1 : The city administrator is authorized to have
signs placed on any trafficway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by
any person. When such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same.
(1985 Code § 18-88; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-1A-11 of this code.
CHAPTER 8
VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
SECTION:
6-8-1: Purpose And Effect Of Impoundment
6-8-2: Place Of Impoundment
6-8-3: Duration Of Impoundment
6-8-4: Redemption And Release Of Vehicle
6-8-5: Authority To Impound Vehicles
6-8-6: Causes Of Impoundment
6-8-7: Abandoned, Wrecked Or Nonoperating Vehicles
6-8-1: PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF IMPOUNDMENT:
Impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this chapter shall
be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public peace,
safety, welfare and safeguarding of property, and shall be used generally for
the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention and abatement of
public nuisances arising from traffic law violations, protection of the public
rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares in the city from obstructions
placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for safeguarding and
protecting recovered stolen vehicles. (1985 Code § 18-30)
6-8-2: PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be
removed to the nearest garage, or other place of safekeeping designated by the
police department, and shall not be removed to any other place. (1985 Code §
18-31; amd. 2004 Code)
6-8-3: DURATION OF IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Release Upon Written Order: Unless otherwise provided hereinafter, any
vehicle impounded under the provisions of this code shall be stored and held
safely until a written order for its release, signed by the chief of police (or
his designated representative), has been issued.
   B.   Conditions Of Release: The written order for release shall be
conditioned upon:
      1.   Payment of all impoundment costs and accrued storage charges
assessed against the vehicle, by the person to whom the release is issued; and
      2.   Payment of all fines and costs due the city because of traffic law
or other law violations involving the vehicle, or proper security posted for
said fine or law violation. (1985 Code § 18-32)
6-8-4: REDEMPTION AND RELEASE OF VEHICLE:
   A.   Presentation Of Order For Release: The person holding the written order
for release shall be entitled to obtain possession of the vehicle upon
presentation of the order for release at the place of impoundment, together
with payment (or tender of payment) of all impoundment costs and accrued
storage charges due.
   B.   Releasing To Persons Other Than Owner: The city clerk or a designated
representative is hereby authorized to release vehicles which have been
impounded (and accept agreements and bonds to save the city harmless by such
releases) to persons other than the registered owner of the vehicle.
   C.   Requirements: Any party claiming an interest in an impounded vehicle
shall submit (by written instruments on other documents), to the chief of
police, proof of compliance with the following requirements:
      1.   Proof of interest;
      2.   Agreement to save and hold harmless the city and all of its
employees; and
      3.   Proof of financial responsibility showing the net worth of the party
seeking the vehicle to be in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), or
a surety bond in an amount no less than double the value of the vehicle sought
to be released. (1985 Code § 18-33)
6-8-5: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES:
   A.   Police Authority: The chief of police of the city, and members of the
city police department, are hereby authorized, within the limits set forth in
this chapter, to impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated.
   B.   Valid Impoundment: No impoundment shall be valid unless made under
order of an authorized police officer, and in strict adherence to the
procedures established in this chapter and by other policies of the city. (1985
Code § 18-34)
6-8-6: CAUSES OF IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Disabled Vehicles: A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be
impounded, under the following circumstances:
      1.   If left unattended and improperly parked on a street or highway;
      2.   If left unattended longer than forty eight (48) hours on the
shoulder of any highway; or
      3.   If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated
to such extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
   B.   Unattended Vehicles: An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge,
viaduct, causeway or within the structure of a grade separation, may be
impounded.
   C.   Driver Detained: Whenever the driver, or person in charge, of any
vehicle is placed under arrest, taken into custody and detained by police under
circumstances which leave, or will leave, a vehicle unattended on any street or
highway, the vehicle may be impounded.
   D.   Illegally Parked Vehicle: A vehicle left unattended upon any street,
alley or thoroughfare, and so parked illegally as to constitute a definite
hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, shall be impounded.
   E.   Abandonment; Notify Owner: When any derelict vehicle is discovered by
the police department to have been parked upon any street in the city for a
period of seventy two (72) hours, or more, the police department is authorized
to impound the vehicle, and if the owner of the vehicle may be ascertained by
reasonable diligence, the owner shall be notified of the action by the police
department.
   F.   Trespassing; Complaint: A trespassing, unattended vehicle found may be
impounded when the required complaint has been properly made and filed. The
owner or legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint against the person
parking the vehicle on the owner's (or legal occupant's) property. If the
identity of the person parking the vehicle is unknown, then the complaint may
be filed against the registered owner of the vehicle. The complaint shall be
verified and shall allege that the complaining party is the owner or legal
occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is parked or standing. Upon
filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant, and if there
appears to be proper cause to believe a violation has occurred, the police
department shall cause the vehicle to be impounded and placed in storage.
   G.   No Parking Zone: Any unattended vehicle parked at the street curbing of
any zone where parking is prohibited, and where official signs are in place
giving notice thereof in violation of the prohibition, may be impounded.
   H.   Blocking Fire Escape, Hydrant: Any vehicle illegally parked in such a
manner that it blocks a fire escape, ladder or exit, or blocks ready access to
a fire hydrant, shall be impounded.
   I.   Street Intersection:
      1.   Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection
shall be impounded.
      2.   A disabled vehicle in an intersection with the person in charge of
the vehicle being present shall be moved out of the intersection and to the
nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing.
   J.   Stolen Vehicle:
      1.   Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered
owner cannot be found within a reasonable time, not exceeding eight (8) hours,
or cannot be determined from the registration papers or other identification in
the vehicle (or from records or information available from reports of stolen
cars), the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place of
impoundment and the registered owner of the vehicle notified of the location of
the place of impoundment as soon as possible by the police department.
      2.   If the registered owner is identified, located and notified of the
recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make his
own arrangements for the removal of the vehicle within a period of twenty four
(24) hours from the time he is actually notified of its recovery. If the owner
is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time specified, the
vehicle may be impounded. (1985 Code § 18-35)
6-8-7: ABANDONED, WRECKED OR NONOPERATING VEHICLES:
   A.   Abandonment Prohibited; Nuisance:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided, no person shall abandon any partially
dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle, nor leave such vehicle for
such time and under such conditions as to cause it to reasonably appear to have
been abandoned, upon any private property, dedicated street right of way or
public easement.
      2.   Vehicles so abandoned or left shall constitute a public nuisance.
   B.   Exceptions: Persons excepted from subsection A of this section are
those who maintain such vehicles:
      1.   In enclosed buildings;
      2.   On the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place
and manner, when such vehicles are necessary to the operation of said business;
or
      3.   In an appropriate storage facility or depository which is maintained
by or for the city.
   C.   Rebuttable Presumption: A rebuttable presumption exists that vehicles
have been abandoned when any one of the following conditions exists:
      1.   Weeds and/or grass undergrowth indicates to a reasonable person that
the vehicle has not been moved, thereby permitting such growth to occur; or
      2.   One or more wheels are flat or missing; or
      3.   Portions of the vehicle which are needed for its operation or
control are missing; or
      4.   Neighboring residents provide written statements as to the length of
time such vehicle has been standing in one place without removal, or statements
that parts are taken from, or added to, such vehicle, which would indicate a
salvage, garage or used parts operation; or
      5.   Evidence exists that provisions of the city code pertaining to
zoning or to junk or salvage yards, are being violated; or
      6.   No current license tag is present or visible on the vehicle.
   D.   Authority Of City Officials: Appropriate city officials may remove and
impound, or cause to be removed and impounded, those vehicles which appear to
be in violation of this section.
   E.   Impoundment Notice To Owner: Prior to the removal and impoundment of
any vehicle under the provisions of this chapter, the appropriate city
officials shall attempt to notify, by certified mail, the registered owner of
such vehicle, stating that the vehicle appears to be in violation of this
chapter, and that the owner has forty eight (48) hours from the receipt of such
notice to remove the vehicle. Should the city officials be unable to serve
notice upon the owner, a notice containing similar provisions shall be affixed
to the abandoned vehicle instead. (1985 Code § 18-36)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Streets, Sidewalks And Public Ways   1
Park And Recreational Facilities   2
Cemetery   3
Railroads   4
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Trees And Shrubbery
7-1-2: Rights Of Way And Easements
7-1-3: Closing Public Ways And Easements
7-1-4: Obstructions
7-1-5: Drainage Of Polluting Substances
7-1-6: Penalty
7-1-1: TREES AND SHRUBBERY:
   A.   Trimming Required:
      1.   The owner of any premises abutting on any street shall trim all
trees and shrubbery growing in the public right of way and on any part of the
premises adjacent to any street or alley, in such a manner that the boughs or
limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient passage and travel along
any streets, sidewalks or alleys.
      2.   When such premises are occupied by some person other than the owner,
such occupant shall trim the trees and shrubbery in the same manner as herein
required of the owner.
   B.   Injuring Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to injure any
tree or shrubbery within any public right of way; provided, that this shall not
prohibit the lawful and proper care and removal of such trees and shrubbery.
(1985 Code § 17-1)
7-1-2: RIGHTS OF WAY AND EASEMENTS:
   A.   Obstructing Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to obstruct or otherwise prevent access to, any publicly used
street, alley, easement or other city owned property, whether platted or
unplatted; provided, that the city may prevent or provide access to such
streets, alleys, easements and city owned properties from time to time, in the
public interest.
   B.   Fenced Property; City Easement: The city council may permit certain
streets, alleys, easements and city properties which are dedicated, but not
required for traffic or other public access or use, to be fenced or otherwise
made inaccessible to the public (as in the case of land being farmed or grazed
as a part of a larger field or pasture); provided, that the city council or any
of its officers or employees shall have the right of ingress, egress and
easement for the purpose of installing or maintaining utilities, cleaning,
grading, mowing or any other activity which is in the public interest.
   C.   Land Dedicated For Farming Or Grazing: Persons, companies, corporations
or individuals who have fenced in, or are farming or grazing dedicated, but
unopened, streets, alleys, easements or city owned properties, as permitted
above, shall:
      1.   Not construct any building, structure, earthworks or ponds, nor in
any other way disturb the general grade and slope of the land;
      2.   Maintain the property so that no nuisance is created;
      3.   Immediately relinquish any rights presumed to be held concerning the
property upon notice by the city; and
      4.   Permit access to the property at any time when requested to do so by
a city officer or employee. (1985 Code § 17-2)
7-1-3: CLOSING PUBLIC WAYS AND EASEMENTS:
   A.   Definitions: The following terms, as used in this section, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   CLOSE: Action by the city council discontinuing the public use of a public
way or easement without affecting title to real property.
   EASEMENT: Rights in real property as set forth in 60 Oklahoma Statutes
section 49.
   PUBLIC AGENCY: The city, state or federal governments or any of their
agencies or political subdivisions.
   PUBLIC WAY: A street, avenue, boulevard, alley, lane or thoroughfare open
for public use.
   B.   Procedure For Closing Public Ways And Easements:
      1.   Application; Contents: Any person or corporation desiring to have a
public way or easement closed within the corporate limits of the city shall
submit a formal application to the planning and zoning commission. The
application shall consist of:
         a.   A map showing the public way or easement the applicant wishes
closed.
         b.   A statement why the applicant desires the closing and whether the
public way or easement is presently being used or when it was last used by the
public.
         c.   A list of all owners of record abutting the public way or
easement or whose property is within three hundred feet (300') of the external
boundary of said public way or easement, taken from the current year's tax
rolls of the county treasurer and certified by a bonded abstracter.
         d.   A list of all franchisees and any others determined to have a
special right or privilege granted by ordinance or legislative enactment to use
the public way or easement.
         e.   Applicant shall provide this required information at its own
expense.  Unless the applicant is a public agency, the application should also
be accompanied by a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to cover the
costs of mailing and publication.
      2.   Notice Of Public Hearing: The planning and zoning commission shall
set a date for a public hearing on the application. The city clerk shall
provide proper notice of the hearing to the public and to all property owners
and franchisees. A minimum of thirty (30) days public notice prior to the
hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of general circulation in
the city.  Written notice of the hearing shall be given to all property owners
within three hundred feet (300'), all franchisees, and any others determined to
have a special right or privilege granted by ordinance or legislative enactment
to use the public way or easement at least thirty (30) days prior to the
hearing on the application by mailing the notice to the last known address of
each person entitled to notice.
      3.   Recommendation Of Commission: Following the public hearing, the
planning and zoning commission shall determine whether it is necessary or
expedient to close the public way or easement and make an appropriate
recommendation to the city council for final consideration of the application.
      4.   Council Action: After considering the application, the mayor and
council may disapprove the application or may pass an ordinance closing to the
public use the public way or easement within the city if the city council deem
such closure necessary or expedient.
      5.   City Authority; Certain Right Retained: Any ordinance closing a
public way or easement shall state that the city retains the right to reopen
the public way or easement whenever the city deems it necessary and that
closing of the public way or easement shall not affect the right to maintain,
repair, reconstruct, operate or remove utility, public service corporation, or
transmission company facilities of service therein, nor shall a closing affect
private ways existing by operation of law unless released in writing executed
by the owners thereof. (Ord. 378, 6-29-2004)
7-1-4: OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   Interference With Pedestrian Or Vehicular Traffic: It shall be unlawful
for any person to use or obstruct the sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements or
public rights of way of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with
pedestrian or other lawful traffic and parking thereon, or to interfere unduly
with the purpose of said easement or right of way.
   B.   Sweeping Refuse Into Street: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to deposit, throw or sweep into or upon streets, alleys, parking
areas or sidewalks any paper, rubbish, grass, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt,
trash, crates, boxes or other refuse of any kind.
   C.   Hazardous Conditions On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for the owner
or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area to permit the
sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become a hazard to
persons using the sidewalk.
   D.   Openings In Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful and an offense for any
person to permit to be open or leave open any cellar door, manhole or grating
of any kind in or upon any street, sidewalk or alley of the city. (1985 Code §
17-3)
   E.   Excavations: It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation
or cutting in any street, sidewalk, alley or public grounds, or to remove any
earth or construction material therefrom, except where authorized to do so by a
representative of the city staff. Excavations so authorized shall be properly
guarded and protected to prevent said excavations from being or becoming
dangerous to life or limb. (1985 Code § 17-3; amd. 2004 Code)
   F.   Obstructing Drainage Easements: It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to obstruct any street, sidewalk, alley or drainage
easement by placing any approach, driveway or other obstruction or substance
whatever, that will obstruct or prevent the natural flow of water through the
easement or into the storm sewers or drains, or dam the same so as to back any
water upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or gutters. (1985 Code § 17-3)
7-1-5: DRAINAGE OF POLLUTING SUBSTANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any residence, business or industry to allow drainage
of a polluting substance (as defined by 82 Oklahoma Statutes section 1084.2, as
amended) into any street, alley, sidewalk or public right of way of the city.
(1985 Code § 17-4; amd. 2004 Code)
7-1-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Notice: Any owner or occupant who fails, refuses or neglects
to trim trees and shrubbery as provided in section
7-1-1 of this chapter, after receiving ten (10) days' notice from the chief of
police to do so, shall be guilty of an offense.
   B.   Penalty Imposed: Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-5-1 of this code. Every day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed
a separate offense. (1985 Code § 17-20; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-2-1: Council Authority; Baseball And Softball Board
7-2-2: Determination Of Fees
7-2-3: Overnight Camping
7-2-4: Vehicles And Animals Restricted In Park
7-2-5: Taylor Lake; Permits, Fees And Regulations
7-2-6: Penalty
7-2-1: COUNCIL AUTHORITY; BASEBALL AND SOFTBALL BOARD:
   A.   Rules And Regulations Enforced By Council: The city council shall
promulgate, invoke, create, amend and enforce such rules, regulations and other
requirements as it deems necessary or expedient in connection with fishing and
fishing privileges, hunting and hunting privileges, boating and boating
privileges, and swimming, and the use of all other recreational facilities
owned or operated by the city. (See also section
1-10-4 of this code for park department.)
   B.   Baseball And Softball Board 1 :
      1.   Appointment: The city council is hereby directed and shall appoint a
baseball and softball board for the city. The said board shall exercise all
powers and duties imposed upon it by the laws of the state of Oklahoma and the
ordinances of the city of Marlow.
      2.   Management Of Baseball And Softball Programs:
         a.   The baseball and softball board shall meet and by a majority vote
adopt all needful rules and regulations governing and protecting the baseball
and softball programs conducted on city owned facilities, including, but not
limited to, all rules and regulations covering all baseball and softball
organizations and governing the use of the baseball and softball fields by said
organizations.
         b.   Said baseball and softball board shall have control of the day to
day activities and scheduling of all baseball and softball programs using the
baseball and softball fields owned by the city, and used for said purposes,
including all practices, meetings and scheduled organized games and
tournaments; and the board, where necessary, with the consent of the city, may
appoint any employee or employees necessary for the proper control and
management of said baseball and softball fields for use by any person or
organization.
         c.   It is further provided that any and all rules and regulations,
including any charges which shall be made for the use of any softball or
baseball field or any other associated charges shall not become effective or
may not be enforced by said baseball and softball board until said rules and
regulations and any charges which shall be made shall have been approved by the
city council, nor shall any employee be hired to assist with the administration
of said baseball and softball board, or the care of any utilities used for said
purpose, until the same has been approved by the city council or by the city
administrator.
      3.   Special Meetings: The baseball and softball board shall hold such
special meetings as may be required and the same shall be called in such manner
as provided for by the statutes of the state of Oklahoma.
      4.   Disposition Of Funds:
         a.   Any charges, donations, deposits or bequests which may be made to
the baseball and softball board shall be considered to be the funds of the
city, and said board shall, after receiving any charges made for the use of any
of the facilities, or after receiving any donations, deposits or bequests,
surrender the same to the city treasurer and the city treasurer shall invest
such funds in a manner required by law.
         b.   No expenditures shall be made to the facilities of the city
without the city council first appropriating such funds and approving the
expenditures made by the baseball and softball board. (1985 Code § 16-105)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 2, chapter 3 of this code.
7-2-2: DETERMINATION OF FEES:
The city shall provide for, or approve, the fees charged for any recreational
privileges on any property or facility for recreational purposes owned or
operated by the city. (1985 Code § 16-106)
7-2-3: OVERNIGHT CAMPING:
   A.   Consent Required: The use of the parks and public areas within the
corporate limits of the city for overnight camping is prohibited without the
consent of the mayor and city council. (1985 Code § 16-107)
   B.   Waiver Of Requirements For Groups: Any prohibition, penalty or
requirement may be waived by the mayor and city council at any regular or
special meeting in favor of any organized group or association for such time as
specified, not to exceed five (5) days and nights, consecutively. (1985 Code §
16-108)
7-2-4: VEHICLES AND ANIMALS RESTRICTED IN PARK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any truck, automobile, motorcycle,
motor scooter or other motor vehicle, or to ride any horse, pony or other
animal in or upon the public parks within the limits of the city, except upon
clearly defined public roadways or public parking areas in such parks, or
except in cases of public necessity when authorized and directed to do so by
public officials of the city. (1985 Code § 16-110)
7-2-5: TAYLOR LAKE; PERMITS, FEES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permits And Fees:
      1.   Permits Required; Payment Of Fees: It shall be unlawful and an
offense for any person, firm or corporation to use or fish in the municipal
lake of the city of Marlow located in Township 3 North, Range 7 West, Grady
County, Oklahoma, and known as the Taylor Lake, without first obtaining permits
for such purposes as may be allowed in said lake, and paying the fees therefor.
      2.   Terms Of Permits: All permits issued under this section shall expire
with the calendar year, regardless of what portion of the year the same may be
issued.
   B.   Water Skiing Or Swimming Prohibited: It shall be unlawful and an
offense for any person, firm or corporation to water ski or swim in said lake.
   C.   Uses Allowed With Permit; Regulations: It shall be permissible to use
said lake for the following purposes, after obtaining permits as set out
therefor herein: (1985 Code § 16-111)
      1.   Fishing:
         a.   Permit Fees: Any person, firm or corporation may use said lake
for fishing, in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the
city by first obtaining a permit at the caretaker's office at Lake J.W. Taylor,
and paying a fee therefor in the amount as established by resolution of the
city council. (Ord. 304, 2-23-1988; amd. 2004 Code)
         b.   Senior Citizens And Disabled Persons:
            (1)   Any person sixty five (65) years of age or over may fish in
said lake without costs after first obtaining a permit at the city clerk's
office.
            (2)   All residents of the city who possess an official designation
from the social security administration or veterans' administration as being
disabled persons may fish in said Lake Taylor without cost after first
obtaining a permit at the city clerk's office. (Ord. 359, 5-27-1999)
         c.   Trotline Fishing Prohibited: No person, firm or corporation may
use said Lake Taylor for trotline fishing. (1985 Code § 16-111)
      2.   Boating: Any person, firm or corporation may use said lake for
boating, in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city
by first obtaining a permit at the caretaker's office at Lake J.W. Taylor, and
paying a fee therefor in the amount as established by resolution of the city
council.
      3.   Camping: Any person, firm or corporation may use said lake for
camping, in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city
by first obtaining a permit at the caretaker's office at Lake J.W. Taylor, and
paying a fee therefor in the amount as established by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 304, 2-23-1988; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Hunting: No public hunting shall be allowed on any portion of J.W.
Taylor Lake; provided however, that the city may at its discretion enter into
private lease agreements to allow for hunting at J.W. Taylor Lake. (Ord. 348,
1-27-1998)
7-2-6: PENALTY:
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter, or maintains or
permits to continue any situation defined by this chapter as unlawful, shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. Every day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed
a separate offense. (1985 Code § 16-175; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CEMETERY
SECTION:
7-3-1: Administration; Cemetery Care Fund
7-3-2: Purchase Or Transfer Of Lots
7-3-3: Interments And Disinterments
7-3-4: Rules And Regulations
7-3-5: Penalty
7-3-1: ADMINISTRATION; CEMETERY CARE FUND:
   A.   Administration: The municipal cemetery shall be maintained, controlled
and administered by the city council, or their duly authorized representatives,
who shall appoint all cemetery personnel.
   B.   Lot Prices, Determination: The city council, by motion or resolution,
from time to time, shall determine the price of lots in the cemetery and also
charges to be made for services at the cemetery. (1985 Code § 16-140)
   C.   Cemetery Care Fund: The cemetery care fund shall be established,
maintained, and used as provided in Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 325, 6-29-1993)
   D.   Cemetery Department: See section
1-10-3 of this code. (1985 Code § 16-142)
7-3-2: PURCHASE OR TRANSFER OF LOTS:
   A.   Sales Subject To Rules And Regulations: All lots shall be sold subject
to these rules and regulations or those hereafter adopted, and the deed of
title shall be stated. No lot shall be used for any purpose other than the
burial of human remains and the placing of appropriate monuments and memorials.
When an interment is to be made, a permit must be obtained from the city clerk
and signed by one of the heirs. Burial lots are exempt from ordinary taxes and
cannot be seized on execution. The city may impose specific charges against
lots. No mortgage or other encumbrance shall be given on any lot. An interment,
once properly made, shall not be disturbed, except on written consent of the
original owners or their heirs, and then only with the permission of the city
council or other duly appointed cemetery personnel.
   B.   Deed Of Title; Exception: When a lot is paid for in full, a deed of
title, for cemetery purposes only, shall be issued to the purchaser by the city
clerk. This subsection does not apply to indigent interment cases.
   C.   Recording Transfer Of Lots: The transfer of lots or parts of lots to
another person shall be reported to the city clerk for recording. No person
shall be recognized as owner or part owner unless so recorded. All transfers of
parts of lots less than that conveyed from the city to the lot owners must be
approved by the city clerk. (1985 Code § 16-141)
7-3-3: INTERMENTS AND DISINTERMENTS:
   A.   Interments; Burial Permits:
      1.   No interment shall take place without a burial permit, and not until
all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations relative to burials have been
complied with. No grave shall be opened unless the grave space has been paid
for, with the exception of indigent cases, or when the funeral director assumes
the responsibility of payment for such grave space or spaces. Funeral directors
making arrangements for burials shall be responsible for all interment charges
if not paid by the owner or agent. If the deceased to be interred is not a
member of the immediate family of the lot owner, permission in writing from
such owner must be filed with the city council or other duly appointed cemetery
personnel. This permission must be filed before the interment is made. (1985
Code § 16-141)
      2.   Only one interment in any one grave shall be permitted, except two
(2) infants may be permitted to be buried in one grave when approval is given
by the cemetery sexton. The city council or other duly appointed cemetery
personnel shall not be held responsible for errors in location of graves on
lots arising from improper instructions of lot owners. Orders from funeral
directors shall be construed as orders from owners. Under no circumstances
shall the city assume responsibility for error in opening graves when orders
are given by telephone.
   B.   Disinterments; Permission Required: Disinterment and removal of a body
shall not be made without the permission of the city administrator or other
duly appointed cemetery personnel, the lot owner, or the next of kin of the
deceased. Graves shall not be opened for inspection except for official
investigations. (1985 Code § 16-141; amd. 2004 Code)
7-3-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Acts: No person shall:
      1.   Enter the cemetery except through established gates;
      2.   Throw rubbish or debris on walks, drives or any cemetery grounds;
      3.   Pick or mutilate any flowers, either wild or domestic, or disturb
any trees, shrubs or other plants;
      4.   Consume refreshments or liquors within a cemetery or carry the same
onto the premises;
      5.   Permit any dog to enter or remain in the cemetery; or
      6.   Discharge any firearms or air rifles in or adjacent to the cemetery.
(This regulation shall not apply to authorized volleys at burials.)
   B.   Children In Cemetery: No children shall enter the cemetery unless
attended by adults responsible for the childrens' conduct.
   C.   Nonliability Of City: The city shall not be responsible for any damage
to lots, structures or objects thereon, or for flowers or articles removed from
any lot or grave.
   D.   Traffic And Animal Regulations: All traffic laws of the city that are
applicable to the operation of vehicles in cemeteries shall be strictly
observed. Persons driving in the cemetery shall be responsible for any damage
done by the vehicle or animal, or both, in the driver's charge. In addition, no
person shall:
      1.   Drive a vehicle in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour on any
cemetery road; (1985 Code § 16-141)
      2.   Drive off the established roads, unless permission is given in
writing by the cemetery sexton; (1985 Code § 16-141; amd. 2004 Code)
      3.   Make a U-turn on cemetery roads; or
      4.   Use any cemetery road as a public thoroughfare.
   E.   Lot Improvements, Council Approval: All plantings and other
improvements to lots shall be done with the approval of the city council or
other duly appointed cemetery personnel. (1985 Code § 16-141)
7-3-5: PENALTY:
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter, or maintains or
permits to continue any situation defined by this chapter as unlawful, shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section 1-5-1 of this code. Every day upon which a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (1985 Code § 16-175; amd. 2004
Code)
CHAPTER 4
RAILROADS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Railroads To Improve Certain Streets And Alleys
7-4-2: Climbing On Trains
7-4-3: Loitering On Railroad Premises
7-4-4: Blocking Of Streets By Trains
7-4-5: Penalty
7-4-1: RAILROADS TO IMPROVE CERTAIN STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Streets: When a railway occupies or crosses any portion of a street
with its tracks either on or adjacent thereto, the railroad company shall
improve as much of the street as is occupied by its tracks and two feet (2') on
either side thereof, in a manner satisfactory to the city council.
   B.   Alleys: Whenever a railroad company crosses or occupies an alley with
its tracks, such company shall improve, drain, grade and/or pave such alley, in
order to eliminate problems created by the presence of its tracks.
   C.   Multiple Tracks Crossing Street: When more than one track crosses a
street within a distance of one hundred feet (100') (measuring from inside rail
to inside rail), the railroad company shall grade, drain and curb the street
area between its tracks and surface, in a manner satisfactory to the city
council.
   D.   Repair And Maintenance: Railroad companies shall keep all such
improvements made by them in good state of repair at all times. (1985 Code §
19-1)
7-4-2: CLIMBING ON TRAINS:
   A.   Attaching To Train While In Motion: It shall be unlawful for any person
to climb upon, hold to, or in any manner attach himself to, any train or
railroad car, while such is in motion within the city, unless such person is
acting in the line of duty.
   B.   Ticket Required: It shall also be unlawful to board any train or
railroad car (passenger, freight or other) without a proper ticket or the
permission of the person in charge of the train or railroad car, or not in the
line of duty. (1985 Code § 19-2)
7-4-3: LOITERING ON RAILROAD PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person not acting within the line of duty, not
having any proper business or not being on any proper mission requiring his
presence there, to loiter anywhere at a railroad yard or upon other railroad
premises. (1985 Code § 19-4)
7-4-4: BLOCKING OF STREETS BY TRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any train to block any street
intersection within the corporate boundaries of the city at any time for more
than five (5) minutes; provided, that this shall not apply to cars in motion,
other than those engaged in switching. (1985 Code § 19-5)
7-4-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. Each day's continuation of any such violation shall be
deemed a separate offense. (1985 Code § 19-20; amd. 2004 Code)
TITLE 8
UTILITIES
Municipal Utility Systems   1
Water System   2
Sewer System   3
Electric System   4
Solid Waste Collection And Disposal System   5
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Utilities Operated By City And Municipal Authority
8-1-2: Operation Of Municipal Utility Systems
8-1-3: Use Of Municipal Utility Systems
8-1-4: Turning On Or Off Utilities
8-1-5: Delinquent Utility Bills; Service Discontinued
8-1-6: Maintenance Of Service Pipes; Wasting Water
8-1-7: City Not Responsible For Utility Interruption
8-1-8: Tampering With Fire Hydrants; Damaging Property
8-1-9: Unlawful Service Connection/Theft Of Services; Damaging Public Utilities
8-1-10: Penalty
8-1-1: UTILITIES OPERATED BY CITY AND MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY:
   A.   Services Provided By City: The city provides water, sewer, electric and
solid waste services for the residents of the city.
   B.   Systems Leased To Municipal Authority: All utility systems are owned by
the city, and are leased to the Marlow municipal authority.
   C.   Operation Through Trust: Said trust shall have control over the
operation, maintenance and administration of said systems and services. (Ord.
325, 6-29-1993)
8-1-2: OPERATION OF MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEMS:
   A.   Responsibility; Powers: The operations of the municipal water, sewer,
solid waste and electrical systems shall be the responsibility of the Marlow
municipal authority. Said authority shall have the power to establish fees,
rates, deposits, charges and such other rules and regulations as may be
necessary for the efficient operation of these systems.
   B.   Administrative Processes Combined: Administrative processes for all
systems may be combined for more efficient operation, at the discretion of the
city council and the Marlow municipal authority board.
   C.   Application Of City Ordinances: City ordinances relating to these
utility systems shall be applicable, whenever possible, to all utility systems.
(Ord. 325, 6-29-1993)
8-1-3: USE OF MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEMS:
   A.   Water And Sewer Systems: Every residential inhabitant within the
corporate limits of the city, and every commercial or business entity or
enterprise who may practically do so, shall secure all of its potable water
requirements from the water system owned by the city and leased to the Marlow
municipal authority, and connect to the sanitary sewer system owned by the
city, and leased to the Marlow municipal authority, and not otherwise dispose
of sewage, unless it is impossible or not feasible to do so. (Ord. 325, 6-29-
1993)
   B.   Electrical And Solid Waste Collection Systems: Every resident within
the corporate limits of the city, and every commercial or industrial
establishment, shall utilize the municipal electrical and solid waste
collection and disposal systems of the city, unless it is impossible to do so.
(1985 Code § 16-3)
8-1-4: TURNING ON OR OFF UTILITIES:
   A.   Requirements For Turning On: It shall be unlawful for any person to
turn the utility on to any premises from any municipal system, without written
permission of the city or the Marlow municipal authority, through the office of
the city clerk. Utilities shall not be turned on until any and all deposits and
charges have been paid. The city clerk or the designated agent of the Marlow
municipal authority shall see that the utility is turned on when all
requirements for service have been complied with.
   B.   Turning On After Turn Off By City: When a utility has been turned off
by city personnel, it shall not be turned on again without written permission
of the city clerk or the designated agent of the Marlow municipal authority.
   C.   Turning Off For Conservation: The city reserves the right to cut off
water or electric service to any customer when necessary to conserve water or
electricity, to protect life or property, or to repair or improve the systems.
(1985 Code § 16-155)
8-1-5: DELINQUENT UTILITY BILLS; SERVICE DISCONTINUED:
A person owing delinquent city utility bills or other charges in connection
with any municipal utility system shall not be extended additional services
until such bills and charges have been paid. (1985 Code § 16-156)
8-1-6: MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE PIPES; WASTING WATER:
All customers using municipal utilities shall keep their service pipes and
other apparatus in good repair and in proper operation, and shall not
unnecessarily waste water nor contribute to unsanitary conditions. (Ord. 325,
6-29-1993)
8-1-7: CITY NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR UTILITY INTERRUPTION:
The city shall not be responsible for any damages due to stoppage or
interruption of any utility or service. (1985 Code § 16-158)
8-1-8: TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANTS; DAMAGING PROPERTY:
   A.   Fire Hydrants:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, unless duly authorized, to
open, turn on or off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect
anything with, any fire hydrant belonging to the city.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner, obstruct
access to any fire hydrant by placing around or thereon brick, lumber, dirt or
other thing. (1985 Code § 16-160)
   B.   Damaging Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to damage,
destroy, obstruct or tamper with any pipes, lines, meters or other equipment or
property which is a part of any municipal utility system. (Ord. 325, 6-29-1993)
8-1-9: UNLAWFUL SERVICE CONNECTION/THEFT OF SERVICES; DAMAGING PUBLIC
UTILITIES:
   A.   Unlawful Service Connection/Theft Of Services:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of
pipe, wire or other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire or other conductor
carrying gas, water, electricity, telephone or cablevision and belonging to a
public utility (whether publicly or privately owned), in such a manner as to
enable that person or any other person to consume or use the gas, water,
electricity, telephone or cablevision without its passing through the meter or
in any other way so as to evade payment therefor.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly take, receive, use
or convert to such person's own use, or the use of another, any electricity,
water or natural gas which has not been measured or any telephone or cable
television service which has not been authorized.
   B.   Damaging Utility Properties: It shall also be unlawful for any person
to damage, molest, tamper with, obstruct or destroy any pipe, line, wire, meter
or other part of any public utility, including telegraph, telephone and
cablevision systems. (Ord. 403, 5-29-2012)
8-1-10: PENALTY:
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter, or of any ordinance,
code or standard adopted by this title, or maintains or permits to continue any
situation defined by this chapter as unlawful, shall be guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-5-1 of this code. Every day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed
a separate offense. (1985 Code § 16-175; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-2-1: Water Connections; Compliance Required
8-2-2: Mandatory Use Of Water System
8-2-3: Application For Water Service
8-2-4: Fees, Rates And Charges
8-2-5: Billing; Delinquency Procedure
8-2-6: Unit Connection Limitations
8-2-7: Turning On Water
8-2-8: Water Turned Off By City; Turn On Fee
8-2-9: Fluoride Levels
8-2-10: Water Sprinkler System Installations
8-2-11: Backflow Preventers Installed In Sprinkler Systems
8-2-12: Curb Stops
8-2-13: Tampering With Or Injuring Water System
8-2-14: Penalty
8-2-1: WATER CONNECTIONS; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Compliance With City Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to make a connection to the municipal water system without
first complying with all applicable provisions of this code and all related
resolutions and requirements of the Marlow municipal authority. (1985 Code §
16-10)
   B.   Connections Outside City: Water connections outside the city limits
must comply with Oklahoma department of environmental quality ground water
rules, and no privately owned water wells shall be cross connected to any water
lines from city meters. (2004 Code)
8-2-2: MANDATORY USE OF WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   Connection Required; Responsibility For Costs: The owners of all
houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
education, recreation or other purposes situated within the city, and abutting
on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a municipal water line, are hereby required, at their
expense, to connect their facility with the proper city water line (in
accordance with all city and state requirements) and pay all city fees and use
charges therefor, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of
official city notice to do so; provided, that the city water line is within
three hundred feet (300') of the property line.
   B.   Private Water Well: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or
establish a private water well within the city to serve a facility. (1985 Code
§ 16-11; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Application For Connection; Payment Of Fee: No unauthorized person
shall make any connection to any city water line without first having made
application therefor to the city clerk and the Marlow municipal authority, and
without first having paid the established fee.
   D.   Exceptions:
      1.   Where a city water line does not lie within three hundred feet
(300') of the property line, or is not scheduled to be placed within three
hundred feet (300') of the property line in the near future (one to 5 years),
an individual may utilize or establish a private water well without connection
to the municipal water system and, therefore, without payment of the municipal
water system fees and charges.
      2.   The requirements of this section shall not apply to persons
currently being served directly by an existing rural water district. (1985 Code
§ 16-11)
8-2-3: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE:
Any person desiring to secure water from the municipal system shall make an
application therefor to the Marlow municipal authority, through the city clerk,
on an application form to be provided by said city clerk. The applicant shall
give such reasonable information as the city clerk may request. He shall state
in the application that he will abide by all ordinances, rules and regulations
governing the water service of the city. (1985 Code § 16-13)
8-2-4: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Water Tap Fee: The charge for making a water tap shall be determined by
motion or resolution adopted by the city council and the Marlow municipal
authority. (1985 Code § 16-14)
   B.   Deposit For Water Service: An applicant for water service shall make a
deposit, the amount of which shall be determined by motion or resolution
adopted by the city council and the Marlow municipal authority. An applicant
shall not be granted such service until he has paid to the Marlow municipal
authority, through the city clerk, such deposit. The deposit shall serve as a
guarantee for the payment of charges for water service and other amounts owed
to the city in connection with such services. When a customer's service is
discontinued, the deposit, or any part of such amount deposited which remains
after all such charges and amounts due the city have been satisfied, shall be
returned to the customer. (1985 Code § 16-15)
   C.   Water Rates: The water rates to be charged for water from the municipal
water system shall be prescribed by motion or resolution adopted by the city
council and the Marlow municipal authority. The rates may be classified by
whether the water is used by residential customers or commercial customers, by
customers within or without the city, and/or by other reasonable
classifications. (1985 Code § 16-18)
8-2-5: BILLING; DELINQUENCY PROCEDURE:
   A.   Due Date; Delinquency Procedure; Time Of Payment: All bills for water
service shall be due and payable on the first day of the calendar month
following the service month when the service was rendered. Bills shall become
delinquent if not paid on or before the tenth day of the month in which they
become due, and the service will be shut off after reasonable notice. (1985
Code § 16-19; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Bills Rendered When Service Discontinued: Bills rendered when service
is discontinued shall be due and payable at the time the bills are presented or
sent to the customer. (1985 Code § 16-19)
8-2-6: UNIT CONNECTION LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Not more than one unit (house, etc.) may be connected per meter and
sewer tap.
   B.   No customer shall make or permit to be made any subsidiary connection
of another's unit with his water service. (1985 Code § 16-16)
8-2-7: TURNING ON WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to turn the water on to any premises from
the municipal water system, except by permission of the Marlow municipal
authority. Water shall not be turned on until the plumbing has been inspected
and approved by Marlow municipal authority or the city building inspector, and
until any and all deposits and charges have been paid. The city will see that
the water is turned on when all requirements for service have been complied
with. (1985 Code § 16-17)
8-2-8: WATER TURNED OFF BY CITY; TURN ON FEE:
   A.   Turning Off Water:
      1.   Water may be cut off and service discontinued for any user for any
of the following reasons:
         a.   Violation of any ordinance or resolution provision relating to
the water system, or violation of any ordinance or resolution provision or any
provision of any code adopted by reference relating to water and sanitary
plumbing; or
         b.   Failure to pay a water bill or other proper charge in connection
with the water system by the time specified by ordinance or resolution.
      2.   Water may also be cut off for any act or omission in regard to the
water system or sanitary sewer system, the use of water, or the disposal of
liquid wastes, which jeopardizes the public health or safety, creates a public
nuisance, or interferes with the rights of others. (1985 Code § 16-20)
   B.   Turning Water On After Turn Off; Charge: When a customer's water
service has been cut off because of delinquency or act or omission of the
customer, as provided by ordinance or resolution, it may be turned on again
only when all charges have been paid or other change in the conditions justify
it. A charge shall be made for turning the water on again during normal working
hours, and a separate charge shall be made for turning water on again after
normal working hours. Said charges shall be set by resolution of the city
council. (1985 Code § 16-21; amd. 2004 Code)
8-2-9: FLUORIDE LEVELS:
In order to protect the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, the
quantity of fluoride in the public water supply shall be controlled in such
manner that the amount present in the water served to the public shall be in
conformity with the policy, and subsequent changes thereto, established by the
Oklahoma department of environmental quality. (1985 Code § 16-22; amd. 2004
Code)
8-2-10: WATER SPRINKLER SYSTEM INSTALLATIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: Before individuals or companies install a sprinkler
system, a permit must be obtained at city hall.
   B.   Inspection: An inspection must be done by the city before said
sprinkler system is connected to the city water supply. (2004 Code)
8-2-11: BACKFLOW PREVENTERS INSTALLED IN SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
   A.   Definition: As used herein, a "backflow preventer" is defined as a
valve or series of valves that, in the opinion of the city building inspector
or the designated representative of the Marlow municipal authority, will
prevent the backflow of water and contaminants from a lawn sprinkler system
into the water system network from which the water originally entered the lawn
sprinkler system.
   B.   Placement: The backflow preventer shall be placed at the beginning of
the lawn sprinkler system, immediately after the system branches off the
service line, and approved by the city building inspector or the designated
representative of the Marlow municipal authority, before the system is placed
in operation.
   C.   Design Of System: The lawn sprinkler system shall not be used for the
delivery of water to any external faucet or outlet other than the lawn
sprinklers themselves, and the system shall be designed and installed so that
no use of the water entering the lawn sprinkler system may be had other than
the release of water through the installed sprinkler heads. (1985 Code § 16-23)
8-2-12: CURB STOPS:
   A.   Installation: On all service pipes from the water main to the water
meter, there shall be installed by, and at the cost of, the Marlow municipal
authority, a curb stop whereby the city may shut off or turn on the flow of
water through the meter.
   B.   Repairs Of Service Pipes And Curb Stops: All repairs of service pipes
and curb stops, when the repairs are made necessary by the acts or omissions of
property owners or third persons not employed or contracted for by the Marlow
municipal authority, shall be made by, and at the expense of, the owners of the
premises served. In the event such repairs are made by the property owners, the
repairs shall be approved by the city building inspector or the designated
representative of the Marlow municipal authority. The city may, in case of an
emergency, repair any service pipe or curb stop and if this is done, the cost
of such repair work shall be repaid to the city by the owner of the premises
served, according to a schedule of repairs and services adopted by the city
council and the Marlow municipal authority. (1985 Code § 16-24)
8-2-13: TAMPERING WITH OR INJURING WATER SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or deface, or in any way tamper
with, any portion of the municipal water system, or to turn the water off or on
from any main at any time or place, unless he is duly authorized so to do by
the city, and the Marlow municipal authority. (1985 Code § 16-12)
8-2-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-3-1: Use Of Sewer System; Compliance Required
8-3-2: Mandatory Sewer Connections
8-3-3: Private Sewage Disposal Facilities
8-3-4: New Sewers And Connections
8-3-5: User Charge Determination
8-3-6: Billing; Delinquency Procedure
8-3-7: Prohibited Sewer Discharges
8-3-8: Penalties
8-3-9: Sewer Cleanout Covers Required
8-3-1: USE OF SEWER SYSTEM; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any connection
to the municipal sewer system without first complying with all applicable
provisions of this code and all other requirements of the city, or the Marlow
municipal authority. (Ord. 368, 2-6-2002)
8-3-2: MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Connection Of Facilities To City Sewer: The owners of all houses,
buildings or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purposes, situated within the corporate limits of the city, and abutting on any
street, alley or right of way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer
of the city, are hereby required, at their own expense, to install suitable
toilet facilities therein, and to have such facilities connected directly with
the proper public sewer within sixty (60) days after the date of official
notice to do so; provided, that such public sewer is within three hundred feet
(300') of the property line.
   B.   Service Of Notice: Said notice, as provided for in subsection A of this
section, shall be served by any designated agent of the city by delivering a
true and correct copy to the property owner, or leaving the same at his usual
place of residence with a member of his family over the age of fifteen (15)
years, or if such owner cannot be found, by posting a copy of such notice at
the front entrance of the building involved.
   C.   Failure To Comply; Discontinuance Of Service: Any person who shall
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the terms of this section after having
been notified so to do as provided herein shall be guilty of an offense. In the
event of a continuous violation of this section by any property owner, the city
may discontinue the furnishing of water to such property owner, until such time
as a proper sewer connection has been made. (Ord. 368, 2-6-2002)
8-3-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES:
   A.   Privies, Septic Tanks Prohibited; Exception: Except as hereinafter
provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended to be used for the disposal of sewage, within the corporate limits of
the city.
   B.   Compliance With State And Local Requirements:
      1.   Where a connection to a public sanitary sewer line is not required
under the provisions of section
8-3-2 of this chapter, a private septic tank or cesspool facility for sewage
disposal may be constructed and maintained, provided it is constructed and
maintained under the rules and regulations of the local and county health
officer, and in compliance with the recommendations and requirements of the
Oklahoma state department of environmental quality.
      2.   No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
public sewer or natural outlet, nor shall any septic system be installed
without having a successful percolation test made prior to installation.
   C.   Maintenance In Sanitary Manner: The owner of private septic tanks or
cesspools shall operate and maintain the same in a sanitary manner at all
times, at no expense to the city, and no statement contained in this chapter
shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the local, county or state health officer.
   D.   Availability Of Public Sewer; Connection Required: At such time as a
public sewer becomes available to a property served by a septic tank or
cesspool, a direct connection shall be made to such public sewer in compliance
with section
8-3-2 of this chapter, and the septic tank or cesspool shall immediately be
abandoned and filled with suitable material. (Ord. 368, 2-6-2002)
8-3-4: NEW SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Connections; International Plumbing Code Compliance: The connection of
the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of
the international plumbing code and other applicable rules and regulations of
the city.
   B.   Design And Construction; State Requirements: All new sanitary sewage
works shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements and
regulations of the Oklahoma state department of environmental quality.
   C.   Availability; Connection To Public Sewer: When a public sewer becomes
available (within 300 feet), the building sewer shall be connected to said
sewer within sixty (60) days. (Ord. 368, 2-6-2002)
8-3-5: USER CHARGE DETERMINATION:
Charges for the use of the city owned wastewater treatment (sanitary sewer)
system shall be set by resolution of the mayor and city council. The mayor and
council shall, from time to time, review the user charges and may change those
charges by resolution of the mayor and council. (Ord. 368, 2-6-2002)
8-3-6: BILLING; DELINQUENCY PROCEDURE:
   A.   Billing:
      1.   Users will be billed on a monthly basis, with payment due ten (10)
days after the date of billing.
      2.   Users on metered water service will be billed on the same notice as
water charges and will be designated as a separate entry. (Ord. 368, 2-6-2002)
      3.   Users of the wastewater system not on metered water service will be
billed monthly on an individual notice for wastewater service at the rate
established by the city council and Marlow municipal authority.
   B.   Delinquencies; Notice Of Termination:
      1.   All bills for sewer service shall be due and payable on the first
day of the calendar month following the service month when the service was
rendered. Bills shall become delinquent if not paid on or before the tenth day
of the month in which they become due, and the service will be shut off after
reasonable notice.
      2.   The city council and Marlow municipal authority will utilize the
municipal law enforcement system to assist, as required, in the control and
management of the user charge system. (Ord. 368, 2-6-2002; amd. 2004 Code)
8-3-7: PROHIBITED SEWER DISCHARGES:
   A.   Injurious Discharges: No person may discharge to public sewers any
waste which, by itself or by interaction with other wastes, may:
      1.   Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or
facilities;
      2.   Constitute a hazard to humans or animals;
      3.   Cause a violation of effluent or water quality limitations in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent; or
      4.   Preclude the selection of the most cost effective alternative for
wastewater treatment and sludge disposal.
   B.   Exceptions: All discharges shall be prohibited except those that meet
the criteria for domestic wastewater. BOD concentration shall not exceed three
hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l)*. SS shall not exceed three hundred
milligrams per liter (300 mg/l)*. (*Maximum limit for average domestic
wastewater.)
   C.   Industrial Discharges: All industrial discharges are prohibited. At the
present time there are no industrial users in the city. If an industrial user
should desire to locate in the city and make use of the sewer system, an
industrial user system will be initiated in accordance with EPA and state
regulations at that time to compensate for its use of the system.
   D.   New Connections From Inflow Sources: Any new connections from inflow
sources into the sanitary sewer portions of the sewer system shall be
prohibited. (Ord. 368, 2-6-2002)
8-3-8: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty For Prohibited Discharges:
      1.   Penalty Imposed: A person who continues prohibited discharges is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, is subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-5-1 of this code for each act of violation and for each day of violation.
      2.   Criminal Or Civil Remedies: In addition to proceeding under
authority of subsection A1 of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all
other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of
statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges.
      3.   Right To Terminate Service: The city reserves the right to terminate
service, after reasonable notice, to any customer that fails to pay bills when
due or discharges any prohibited wastes into the sewer system. (Ord. 368, 2-6-
2002; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Other Violations: Any person violating the provisions of this chapter,
except for violations covered by subsection A of this section, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
8-3-9: SEWER CLEANOUT COVERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Cleanout Cover Required: All sewer cleanouts of any house, building or
property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes
shall be covered with a suitable cover or plug designed to prevent inflow or
infiltration generated by sources outside said house, building or property from
entering the sanitary sewer connection of such house, building or property.
   B.   Service Of Notice: If the city of Marlow determines that a sewer
cleanout does not have a suitable cover or plug, the owner of the property or
other responsible party shall be notified that he/she has ten (10) days to
correct the situation. Said notice shall be served by a designated agent of the
city by delivering a true and correct copy to the property owner or leaving the
same at his/her usual place of residence with a member of the family over the
age of fifteen (15) years, or by posting a copy of the notice at the front
entrance of the building involved if the owner cannot be found.
   C.   Failure To Comply: Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with the terms of this section after having been notified to do so shall
be guilty of an offense and may be fined as provided in this chapter, or the
city may discontinue water service to the property until the situation is
corrected. (Ord. 415, 6-28-2016)
CHAPTER 4
ELECTRIC SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-4-1: System Operated By City And Municipal Authority
8-4-2: Application For Service
8-4-3: Fees, Rates And Charges
8-4-4: Billing; Delinquency Procedure
8-4-5: Unit Connection Limitations
8-4-6: Turning On Electricity
8-4-7: Electricity Turned Off By City; Turn On Charge
8-4-8: Penalty
8-4-1: SYSTEM OPERATED BY CITY AND MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY:
The municipal electric system is a public utility owned and operated by the
city, leased to the Marlow municipal authority, and under the control of the
electrical and utility superintendents. It is the responsibility of the Marlow
municipal authority and the city council to see that it is operated in a
businesslike manner and in accordance with ordinance and resolution provisions
and other policies adopted by the Marlow municipal authority and the city
council. (1985 Code § 16-60)
8-4-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
Any person desiring to secure electricity from the municipal system shall make
an application therefor to the Marlow municipal authority, through the city
clerk, on an application form to be provided by the city. The applicant shall
give such reasonable information as the city clerk may request. He shall state
in the application that he will abide by all ordinances, resolutions, rules and
regulations governing the electric service of the city. (1985 Code § 16-61)
8-4-3: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Deposit Required:
      1.   An applicant for electric service shall make a deposit, the amount
of which shall be determined by motion or resolution adopted by the Marlow
municipal authority and the city council. An applicant shall not be granted
such service until he has paid to the Marlow municipal authority, through the
city clerk, such deposit.
      2.   The deposit shall serve as a guarantee for the payment of charges
for electric service and other amounts owed in connection with such service.
When a customer's service is discontinued, the deposit or any part of such
amount deposited which remains after all such charges and amounts due the city
have been satisfied, shall be returned to the customer. (1985 Code § 16-62)
   B.   Electric Rates:
      1.   The electric rates to be charged for electricity from the municipal
electric system shall be prescribed by motion or resolution adopted by the
Marlow municipal authority or the city council.
      2.   The rates may be classified by whether the electricity is used by
residential customers or commercial customers, by customers within or without
the city, and/or by other reasonable classifications. (1985 Code § 16-65)
8-4-4: BILLING; DELINQUENCY PROCEDURE:
   A.   Due Date; Delinquency Procedure; Time Of Payment: All bills for
electric service shall be due and payable on the first day of the calendar
month following the service month when the service was rendered. They shall
become delinquent if not paid on or before the tenth day of the month in which
they become due, and the service will be shut off after reasonable notice.
(1985 Code § 16-66; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Bills Rendered When Service Discontinued: Bills rendered when service
is discontinued, shall be due and payable at the time the bills are presented
or sent to the customer. (1985 Code § 16-66)
8-4-5: UNIT CONNECTION LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Not more than one unit (house, etc.) may be connected per meter.
   B.   No customer shall make or permit to be made any subsidiary connection
of another's unit with his electric service. (1985 Code § 16-63)
8-4-6: TURNING ON ELECTRICITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to turn the electricity on to any premises
from the municipal electric system, except by permission of the Marlow
municipal authority. Electricity shall not be turned on until the electrical
wiring has been inspected and approved by the Marlow municipal authority or the
city building inspector, and until any and all deposits and charges have been
paid. The city will see that the electricity is turned on when all requirements
for service have been complied with. (1985 Code § 16-64)
8-4-7: ELECTRICITY TURNED OFF BY CITY; TURN ON CHARGE:
   A.   Turning Off Electricity:
      1.   Electricity may be cut off and service discontinued for any user for
any of the following reasons:
         a.   Violation of any ordinance or resolution provision relating to
the electric system, or violation of any ordinance or resolution provision or
any provision of any code adopted by reference relating to electrical
installations, as the case may be; or
         b.   Failure to pay an electric bill or other proper charge in
connection with the electric system by the time specified by resolution and/or
ordinance.
      2.   Electricity may also be cut off for any act or omission in regard to
any municipal utility system which jeopardizes the public health or safety,
creates a public nuisance, or interferes with the rights of others. (1985 Code
§ 16-67)
   B.   Turning Electricity On After Turn Off; Charge: When a customer's
electric service has been cut off because of delinquency or act or omission of
the customer, it may be turned on again only when all charges have been paid or
other change in the conditions justify it. A charge shall be made for turning
the electricity on again during normal working hours, and for turning
electricity on again after normal working hours or on weekends or on holidays,
in accordance with fees established by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 325, 6-
29-1993)
8-4-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 5
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-5-1: System Operated By City And Municipal Authority
8-5-2: Purpose And Policy
8-5-3: Definitions
8-5-4: Duty To Request Garbage Service
8-5-5: Garbage And Refuse Accumulations; Container Requirements
8-5-6: Collection Of Garbage And Refuse
8-5-7: Refuse Collection Business Permit
8-5-8: Service Collection Fees
8-5-9: Billing; Delinquencies
8-5-10: Inspection Of Premises
8-5-11: Disposal Of Dead Animals And Rubbish
8-5-12: Restrictions Concerning Refuse And Containers
8-5-13: Burning Of Solid Waste
8-5-14: Scavenging Prohibited
8-5-15: Penalty
8-5-1: SYSTEM OPERATED BY CITY AND MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY:
   A.   City Function; Leased To Authority: The collection and disposal of
garbage, trash, refuse and other solid waste is hereby declared to be a
municipal function of the city, and leased to the Marlow municipal authority as
a protection of the public health.
   B.   Enforcement: The police powers of the city shall be invoked when
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
   C.   Refuse Collection And Disposal Method: In addition, the city may
collect and dispose of refuse, as it deems necessary; provided, that such
disposal shall be an approved method of incineration (not open burning) or by
landfill and daily cover. (Ord. 325, 6-29-1993)
8-5-2: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
It is the purpose of this chapter and it is hereby declared to be the policy of
the city, and the Marlow municipal authority, pursuant to the authority of the
Oklahoma solid waste management act (27A Oklahoma Statutes section 2-10-101 et
seq., inclusive, and as amended), to regulate the collection and disposal of
solid wastes in a manner that will protect the public health and welfare,
prevent air and water pollution, prevent the spread of disease and the creation
of nuisances, conserve the natural resources, and enhance and preserve the
beauty and quality of the community's environment. (Ord. 325, 6-29-1993; amd.
2004 Code)
8-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
   REFUSE: Tree trimmings, junked building and roofing materials, manufacturing
waste, rocks, dirt and other waste material not defined as "solid waste" or
"trash".
   SANITATION SUPERINTENDENT: The municipal sanitation superintendent of the
city, or his authorized agent.
   SOLID WASTE: Shall include all putrescible and nonputrescible refuse in
solid or semisolid form, including, but not limited to, garbage, refuse,
rubbish, ashes or incinerator residue, street refuse, dead animals, demolition
wastes, construction wastes, solid or semisolid commercial and industrial
wastes and hazardous wastes (including explosives, pathological wastes,
chemical wastes, herbicide and pesticide wastes).
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM: The entire process of storage, collection,
transportation, processing and burying solid wastes at or in a site approved by
the Oklahoma state department of environmental quality.
   TRASH: Paper, rags, containers of paper, tin cans, yard and house sweepings
and all other household waste, but not tree trimmings, building and
manufacturing waste, sewage and rocks, raw dirt, rainwater and other liquid
refuse properly disposable through the sanitary sewers of the city. (1985 Code
§ 16-82; amd. 2004 Code)
8-5-4: DUTY TO REQUEST GARBAGE SERVICE:
To assist in maintaining the general sanitation of the city, it shall be the
duty of every person occupying or having control of the occupancy of any
premises located on a regularly established garbage route to notify the city
clerk at the beginning of such occupancy, and request, accept and use the
garbage pick up and collection services; provided however, that failure of any
owner, rental agent or occupant of such premises to make such request shall not
prevent, nor in any way impair or impede, the city from adding the address of
such premises to the proper garbage collection route records, providing such
service and otherwise enforcing, by appropriate action, the regulatory measures
herein prescribed and causing the fees or charges therefor to be paid. (1985
Code § 16-89)
8-5-5: GARBAGE AND REFUSE ACCUMULATIONS; CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Containers Required; Specifications; Location:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation owning,
managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises or any place where garbage
or rubbish accumulates to provide for, and at all times to maintain in good
order and repair, on any said premises, a portable container or containers for
refuse which shall be made of galvanized metal or equivalent, not easily
corrodible, rodentproof and flyproof, with a tight fitting lid which shall not
be removed except when depositing or removing the contents of the receptacle,
and with handles on the sides, and of sufficient capacity and in sufficient
numbers to accommodate and securely keep all of the garbage and rubbish that
may accumulate between collections; provided, that each container shall have a
capacity as specified from time to time by the city council. All containers
shall be kept clean and free from the accumulation of any substance remaining
attached to the inside of the container which would attract flies, mosquitoes
or any other insects. All container lids shall be chained or fastened securely
at all times to a stationary object.
      2.   All containers and grounds immediately around same shall be kept in
a safe and sanitary condition at all times, and kept in suitable racks. (1985
Code § 16-83; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Refuse Bundled Or Bagged:
      1.   All ordinary accumulations of rubbish such as tree limbs, paper
boxes, scrap lumber, bricks, leaves, grass clippings, etc., which cannot be
conveniently placed in the containers required under this chapter shall be
gathered together in bundles weighing fifty (50) pounds or less and no item in
the bundle shall be longer than four feet (4'). Bundles shall be secured with
heavy string, rope, etc., so that the binding will not break if used to pick up
the bundle.
      2.   Plastic bags may also be used but must be securely tied at the
opening and the contents shall be of a weight and composition so as not to
cause the bag to break open when lifted by the top.
      3.   Bundles and bags shall be placed immediately adjacent to a public
street or alley and not on the private property side of any fence or other
barrier, and shall not be stacked in such a location or manner as to hide or
obstruct any utility meter, pole, can, lid, or other device.
      4.   Rubble and rubbish not conforming to this subsection will be handled
as outlined elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 308, 10-25-1988)
   C.   Removal Of Receptacles After Pick Up: Every person, firm or corporation
owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting any premises or any place
where garbage or rubbish accumulates shall remove trash receptacles from their
collection location, as specified in subsection A2 of this section, to a
storage location not visible from the front of the premises within twelve (12)
hours after trash is collected by the city or its authorized representative.
(Ord. 360, 8-31-1999)
8-5-6: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
The city, or its authorized representatives, shall collect from the containers
required under this chapter from the residential areas of the city and from the
commercial and industrial operations and all food establishments of the city
all garbage and rubbish as often as is necessary to ensure sanitary conditions;
provided, that it shall be the duty of any person in possession or control of
any premises to place the containers required in this chapter in a location
easily accessible to the collector, as directed in this chapter, as determined
by the sanitation superintendent. (Ord. 308, 10-25-1988; amd. 2004 Code)
8-5-7: REFUSE COLLECTION BUSINESS PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of refuse collection or refuse disposal for compensation in the city,
unless authorized by the city. (1985 Code § 16-85; amd. 2004 Code)
8-5-8: SERVICE COLLECTION FEES:
   A.   Monthly Residential Charge: There shall be charged, assessed and
collected from each residential unit within the city limits, a monthly amount
established by the city council. (1985 Code § 16-88)
   B.   Commercial And Industrial Units: There shall be charged, assessed and
collected from each commercial or industrial unit within the city limits, using
the refuse service of the city, a fee which shall be established by the city
council. These fees shall be established using the following criteria:
      1.   Volume of refuse collected;
      2.   Number of weekly collections requested; and
      3.   Time and difficulty involved in making collection. (Ord. 321, 10-29-
1991)
8-5-9: BILLING; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Rendition With Other Utility Bills: All bills for solid waste
collection and disposal service charges may be included on other city utility
bills and no payment shall be accepted except for the full amount billed for
all services.
   B.   Delinquencies: Delinquent solid waste service bills shall carry the
same due dates, grace periods and penalties as other utility bills. (1985 Code
§ 16-90)
8-5-10: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
It shall be the duty of the city health official to make all necessary
inspections and investigations of any and all premises to see that the terms of
this chapter, and all regulations of the city, are complied with. (1985 Code §
16-87)
8-5-11: DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS AND RUBBISH:
   A.   Carcasses Of Animals: Carcasses of animals such as cows, horses and
mules shall be removed and disposed of at the expense of the owner or person
having same in charge and by the method directed by the city health official.
   B.   Heavy, Bulky Accumulations: Heavy accumulations such as brush, broken
concrete, ashes, sand or gravel, automobile frames, dead trees, and other
bulky, heavy materials shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or
person controlling same under the direction of the sanitation superintendent.
   C.   Manure, Waste Oils, Hazardous Materials: Manure from cow lots, horse
stables, poultry yards, pigeon lofts and other animal or fowl pens, and waste
oils from garages or filling stations, or materials considered hazardous and/or
dangerous, shall be removed and disposed of at the expense of the person
controlling same in the manner and by the method directed by the city health
official. (1985 Code § 16-86)
8-5-12: RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING REFUSE AND CONTAINERS:
   A.   Placing Garbage In Streets, Other Prohibited Places: The placing of
garbage, rubbish or any refuse material in any street or alley within the city
limits, or the disposal of such refuse at any place within the city limits,
except at the municipal disposal site, or at such other place as may be
directed by the city health official, is prohibited.
   B.   Meddling With Refuse Containers: The meddling with refuse containers or
in any way pilfering, scattering contents, or junking in any alley or street
within the city limits is prohibited.
   C.   Method Of Disposal Of Garbage: The disposal of garbage and rubbish
shall be by an approved method of incineration (not open burning) or by
landfill and daily cover. (1985 Code § 16-86)
   D.   Container Use Restricted: Use of refuse containers shall be prohibited
to all except the owner. (2004 Code)
8-5-13: BURNING OF SOLID WASTE:
   A.   Burning Solid Waste: It shall be unlawful for any person to start or
maintain any fire, or cause any fire to be started or maintained, for the
purpose of burning or incinerating any solid waste.
   B.   Incinerators: It shall be unlawful to construct or install, within any
building in the city, an incinerator designed to burn solid wastes. (1985 Code
§ 16-91)
8-5-14: SCAVENGING PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definition: "Scavenging", as used in this section, means the
collecting, hauling, transporting or removing of any material or any residue or
part thereof, of any kind or whatsoever nature, from any dump ground, sanitary
landfill, garbage or trash disposal facility, or sewage disposal facility,
provided or maintained by the city or the Marlow municipal authority, for such
purposes.
   B.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation,
unless expressly licensed or permitted by the city or the Marlow municipal
authority, to enter upon any dump ground, sanitary landfill, garbage or trash
disposal facility or sewage disposal facility maintained by the city or the
Marlow municipal authority for such purposes, and engage in "scavenging", as
defined herein. (Ord. 314, 8-29-1989)
8-5-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
 1-5-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Building Codes And Regulations   1
Permit Requirements And Regulations   2
  Special Permits   2A
Electrical Installations   3
House Numbering System   4
Manufactured, Mobile And Modular Housing   5
  Mobile Home, Manufactured Housing
  And Trailer Parks   5A
  Manufactured Housing And Mobile
  Home Subdivisions   5B
  Modular Housing   5C
Oil And Gas Drilling   6
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Construction Codes Adopted
9-1-2: Modifications Of Adopted Codes
9-1-3: Enforcement Of Adopted Codes
9-1-4: Nonliability Of City Officers And Employees
9-1-5: Fire Limits; Regulations
9-1-6: Moving Of Frame Buildings
9-1-7: Smoke Detectors Required In Rental Units
9-1-8: Conduit Required For Underground Wiring
9-1-9: Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors For Certain Businesses
9-1-10: Penalty
9-1-1: CONSTRUCTION CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Adoption By Reference: The particular model codes listed below, as
adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (the
"OUBCC") in the Oklahoma State Statutes and Oklahoma Administrative Code, are
hereby adopted and incorporated in this code, as if fully set out at length
herein, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the following
activities carried on within the corporate limits of the City of Marlow,
Oklahoma:
      1.   Building Code: The construction, alteration, removal, demolition,
equipment, use, occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and
structures:
      International Building Code (IBC), current edition, published by the
International Code Council.
      2.   Existing Building Code: The repair, alteration, addition and change
of occupancy for existing buildings and historic buildings:
      International Existing Building Code (IEBC), current edition, published
by the International Code Council.
      3.   Plumbing Code: The installation or alteration of plumbing and
drainage systems for buildings and structures:
      International Plumbing Code (IPC), current edition, published by the
International Code Council.
      4.   Electrical Code: The installation or alteration of electrical
equipment for buildings or structures:
      National Electric Code (NEC), current edition, published by the National
Fire Protection Association.
      5.   Housing Code: The provisions of basic, minimum housing standards for
the preservation of the health, safety and welfare of occupants:
      International Residential Code (IRC), current edition, published by the
International Code Council.
      6.   Fire Prevention Code: The provision of basic safeguards to life and
property from the hazards of fire and explosion:
      International Fire Code (IFC), current edition, published by the
International Code Council.
      7.   Gas Code: The installation or alteration of gas systems for
buildings or structures:
      International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), current edition, published by the
International Code Council.
      8.   Energy Conservation Code: The provision of basic standards for
energy conservation in buildings and structures:
      International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), current edition, published
by the International Code Council.
      9.   Mechanical Code: The provision of basic standards for mechanical
installations in buildings and structures:
      International Mechanical Code, current edition, published by the
International Code Council.
      10.   Property Maintenance Code: The provision of basic standards
governing the maintenance of existing buildings:
      International Property Maintenance Code (IMC), current edition, published
by the International Code Council.
   B.   Codes On File:  Three (3) copies of all of the codes referenced in this
section adopted by the city are on file in the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
   C.   Codes In Effect: From the date on which this chapter shall take effect,
the provisions of the codes, as herein modified, shall be controlling in those
areas set forth in section
9-1-2 E. of this chapter, within the corporate limits of the City of Marlow,
Oklahoma.
   D.   Conflicts With City Code: Whenever any provision of any of those model
construction codes adopted by this chapter conflict with this code, the latter
provisions shall govern. (1985 Code § 4-5) (amd. Ord. 426, 11-27-2018)
9-1-2: MODIFICATIONS OF ADOPTED CODES:
   A.   Definitions:
      1.   Wherever the words "City", "Town" or "Municipality" are used in
those codes adopted, it shall mean the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
      2.   Wherever the words "Inspector", "Building Inspector" or
"Administrative Official" are used in those codes adopted, it shall mean the
city official currently assuming the duties and responsibilities of city
building inspector for the city of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   B.   Official Titles: All official titles used in those codes adopted shall
be interpreted as defined in this city code.
   C.   Penalties: Maximum penalties for violation of provisions of those codes
adopted shall be provided in the "penalty" section of this chapter (section
9-1-10).
   D.   Wood Shingles: Notwithstanding any provisions of any of those codes
adopted by this chapter, wood shingles may be used for roofing.
   E.   Corporate Limits: All limits, except "fire limits", referred to in any
of those codes adopted by this chapter are hereby established as the corporate
limits of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma. (1985 Code § 4-2)
9-1-3: ENFORCEMENT OF ADOPTED CODES:
Any city official or other employee designated by the city administrator shall
be responsible for enforcing the codes adopted by this chapter. Said persons
may bear such titles as "building inspector", "gas inspector", "plumbing
inspector", "electrical inspector", etc., as may be deemed appropriate to
indicate their respective areas of concern, and shall be appointed or
designated by the city administrator. (1985 Code § 4-6; amd. 2004 Code)
9-1-4: NONLIABILITY OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Relief From Personal Liability: Any officer or employee of the city
charged with the enforcement of this chapter and acting in good faith and
without malice, for the city, in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby
render himself liable personally and he is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of
any act or omission required or permitted in the discharge of such duties.
   B.   Defense Of Suits: Any suit brought against any officer or employee
because of such act or omission performed by him in the enforcement of any
provisions of such codes may be defended by the city attorney until the final
termination of the proceedings. (1985 Code § 4-42)
9-1-5: FIRE LIMITS; REGULATIONS:
   A.   Fire Limits Established: The following territory within the corporate
limits (original townsite) of the city shall embrace and constitute the "fire
limits" of the city:
 
Block 10  Lots 9 and 14
Block 11  Lots 1 to 14 and 21 to 26
Block 13  Lots 1 to 28
Block 14  Lots 1 to 28
Block 15  Lots 1 to 6 and 13 to 26
Block 16  Lots 15 to 28
Block 21  Lots 1 to 14
Block 22  Lots 1 to 14 and 21 to 26
Block 23  Lots 1 to 26
Block 24  Lots 1 to 28
Block 38  Lots 4 to 11
Block 39  Lots 1 to 4 and 11 to 14
Block 50  Lots 1 to 4 and 11 to 14
Block 51  Lots 4 to 11
Block 54  Lots 4 to 11
Block 55  Lots 1 to 4 and 11 to 14
Block 124 Lots 1 to 4 and 11 to 14
Block 125 Lots 4 to 11
Block 128 Lots 4 to 11
Block 129 Lots 1 to 4 and 11 to 14
Block 140 Lots 1 to 4 and 11 to 14
Block 141 Lots 4 to 11
 
   B.   Construction Limitations:
      1.   Construction Or Moving Of Buildings; Fireproof Walls: It shall
hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to build, erect,
construct or cause to be built, erected or constructed, or place or move within
the territory described in subsection A of this section, any building or
addition thereto, unless the walls of such building or addition shall be built
or constructed of stone, brick or other noncombustible material.
      2.   Rebuilding Damaged Building: It shall also be unlawful to rebuild
any building which has been more than fifty percent (50%) destroyed by fire,
except as herein stated. (1985 Code § 4-37)
9-1-6: MOVING OF FRAME BUILDINGS 1 :
No frame building shall be moved from without to within the corporate limits of
the city which, by reason of its age, state of repair, condition of wiring or
which, for any other reason, is unfit for human habitation or which might
endanger the public peace, safety, health or welfare. (1985 Code § 4-38)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  9-2A-1 of this title.
9-1-7: SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED IN RENTAL UNITS:
   A.   Definition: The term "smoke detector" shall mean a device which detects
particles or products of combustion, other than heat, approved by Underwriter's
Laboratory, Inc., or other comparable testing firm.
   B.   Applicability Of Section: Any building, public or private, other than
single-family dwelling units constructed after the effective date of this
section, shall be subject to the rules and regulations contained in this
section. This includes, but is not limited by reason of enumeration to, the
following: multiple-family dwellings, motels, hotels, nursing homes,
convalescent homes, rooming houses, condominiums, apartments, commercial
establishments, and public buildings of every type.
   C.   Installation Required; Alternative:
      1.   The installation of a minimum of one smoke detector per affected
building is hereby required for all buildings constructed subsequent to the
effective date of this section.
      2.   As an alternative to a smoke detector, a fire detection system may
be installed. No fire detection system shall be installed unless a permit is
issued therefor by the building inspector.
   D.   Occupancy Prohibited Without Smoke Detector: It shall be unlawful for
any person to occupy a building required under this section to have a smoke
detector, or let the same to another for occupancy, which does not have
installed and in operating condition, a smoke detector on each level of said
building.
   E.   Installation In Hallways: In buildings defined in subsection B of this
section, where a common hallway is used, smoke detectors shall be spaced not
more than twenty five feet (25') apart in such hallway.
   F.   Number Of Smoke Detectors: At least one smoke detector shall be
installed per unit. A "unit" is herein defined as a separate and distinct
dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling and as a separate and distinct public
or commercial establishment in a structure housing more than one public or
commercial establishment.
   G.   Mounting On Wall Or Ceiling: Each required smoke detector shall be
mounted on the ceiling, or a wall not more than twelve inches (12") from the
ceiling.
   H.   Maintenance: It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each
affected building covered by this section to maintain all smoke detectors or
fire detectors in good working order. (1985 Code § 4-43)
9-1-8: CONDUIT REQUIRED FOR UNDERGROUND WIRING:
All new electrical installation and wiring from the power pole to electric
meter shall be enclosed in conduit of PVC pipe schedule 40 for all portions of
the electric line running underground. (Ord. 312, 4-25-1989)
9-1-9: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS FOR CERTAIN BUSINESSES:
   A.   Installation Required; Exceptions:
      1.   A grease interceptor shall be installed in the waste line leading
from sinks, drains or other fixtures in restaurants, hotel kitchens, cafeterias
and food processing establishments, and in any bar, lounge, private club or
fountain where food is prepared or served, or where dishes, glasses, pots, pans
or other kitchenwares are washed, or any other establishment where grease or
broken glass can be introduced into the drainage system in quantities that can
effect line stoppage or hinder sewage disposal. Grease, oil and sand
interceptors are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other ingredients
harmful to the building's drainage system, the public sewer or sewage treatment
plant process.
      2.   Interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
residential dwelling units.
   B.   Maintenance And Operations; Inspection: All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity as defined in the city's current adopted plumbing code and
shall be approved by the city building inspector. All interceptors shall be
located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Such interceptors shall be properly inspected following construction, by the
city building inspector, and shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense,
in continuously efficient operation at all times.
   C.   Avoiding Hazardous Conditions: An oil separator shall be installed in
the drainage system of any establishment where, in the judgement of the city
building inspector, a hazard exists or where oils or other flammables could be
introduced or admitted into the public sewer by accident or otherwise.
   D.   Certain Business Establishments:
      1.   All garages, filling stations and car washes having car wash racks
or facilities shall install combination grit and grease interceptors.
      2.   All commercial laundries shall be equipped with an interceptor
having a removable wire basket or similar device that will prevent strings,
rags, buttons or other materials detrimental to the public sewage system from
passing into the drainage system.
      3.   Bottling plants shall discharge all process wastes into an
interceptor which will provide for the separation of broken glass or other
solids, before discharging liquid wastes into the drainage system.
      4.   Slaughterhouses shall equip all slaughtering room drains with a
separator which shall prevent the discharge of feathers, entrails and other
material likely to clog the drainage system.
   E.   Time Limit For Installations: All existing establishments listed in
subsection A of this section shall have ninety (90) days from the effective
date of this section to install an improved interceptor or separator.
Establishments covered under subsection C of this section will be handled on a
case by case basis to determine whether an oil separator is required. All
establishments covered under subsection A of this section, constructed
henceforth, shall include an approved interceptor. (1985 Code § 4-41)
   F.   Right Of Entry For Inspections: The city building inspector, utilities
superintendent, city administrator, or other official designated by the city
administrator, shall have the right of entry during usual business hours, to
conduct an inspection of an interceptor or separator. (1985 Code § 4-41; amd.
2004 Code)
   G.   Violation; Penalty:
      1.   Notice; Cease Violations: Any person found to be in violation of
this section shall be served with written notice stating the violation and
providing seventy two (72) hours for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations. In the event an establishment is cited with a second
violation within six (6) months of the first, the time allowed for correction
shall be reduced to forty eight (48) hours. A third citation within six (6)
months from the first violation will be cause for the city to immediately
discontinue water service to the establishment for a period of not less than
ten (10) days during which time the offender shall correct the violation. (1985
Code § 4-41)
      2.   Penalty: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in subsection G1 of this section, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
9-1-10 of this chapter for each violation. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (1985 Code § 4-41; amd. 2004
Code)
9-1-10: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to do any thing required by this
chapter or by any code adopted by this chapter, who shall otherwise violate any
provision of this chapter or of any code adopted by this chapter, or who shall
violate any lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers provided for
in this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues, shall be deemed
a separate offense. (1985 Code § 4-55; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Building Permit Requirements; Fees
9-2-2: Review Of Building Permit Application; Conditions
9-2-3: Consideration; Permit Issuance Or Denial
9-2-4: Display Of Permit
9-2-5: Failure To Initiate Work
9-2-6: Record Of Permits And Fees
9-2-7: Monitor Utility Hookup Requests
9-2-8: Appeal Building Permit Decisions
9-2-9: Conflicting Provisions
9-2-10: Revocation Of Permit
9-2-11: Penalty
9-2-1: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   Various Permits Required:
      1.   Building Construction, Demolition, Removal: No person shall erect,
enlarge, construct, relocate, substantially improve, repair, place, alter, move
or demolish any building, structure, mobile, modular or manufactured home, or
initiate any other construction without first obtaining a separate building
permit for each such building or structure from the Office of the City Clerk.
      2.   Manmade Changes To Real Estate In Flood Hazard Areas 1 : No manmade
change to improved or unimproved real estate located within a designated flood
hazard area, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations,
shall be initiated until a separate building permit has been obtained for each
such operation from the Office of the City Clerk.
      3.   Mobile, Manufacturing, Modular Home Placement 2 : No mobile,
manufactured or modular home shall be placed on improved or unimproved real
estate without first obtaining a separate building permit for each such home
from the Office of the City Clerk. (1985 Code § 4-10)
   B.   Application For Permit: All applications for building permits shall be
signed and in writing, upon an official blank form supplied by the Office of
the City Clerk or the City building inspector, and shall be submitted to either
of said officials. (Ord. 313, 7-25-1989; amd. Ord. 423, 8-28-2018)
   C.   Fee Schedule: The fee schedule for building permits shall be as
follows:
 
New construction:             
 0 - 3,000 square feet      $250.00
 3,001 - 5,000 square feet  400.00
 Over 5,000 square feet     500.00
New modular                  200.00
Permanent detached accessory 90.00 (fence, pool)
Portable accessory           50.00
Moving of structure          125.00
Demolition                   50.00
 
   COMMERCIAL BUILDING FEE SCHEDULE
 
                 Square Footage  Plan Review Fees For
                                 Fees        Additional  Inspection Permit
Groups Occupancy Minimum Maximum (Includes 1 Plan Review Fees       Fees1
                                 Re-Review)  Rounds
                        0       2,500   $ 385.00             $1,250.00
                        2,501   4,500   650.00    $175.00
                        4,501   10,000  1,300.00             1,500.00
                        10,001  50,000  1,850.00             2,800.00
                        50,001  100,000 3,250.00  300.00     4,000.00
A        Assembly       100,001 300,000 4,500.00             8,500.00   $100.00
                                        $4,500.00            $8,500.00
                                        + 0.01               + 0.01 sq.
                        300,001+        sq. ft.   500.00     ft. over
                                        over                 300,001
                                        300,001
                        0       2,000   $ 385.00             $ 1,000.00
                        2,001   5,000   650.00    125.00     1,500.00
                        5,001   10,000  1,300.00             1,850.00
         Health care,   10,001  20,000  1,650.00             4,095.00
         institutional, 20,001  30,000  2,450.00  200.00     5,265.00
         or detention   30,001  50,000  3,475.00             7,020.00
1-2, 1-3 (includes      50,001  100,000 4,275.00             11,700.00  100.00
         limited care   100,001 300,000 5,500.00             21,000.00
         and assisted                   $5,500.00 $21,000.00
         living)                        + 0.01    + 0.01 sq.
                        300,001+        sq. ft.   ft. over
                                        over      300,001
                                        300,001
                        0       3,000   $ 415.00             $ 750.00
                        3,001   10,000  825.00    125.00     1,755.00
                        10,001  30,000  1,550.00             2,575.00
                        30,001  80,000  2,225.00             4,650.00
         Business or    80,001  150,000 3,000.00             9,900.00
B and M  mercantile     150,001 300,000 5,125.00             14,625.00  100.00
                                        $5,125.00 $14,625.00
                                        + 0.01    + 0.01 sq.
                        300,001+        sq. ft.   ft. over
                                        over      300,001
                                        300,001
                        0       5,000   $ 650.00             $ 1,500.00
                        5,001   10,000  1,150.00  175.00     1,875.00
                        10,001  30,000  1,900.00             4,365.00
                        30,001  80,000  3,150.00             9,945.00
E and 1- Educational    80,001  150,000 4,900.00  300.00     17,550.00
4        and daycare    150,001 300,000 7,850.00             43,875.00  100.00
                                        $7,850.00            $43,875.00
                                        + 0.01               + 0.01 sq.
                        300,001+        sq. ft.   500.00     ft. over
                                        over                 300,001
                                        300,001
                        0       10,000                       $ 750.00
                        10,001  20,000                       750.00
                        20,001  50,000  $550.00              1,250.00
F1, F2,  Industrial or  50,001  100,000                      1,250.00
S1, S2,  storage        100,001 200,000           125.00     1,250.00   100.00
and U                                   $550.00 + $1,250.00
                        200,001+        0.01 sq.  + 0.01 sq.
                                        ft. over  ft. over
                                        200,001   200,001
                        0       2,000   $ 725.00             $1,000.00
                        2,001   5,000   1,100.00             1,200.00
H1, H2,                                 $1,100.00 $1,200.00
H3, H4,  High hazard                    + 0.02    + 0.01 sq.            100.00
and H5                  5,001+          sq. ft.   ft. over
                                        over      5,001
                                        5,001
                        0       2,500   $ 550.00             $ 1,500.00
                        2,501   10,000  1,250.00  150.00     1,872.00
         Hotels, dorms, 10,001  30,000  1,800.00             4,680.00
         apartments,    30,001  50,000  3,250.00             9,945.00
R1, R2,  lodging,       50,001  150,000 4,200.00             17,550.00
R3, R4,  rooming, and   150,001 300,000 5,425.00             43,875.00  100.00
I-1      residential                    $5,425.00 $43,875.00
         care                           + 0.01    + 0.01 sq.
         facilities     300,001+        sq. ft.   ft. over
                                        over      300,001
                                        300,001
 
Note:
   1.    Suggested permit fees for City to retain.
(Ord. 423, 8-28-2018)
   D.   Administration Of Building Permit Process: The Office of the City Clerk
shall be responsible for the administration of the building permit process
within said community; provided, that building permit application forms may be
obtained from, and submitted to, the City building inspector. (1985 Code § 4-
10; amd. Ord. 423, 8-28-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 12 of this Code.
2 2. See also chapter 5 of this title.
9-2-2: REVIEW OF BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Contents Of Application; Required Documents: Applications for building
permits shall contain all applicable information required on the building
permit form, and shall be accompanied by drawings of the proposed work (drawn
to scale), showing floor plans, structural details, computations and such
additional information as may be required of the applicant by the Office of the
City Clerk, the City building inspector, or this Code. Plans for drainage at
proposed construction site shall also be submitted, if requested. (1985 Code §
4-10; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Review By Building Inspector; Ensure Compliance: Upon receipt of a
complete building permit application, the City Clerk shall immediately turn the
application over to the City building inspector, who shall review the
application to ensure that:
      1.   The involved land is properly zoned for the proposed use;
      2.   Applicable zoning district provisions (including Floodway and
Floodway Fringe District provisions) have been met;
      3.   Roadway access is available;
      4.   Adequate and sanitary provisions have been made for utilities;
      5.   All easements provided in the recorded plat, if any, are not
encroached upon;
      6.   All other floodplain regulations, if applicable, have been met and
the required information provided; and
      7.   All other required City permits have been obtained. (Ord. 313, 7-25-
1989)
   C.   Review Process, Time Limit: The City building inspector and the Office
of the City Clerk shall complete all required review processes in an efficient
and effective manner, without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. (1985 Code §
4-10)
9-2-3: CONSIDERATION; PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
   A.   Approval; Forward To Clerk: If the City building inspector is satisfied
that the proposed work described in the application and attached materials
conform to the requirements of the adopted zoning ordinance, Building Code and
other regulations and requirements, he shall authorize the issuance of the
building permit by signing the application and forwarding it to the City Clerk,
who shall collect the appropriate building permit fee from the applicant and
provide a copy of the signed application and original building permit to the
applicant. (Ord. 313, 7-25-1989)
   B.   Denial: If the application or attached materials do not conform to
pertinent City regulations, the City building inspector shall not approve said
application, but shall return the application to the City Clerk, along with
written reason(s) for disapproval. The City Clerk shall return the application,
with written reason(s) attached, to the applicant. The applicant may
subsequently amend his application, if possible, and resubmit it, or initiate
other action to correct the deficiencies.
   C.   Issuance Of Building Permit: A building permit, once approved and
issued, shall be construed as a license to proceed with the work and shall not
be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any City
regulations, nor shall such issuance prevent the City building inspector from
thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction or a
violation of this chapter. (1985 Code § 4-10)
9-2-4: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
Building permits shall be conspicuously displayed on the project or site, in a
manner visible from the street. (1985 Code § 4-10)
9-2-5: FAILURE TO INITIATE WORK:
   A.   Permit Null And Void: If the work allowed under an issued building
permit has not been initiated within six (6) months from the issuance date of
said permit, such permit shall become null and void, unless a request for an
extension is submitted to, and approved by, the City Clerk. If said permit
becomes null and void, a new permit must be obtained and the regular fee
incident thereto collected, in order for the work to be initiated or resumed.
(1985 Code § 4-10; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Review By Clerk; Revocation: Permits in effect for a period in excess
of twelve (12) months shall be reviewed by the Office of the City Clerk, who
shall determine whether said permit is still valid because of any possible
changes. The City Clerk may revoke said permit as stated in section
9-2-10 of this chapter. (1985 Code § 4-10)
9-2-6: RECORD OF PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   Permits: The City building inspector shall keep a permanent and
accurate accounting of all building permits. (1985 Code § 4-10; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Fees: The City Clerk shall keep a permanent and accurate record of all
building permit fee payments. (1985 Code § 4-10)
9-2-7: MONITOR UTILITY HOOKUP REQUESTS:
The City Clerk and the City building inspector shall monitor Municipal utility
hookup requests and shall not allow Municipal utilities to be turned on to any
unit, structure or project for which a building permit has not been issued.
(1985 Code § 4-10)
9-2-8: APPEAL BUILDING PERMIT DECISIONS:
Appeals from any aggrieved person concerning a decision of the City Clerk
relative to the granting of building permits shall be taken to the City
Council, who shall act as the building permit Board of Adjustment for the City.
(Ord. 313, 7-25-1989)
9-2-9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In the event of any conflict between the building permit provisions delineated
herein and any provisions of the Building Code adopted by the City Council, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (1985 Code § 4-10)
9-2-10: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The City Clerk may revoke a building permit in case there has been any false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or
attached materials on which the building permit approval was based. (1985 Code
§ 4-10)
9-2-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-5-1 of this Code. (2004 Code)
ARTICLE A.  SPECIAL PERMITS
SECTION:
9-2A-1: House Moving Permit
9-2A-2: Pavement Cutting Permit
9-2A-3: Liquefied Petroleum Gas State Permit
9-2A-1: HOUSE MOVING PERMIT 1 :
   A.   Permit Required; Approval:
      1.   Before any person shall move any house, building or heavy structure
(but not including a mobile home) on or over any street within or through the
city, it shall first be necessary to obtain a house moving permit to do so from
the office of the city clerk.
      2.   Application for said permit must be submitted at least forty eight
(48) hours prior to the time of the proposed move. (1985 Code § 4-11)
      3.   Said permit shall first be approved by the city administrator, chief
of police, or building inspector. (1985 Code § 4-11; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Permit Fee; Additional Costs:
      1.   The fee for a permit to move such house or structure shall be twelve
dollars fifty cents ($12.50), plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour, with
the first hour's cost to be prepaid.
      2.   In the event it is necessary to move utility lines, poles, signs or
other structures to facilitate the move, the cost therefor will be paid by the
applicant, in addition to the normal fee. (1985 Code § 4-11)
   C.   Route Approval; Requirements For Mover:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the city administrator or chief of police to
approve or determine the route that may be used and the potential for damages,
if any, to any property. (1985 Code § 4-11; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   Such city official may prescribe such rules and regulations as are
necessary to promote an effective move and the protection of persons and
property.
      3.   The mover shall erect all necessary danger signals during the
operation of moving.
   D.   Liability For Property Damage: Any person moving any house or any other
structure on or over any street or alley shall be liable personally and upon
his bond for any damages to trees, public property, persons or any matter
whatsoever resulting from such moving. This shall not be construed to authorize
any person to cut or trim any trees, or commit any injury to any public or
private property which cannot be immediately restored to its former condition,
and no permit shall authorize any moving under any conditions which will
promote such damage. (1985 Code § 4-11)
 
Notes
  1. See also sections
1 9-1-5B1 and
   9-1-6 of this title.
9-2A-2: PAVEMENT CUTTING PERMIT:
   A.   Crossing Under Street Or Sidewalk: Any plumber or other person desiring
to cross under any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public ground,
whether paved, graveled, graded or not, in the city for any purpose whatever,
shall first obtain a permit from the city administrator or his designated
representative and, where economically feasible, shall cross under the same by
boring under said public street, alley, sidewalk or other public ground. (1985
Code § 4-12)
   B.   Cutting Open Street Or Sidewalk: Where not economically feasible to
cross under any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public ground in the
city as set out in subsection A of this section, upon prior approval given by
the city administrator, and upon payment of a fee as prescribed from time to
time by the city council, any plumber or other person desiring to cut into or
in any manner open any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public ground,
whether paved, graveled, graded or not, in the city for any purpose whatever,
shall first obtain a permit from the city administrator or his designated
representative to cut or open such street, alley, sidewalk or other public
ground. (1985 Code § 4-12; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Deposit To Guarantee Work: Prior to the issuance of a permit as
required herein, the city administrator or his designated representative may
require a deposit in an amount sufficient to refill and repair the requested
cut or opening in accordance with the requirements of subsections F, G and H of
this section. All deposits shall be made with the city treasurer and shall be
held in a special fund. Such deposit shall be released to the permit holder
upon certification by the city administrator or his designated representative
that refilling and repairing of the cut or opening has been performed in
accordance with the requirements of subsections D, E, F, G, and H of this
section.
   D.   Compliance With Requirements: It shall be the duty of the permit holder
to comply with the provisions of subsections B, C, F, G and H this section, and
all work required shall be completed immediately.
   E.   Refill, Repair And Maintenance:
      1.   After satisfactory refill and repair as required by subsections F, G
and H of this section, it shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to
immediately perform any and all subsequent refill, repair and maintenance on
said cuts or openings for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the
permit, upon notice from the city administrator or his designated
representative.
      2.   Upon failure of the permit holder to make adequate refill and repair
as required by this section, the city may refill or repair or secure said work
by contract with the cost of said work being assessed against the permit
holder. Failure of the permit holder to pay such costs shall be grounds for
denial of any and all future permits required by subsections B and C of this
section, and said permit holder shall be subject to all other penalties
provided for in this chapter.
   F.   Compliance With Drawings And Specifications: When any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public ground has been cut or opened for any purpose, the
permit holder shall refill and repair said cut or opening pursuant to the
engineer's drawing and specifications shown below.
   G.   Surface Restoration: All surfaces shall be restored with similar
materials and workmanship as originally existed prior to the cut or opening,
and shall be subject to the approval of the city administrator or his
designated representative.
   H.   Hauling Away Dirt, Other Materials: All dirt and other materials taken
from the cut or opening shall be hauled away by the permit holder.
   I.   Barricades And Lights: In all cases where the surface of the street,
alley, sidewalk or other public ground is disturbed, the party so cutting into
the opening shall maintain suitable barricades and shall place lights at night
to protect persons from danger.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1729.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1731.png]
 
(1985 Code § 4-12)
9-2A-3: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS STATE PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required; Compliance: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to manufacture, fabricate, assemble, install or repair any
system, container, apparatus or appliance to be used for the transportation,
storage, dispensing or utilization of liquefied petroleum gas, or to transport,
handle or store such gas, unless such person has complied, and complies, with
all provisions of the state law and local ordinances relating thereto, and has
any permit which may be required by state law.
   B.   Storage Limitation: No storage of liquefied petroleum gas, except by
retail customers in reasonable amounts for their own use, shall be permitted
within the corporate limits of the city. (1985 Code § 4-13)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definition
9-3-2: Permit Required; Exception
9-3-3: Electrical Inspection Fees
9-3-4: Conformance With Regulations And Standards
9-3-5: Special Rulings By Inspector
9-3-6: Electrical Work; Requirements And Restrictions
9-3-7: Penalty
9-3-1: DEFINITION:
The term "electrical equipment", as used in this chapter, refers to electrical
conductors, metallic raceways, fittings, devices, fixtures, appliances,
apparatus, and any electrical material of any nature, kind, or description, to
be installed within or on any building or structure. (1985 Code § 4-16)
9-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
No electric wiring shall be installed or changed without a permit issued by the
city clerk; provided, that no separate electric permit shall be required in
case a building permit is secured to construct a new building. (1985 Code § 4-
14)
9-3-3: ELECTRICAL INSPECTION FEES:
The city council, by motion or resolution, may prescribe the fees to be charged
for inspection of electrical installations. The fees shall be the property of
the city. (1985 Code § 4-15)
9-3-4: CONFORMANCE WITH REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   State And Local Regulations: All electrical equipment installed or used
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the statutes of the
state of Oklahoma and any orders, rules, and regulations issued by authority
thereof, and with approved electrical standards for safety to persons or to
property.
   B.   Standards: Unless by this chapter, by a statute of the state of
Oklahoma, or any orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority thereof, a
specific type or class of electrical equipment is disapproved for installation
and use, conformity with the standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.,
shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety
to persons or to property. (1985 Code § 4-17)
9-3-5: SPECIAL RULINGS BY INSPECTOR:
The electrical inspector shall have the authority to make special rulings, when
circumstances warrant, for the safeguarding of life and property and the
improvement of electrical installations, but in all cases, persons engaged in
the installing of electrical equipment and holding a state electrical license
must be notified by letter of these decisions. (1985 Code § 4-18)
9-3-6: ELECTRICAL WORK; REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Wiring In Fire Limits: All wiring hereafter installed in the fire
limits must be placed in metallic raceways. Armored cable or flexible conduit
shall be used only when, in the judgment of the electrical inspector, it is
impractical to install other metallic raceways. Exceptions to the requirements
of this section are specified in section
9-3-5 of this chapter. (1985 Code § 4-19)
   B.   Extensions Of Certain Installations In Fire Limits: Wiring
installations, consisting of concealed knob and tube, cleat, armored cable, or
flexible conduit that was installed previous to the adoption of this code,
which in the judgment of the electrical inspector is in a safe condition, may
have extension of the same kind of work made to these installations. (1985 Code
§ 4-20)
   C.   Pilot Light Required For Iron In Mercantile Occupancies: In all
mercantile occupancies where electric irons are used, they must be installed
with approved pilot light. If pilot light is in an enclosure such as an
alteration room, an additional light must be installed in a visible position
outside the enclosure. (1985 Code § 4-21)
   D.   Rigid Conduits: For mechanical security and continuity to ground, rigid
conduit shall be provided with two (2) lock nuts, one inside and one outside
the equipment to which it is attached. Metallic service equipment, rigid
conduit, electrical metallic tubing, flexible conduit, metallic switch, outlet
receptacle, and junction boxes shall have a conductive coating or finish.
Watertight couplings shall be employed for joining electrical metallic tubing.
(1985 Code § 4-22)
   E.   Branch Circuits: In residential and mercantile occupancies, lighting
branch circuits shall be confined to one thousand (1,000) watts, and not more
than eight (8) outlets per circuit will be allowed in the fire limits. Branch
circuit conductors shall not be smaller than no. 12. type C lamp cord will not
be permitted in the kitchen of restaurants or like places where grease
accumulates, nor in part of a building where live poultry is confined. (1985
Code § 4-23)
   F.   Basement Installations: A circuit of not less than no. 12 wire shall be
installed in basements in any area subject to floods. Ground connections shall
not be made in toilets adjacent to salt storage or acid vapors, or in any
location where the grounding conductor and fitting is likely to become
corroded. (1985 Code § 4-24)
9-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 4
HOUSE NUMBERING SYSTEM
SECTION:
9-4-1: Numbering Required
9-4-2: System Established
9-4-3: Owner Responsibility
9-4-4: Variation To System
9-4-5: Penalty
9-4-1: NUMBERING REQUIRED:
All buildings and houses in the city shall be numbered. The city administrator
or his/her designee shall be responsible for designating the proper numbers for
houses and buildings. (1985 Code § 4-36; amd. 2004 Code)
9-4-2: SYSTEM ESTABLISHED:
   A.   The north and south base line shall be First Street; all buildings east
of the base line shall be known and numbered as east, and all buildings west of
the base line shall be known and numbered as west.
   B.   The east and west line shall be Main Street; all buildings north of
this line shall be known and numbered as north, and all buildings south of this
base line shall be known and numbered as south.
   C.   There shall be one hundred (100) numbers applicable to each block,
beginning with "one" on the odd side and "two (2)" on the even side of the
street. (1985 Code § 4-36)
   D.   Each platted lot on each block shall be entitled to a separate number.
(1985 Code § 4-36; amd. 2004 Code)
   E.   The first block from the base line in either direction shall be given
numbers from one to one hundred (100), and the second block shall be given
numbers from one hundred (100) to two hundred (200), and so on in consecutive
order by one hundreds to each block in succession.
   F.   The even numbers shall be on the east side of the streets extending
north and south, and on the south side of the streets extending east and west;
the odd numbers shall be on the opposite side of such streets.
   G.   The affix "one-half (1/2)" shall be added to the last preceding number
in designating stairway or garage apartments. (1985 Code § 4-36)
9-4-3: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be the duty of the owner of any house or building in the city to have
such house or building numbered in accordance with this chapter. (1985 Code §
4-36)
9-4-4: VARIATION TO SYSTEM:
In situations where the plat or pattern of the area does not fit this numbering
system, the planning commission shall study the area and recommend to the city
council, for adoption by ordinance, an appropriate amendment to this chapter.
(1985 Code § 4-36)
9-4-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 5
MANUFACTURED, MOBILE AND MODULAR HOUSING
SECTION:
9-5-1: Purpose
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Freestanding Mobile Homes
9-5-4: Nonresidential Mobile Trailers
9-5-5: Housing Regulations For Mobile And Manufactured Homes
9-5-6: Penalty
9-5-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for areas within
the corporate boundaries of the city, wherein the location and development of
manufactured housing, mobile homes, mobile home parks, trailer parks,
manufactured and mobile home subdivisions and modular housing units or
additions may be safely continued and encouraged.
   B.   The regulations set forth in this chapter are designed to promote
stable neighborhoods, prevent health and safety hazards and encourage the
economical and orderly development and operation of manufactured housing and
mobile home parks and subdivisions, trailer parks and modular housing units and
additions. (1985 Code § 10-1)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, words and phrases shall
have the meanings indicated hereinbelow:
   CITY BUILDING INSPECTOR: The building inspector of the city of Marlow,
Oklahoma, or his authorized agent.
   HEALTH OFFICIAL: The legally designated health authority of the city of
Marlow, Oklahoma (or his authorized representative), or the authorized
representative of the Stephens County health department or the state department
of health.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING: A dwelling unit fabricated on or after June 15, 1976,
in an off site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the
building site, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with
the federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards code. The
three (3) types of manufactured housing are defined as meeting all of the
requirements listed below, and are to be considered separate from mobile or
modular housing:
   A.   Type I manufactured housing shall:
      1.   Have more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of occupied space in
a typically double section or larger multisection unit, with a minimum width of
twenty feet (20');
      2.   Be placed onto a permanent foundation, and be anchored to the
ground, in accordance with the city's foundation code or other adopted
foundation requirements, and the manufacturer's specifications;
      3.   Utilize a permanent perimeter enclosure, in accordance with
municipally approved installation standards;
      4.   Have wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms removed;
      5.   Have all utilities connected, in accordance with the appropriate
city codes and the manufacturer's specifications;
      6.   Have siding material of a type customarily used on site built
residences in the community and neighborhood;
      7.   Have roofing material of a type customarily used on site built
residences in the community and neighborhood;
      8.   Have a one hundred (100) square foot (minimum), attached, covered
and/or enclosed parking garage, which is compatible with other housing in the
immediate area; all parking and driveway areas shall be hard surfaced;
      9.   Have legitimate front and rear doors; and
      10.   Have a minimum eaves width of six inches (6").
   B.   Type II manufactured housing shall:
      1.   Have more than seven hundred twenty (720) square feet of occupied
space in a single, double, expando or multisection unit (including those with
add-a-room units);
      2.   Be placed onto a permanent foundation, and be anchored to the
ground, in accordance with the city's foundation code or other adopted
foundation standards, and the manufacturer's specifications;
      3.   Utilize a permanent perimeter enclosure, in accordance with
municipally approved installation standards;
      4.   Have wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms removed;
      5.   Have utilities connected in accordance with appropriate municipal
codes and the manufacturer's specifications;
      6.   Have siding material of a type customarily used on site built
residences in the community and neighborhood;
      7.   Have roofing material of a type customarily used on site built
residences in the community and neighborhood;
      8.   Have a one hundred (100) square foot (minimum) attached, covered
and/or enclosed parking garage, which is compatible with other housing in the
immediate area; all parking and driveway areas shall be hard surfaced;
      9.   Have legitimate front and rear doors; and
      10.   Have a minimum eaves width of six inches (6").
   C.   Type III manufactured housing shall:
      1.   Have more than six hundred (600) square feet of occupied space, in a
single, double, expando or multisection unit (including those with add-a-room
units);
      2.   Be placed onto a support system, in accordance with municipally
approved installation standards;
      3.   Be enclosed with foundation siding or skirting, in accordance with
municipally approved installation standards;
      4.   Be anchored to the ground, in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications and the city's appropriate, adopted code; and
      5.   Have utilities connected, in accordance with appropriate municipal
requirements and the manufacturer's specifications.
   MOBILE HOME: Any single-family dwelling designed for transportation on
streets and highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailer (both
highway and rail) and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a
dwelling complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, located on jacks or permanent foundation,
connected to utilities and similar operations.
   MOBILE HOME, DEPENDENT: Any mobile home which does not have a flush toilet
and a bath or shower. For purposes of regulations under this chapter, a
dependent mobile home shall be considered to be the same as a travel trailer,
unless otherwise specified.
   MOBILE HOME, FREESTANDING: Any mobile home or travel trailer not located in
a mobile home park or travel trailer park respectively, licensed by the city of
Marlow, Oklahoma, or located in an approved mobile home subdivision.
   MOBILE HOME PARK: Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more mobile
homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of
whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE: Any plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for
the accommodation of one mobile home, and not located on a mobile home sales
lot.
   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision designed and intended for
residential use, where residence is in mobile homes or manufactured housing
exclusively, and lots are sold for occupancy.
   MODULAR HOME: Any factory fabricated, transportable building unit, not built
upon a permanent chassis, designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated
with similar units on a permanent foundation. The term is intended to apply to
major assemblies and does not include prefabricated subelements incorporated
into a structure at the site, nor does it include any type of "manufactured
housing", as defined herein. Any "modular home" must meet U.S. government
"modular home" certification standards (see article C of this chapter).
   NONRESIDENTIAL MOBILE TRAILER: Any vehicle having the basic characteristics
of either a mobile home or travel trailer, but which is used for purposes other
than residential and is not being offered for sale (as indicated by a clearly
displayed sign on or near the trailer).
   PARK: A mobile home and/or travel trailer park.
   PUBLIC WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM: Any such system built and owned by, or
dedicated to and accepted by, the city of Marlow, Oklahoma. All other such
systems shall be deemed private systems.
   SERVICE BUILDING: Any building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men
and/or women, and may also include buildings containing laundry facilities and
other facilities.
   SUBDIVISION: A manufactured housing or mobile home subdivision, unless
otherwise indicated.
   TRAVEL TRAILER: All vehicles and portable structures built on a chassis,
designed as a temporary or permanent dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation use. For purposes of regulation under this chapter, a "dependent
mobile home" shall be considered to be the same as a travel trailer, unless
otherwise specified.
   TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more travel
trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of
whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations.
   TRAVEL TRAILER SPACE: A plot of ground within a travel trailer park designed
for accommodation of one travel trailer. (1985 Code § 10-2)
9-5-3: FREESTANDING MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   Location Restricted: No freestanding mobile home or travel trailer
shall be permitted within the corporate limits of the city, except in a
residential area, unless it is being offered for sale or parked for storage, or
located within an appropriate zoning district which permits such freestanding
location. (1985 Code § 10-3)
   B.   Permit Required; Fee; Consent Of Property Owners:
      1.   Any person wishing to locate a mobile home in a single-family
residential district shall first obtain a permit from the city.
      2.   The permit shall not be issued unless the petitioner presents to the
city a petition signed by seventy five percent (75%) of the owners of property
within three hundred feet (300') of the exterior lot lines of the property upon
which the mobile home is to be placed. Said petition shall contain a statement
that a mobile home is to be placed upon the property and that those signing the
petition live or own property within three hundred feet (300') of the exterior
lot lines upon which the mobile home is to be placed; further, that the persons
signing consent to the mobile home being placed upon the property. The
petitioner shall furnish to the city a statement from a bonded abstract company
certifying the names of the owners of the property which is within three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior lot lines upon which the mobile home is to
be placed.
      3.   The fee for such permit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00), to be paid
before the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 284, 1-28-1986)
   C.   Mobile Homes Or Travel Trailers For Sale:
      1.   Except for mobile homes or travel trailers within regular commercial
mobile home or travel trailer sales lots, each such freestanding mobile home or
travel trailer offered for sale must be clearly marked as such, shall not be
occupied for either living or sleeping purposes, and must be removed from the
premises if not sold within one hundred twenty (120) days.
      2.   Freestanding mobile homes or travel trailers located within regular
commercial mobile home or travel trailer sales lots need not be individually
marked for sale or removed within one hundred twenty (120) days, if not sold.
   D.   Storage On Residential Lots: A property owner shall not store, nor
permit to be stored, more than one mobile home or travel trailer on a
residential lot. Such mobile home or travel trailer shall not be stored in any
required front or side yard or public utility easement, nor shall such mobile
home or travel trailer project beyond the front of any building. (1985 Code §
10-3)
   E.   Mobile Home Specifications And Requirements: A mobile home shall not be
authorized to be placed in a single-family residential district until said
mobile home complies with the following requirements:
      1.   The mobile home must have a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet
of floor space (12 feet by 50 feet).
      2.   The mobile home must comply with the code of the USA standards
institute and bear a certification or registration tag so certifying, and/or
bear the mobile home manufacturing association (MHMA) emblem and registration
tag, and/or be certified by the manufacturer of said mobile home to be in
compliance with the requirements of either of the aforementioned organizations,
before said mobile home shall be accepted as being in compliance with the
Marlow city code.
      3.   No mobile home shall be placed on a lot in a single-family
residential district unless said lot is at least fifty feet (50') wide, with a
minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet.
   F.   Mobile Home Installation Requirements: Permit installation requirements
are as follows:
      1.   The mobile home shall be installed on a foundation, approved by the
city building inspector, with wheels removed.
      2.   The mobile home shall be skirted with material approved by the city
building inspector.
      3.   The mobile home must be tied down with strips or other methods
approved by the city building inspector, and in accordance with specifications
furnished by the office of the city building inspector.
      4.   The mobile home must have separate water and electrical meters, and
be on public sewer, if available, and if not, on a septic tank approved by the
city health official.
      5.   The mobile home's electrical service equipment shall not be less
than one hundred (100) amp service.
      6.   The state license plate must be removed and the unit put on the
county assessor's tax rolls in all instances where the mobile home is placed on
real property belonging to the mobile home owner. In the event the mobile home
is placed on real property not belonging to the mobile home owner, then the
state license plate shall remain on said vehicle and the license tax shall be
paid the state of Oklahoma, as provided by the statutes of the state of
Oklahoma.
   G.   Existing Mobile Home; Sale Of Property: Any mobile home in violation of
this section which was located before the effective date of this section, shall
be permitted to remain thereon; provided however, that if the property upon
which the mobile home is located is sold, the new owner may leave the existing
mobile home on the premises, but the new owner shall not be permitted to locate
a different mobile home on the premises if the premises is vacant for more than
one hundred twenty (120) days. The owner of real property with a mobile home
thereon at the time of the effective date of this section may place a different
mobile home upon said premises. (Ord. 301, 8-25-1987)
   H.   Commission Review Of Application; Council Action: After all
specification requirements and installation requirements described in this
chapter have been met, the applicant shall submit his request for the placement
of a mobile home within the single-family residential district to the planning
commission at their next regular or special meeting. The commission shall
review and verify that all residential district requirements have been met and
that all other pertinent and applicable provisions have been reviewed. The
commission shall, within a reasonable time, render a majority decision
recommendation to the city council to allow or deny the applicant's request.
The city council, at their next regular meeting, shall act upon the
recommendation of the commission. (Ord. 302, 9-29-1987)
9-5-4: NONRESIDENTIAL MOBILE TRAILERS:
   A.   Permit Required: No nonresidential mobile trailer shall be permitted in
the city unless a permit for its operation is issued by the city building
inspector. Such permit shall specify the permitted use of the nonresidential
mobile trailer, the location of such operation and the termination date of the
permit.
   B.   Compliance With Regulations: No permit shall be issued for a use which
would violate any local, state or federal ordinance, law or regulation.
   C.   Annual Fee; Exception: An annual fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall
be charged for each nonresidential mobile trailer permit; provided, that no
governmental or nonprofit agency shall be charged such a fee.
   D.   Construction Projects: Operation of nonresidential trailers by
contractors or construction projects for which building permits have been
issued or which are otherwise approved by governmental units is permitted
during the term of such construction project, without issuance of a permit.
   E.   Permanent Location Prohibited: This section shall not be construed as
permitting or authorizing the permanent location of any nonresidential mobile
trailer within the city. (1985 Code § 10-4)
9-5-5: HOUSING REGULATIONS FOR MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES:
   A.   Compliance With Housing Code: Every manufactured house or mobile home
located in either a mobile home park, a subdivision or as a freestanding home,
shall meet the provisions of the adopted housing code of the city, except as
otherwise provided in this section, or as may be otherwise provided in other
provisions of this code.
   B.   Gross Floor Area: Every manufactured house or mobile home shall contain
the following minimum gross floor area of habitable space:
      1.   One hundred fifty (150) square feet for one or two (2) occupants;
      2.   One hundred (100) additional square feet for the third occupant; and
      3.   Seventy five (75) square feet additional for each additional
occupant thereafter.
   C.   Ceiling Height: Habitable space in a mobile or manufactured home shall
have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet (7') over fifty percent (50%) of
the floor area. The floor area where the ceiling height is less than five feet
(5') shall not be considered in computing minimum gross floor area.
   D.   Exits: A mobile or manufactured home shall have a safe and unobstructed
primary exit and an emergency exit located remote from the primary exit.
   E.   Sleeping Rooms: Rooms occupied for sleeping purposes must contain at
least sixty (60) square feet of floor space if used by more than one person,
and at least forty (40) square feet if used by one person.
   F.   Dependent Homes: Dependent mobile homes shall not be required to have a
flush toilet, bath or shower.
   G.   Travel Trailers; Exceptions: The housing code shall not apply to travel
trailers insofar as floor area, flush toilet, bath or shower ceiling height is
concerned. (1985 Code § 10-5)
9-5-6: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this code. Each day upon which such violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense. (1985 Code § 10-60; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE A.  MOBILE HOME, MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND TRAILER PARKS
SECTION:
9-5A-1: Permit Requirements; Procedures; Fees
9-5A-2: Inspection Of Parks
9-5A-3: Notices, Hearings And Orders
9-5A-4: Park Supervision
9-5A-5: Location And Design Considerations
9-5A-6: Service Buildings For Travel Trailer Parks
9-5A-7: Sewage Disposal
9-5A-8: Water Supply
9-5A-9: Refuse Disposal
9-5A-10: Insect And Rodent Control
9-5A-11: Electricity; Exterior Lighting
9-5A-12: Fuels; Power Sources
9-5A-13: Fire Protection
9-5A-14: Alterations And Additions
9-5A-15: Registration Of Owners And Occupants
9-5A-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; PROCEDURES; FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
maintain or operate any mobile home, manufactured housing or travel trailer
park within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid permit issued
annually and jointly by the city building inspector and health official of the
city, in the name of such person for the specific park, except that the
maintenance or operation of an existing park on the effective date of this
article may be continued under a temporary permit for such period of time and
under such conditions as are hereinafter described.
   B.   Application For Permit:
      1.   Application shall be made to the city building inspector acting
jointly with the health official, in writing, within twenty four (24) hours
after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of, interest
in or control of, any such park. Such notice shall include the name and address
of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such park.
      2.   Application for original permits shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, and accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of
the application, and shall contain the following:
         a.   Name and address of the applicant;
         b.   The interest of the applicant in, and the location and legal
description of, the park;
         c.   A complete plan of the park, showing compliance with all
applicable provisions of this article and regulations promulgated thereunder;
and
         d.   Such further information as may be requested by the health
official and/or city building inspector.
      3.   Applications for renewals of permits shall be made, in writing, by
the holder of the license and shall contain the following:
         a.   Any change in the information submitted since the time the
original license was issued, or the latest renewal granted; and
         b.   Other information requested by the health official and/or city
building inspector.
   C.   Fees; Term Of Permit:
      1.   The city clerk shall charge and collect for each mobile home,
manufactured home and/or travel trailer park an initial permit or temporary
permit fee of not to exceed two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per space.
      2.   The initial permit or temporary permit shall expire one year from
the date of issue, unless renewed upon such conditions as the city council may,
by ordinance, direct. (1985 Code § 10-10)
   D.   Posting Of Temporary Permit: The permit shall be conspicuously posted
in the office of, or on the premises of, the park at all times. (1985 Code §
10-14)
   E.   Plan Required: A complete plan, for the purpose of obtaining a permit,
to be issued, shall show:
      1.   The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
      2.   The number, locations and size of all mobile home, manufactured home
or travel trailer spaces;
      3.   The location and width of roadways, walkways, buffer strips and
recreational areas;
      4.   The location of service buildings and other proposed structures;
      5.   The location and size of utility lines and treatment facilities; and
      6.   Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed, or to be constructed, within the park.
   F.   Existing Parks, Concrete Pads: Mobile home and travel trailer parks in
existence upon the effective date of this article, which have concrete pads
indicating the location of mobile home, manufactured home or travel trailer
spaces, need not comply with those sections of this article which would require
the moving of concrete pads. They must, however, comply with all other
requirements, and any park expansion shall be in full compliance with
provisions of this article.
   G.   Suspension Of Permit:
      1.   Whenever the health official and/or city building inspector find
conditions existing in violation of this article, or of any regulation adopted
pursuant hereto, he shall give notice, in writing, to the person to whom the
permit was issued that, unless such conditions or practices be corrected within
a reasonable period of time (specified in the notice), the permit will be
suspended.
      2.   At the end of such period, not to exceed ninety (90) days, the
health official and/or city building inspector shall reinspect such park, and,
if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the
permit and give notice, in writing, of such suspension to the person to whom
the permit was issued.
      3.   Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such person shall cease
operation of such park except as may be provided hereinafter.
   H.   Permit Denial Or Suspension; Hearing: Any person whose permit has been
denied or suspended, or who has received notice from the health official and/or
city building inspector that his permit will be suspended unless certain
conditions or practices at the park are corrected, may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the city council; provided, that when no
petition for such hearing shall have been filed within ten (10) days following
the day on which notice of suspension was served, such permit shall be deemed
to have been automatically revoked at the expiration of such ten (10) day
period. (1985 Code § 10-10)
9-5A-2: INSPECTION OF PARKS:
   A.   Authority Of Officials: The health official and city building inspector
are hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the
condition of mobile home, manufactured home and travel trailer parks located
within the city, in order to perform their duty of safeguarding the health and
safety of occupants of such parks and of the general public.
   B.   Outside Premises: The health official and city building inspector shall
have the power to inspect the outside premises of private or public property
for the purposes of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the
enforcement of this article or of regulations promulgated thereunder.
   C.   Register Of Homes And Occupants: The health official and city building
inspector shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of
all homes and occupants using the park.
   D.   Occupant Allow Access To Premises: It shall be the duty of every
occupant of a park to give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access
to any part of such mobile home, manufactured home or travel trailer park, or
their premises, at reasonable times for the purpose of making, ordering or
inspecting such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance
with this article, or with any lawful regulations adopted thereunder, or with
any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. (1985 Code
§ 10-11)
9-5A-3: NOTICES, HEARINGS AND ORDERS:
   A.   Contents Of Notice: Whenever the health official or city building
inspector determines violations of pertinent regulations exist, he shall notify
the licensee or permittee of such alleged violation. Such notice shall:
      1.   Be in writing;
      2.   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
      3.   Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will affect
compliance with provisions of this article and other pertinent regulations;
      4.   Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, for the
performance of any act it requires; and
      5.   Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require;
provided, that, such notice or order shall be deemed as properly served upon
owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by certified mail to his last
known address.
   B.   Written Request For Hearing: Any person affected by any notice issued
under this article or resulting regulations, may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the city council, acting as a board of appeals;
provided, that such person shall file with the city building inspector a
written request for such hearing, setting forth briefly the grounds for such
request, within ten (10) days after the day notice was served. The filing of
such request shall stay the notice of suspension of permits, except in cases of
orders issued under subsection E of this section. The hearing shall be held at
the next city council meeting for which the agenda has not been completed, or
at a later meeting if so requested by the petitioner, should the city building
inspector determine that sufficient cause for such delay exists.
   C.   Council Findings: After such hearing, the health official or city
building inspector shall compile the findings of the city council as to
compliance with this article and pursuant to regulations, and shall issue an
order, in writing, sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the prior notice which
shall be served as provided in subsection A5 of this section. Upon failure to
comply with such order, the permit of the park shall be revoked.
   D.   Appeal To District Court: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
city council may seek relief in district court.
   E.   Emergency Situation: Whenever the health official or city building
inspector finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order
reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be
taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension
of the permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, such order
shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the city council,
shall be afforded a hearing at the next regular meeting, even if the agenda has
been completed. The provisions of subsections C and D of this section shall be
applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. (1985 Code § 10-12)
9-5A-4: PARK SUPERVISION:
The permittee or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker shall be charged at
all times with keeping the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean,
orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable,
with the permittee, for the violation of any provision of this article to which
the licensee or permittee is subject. (1985 Code § 10-13)
9-5A-5: LOCATION AND DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   Types Of Parks: Parks shall be of three (3) types: 1) mobile and
manufactured home parks; 2) travel trailer parks; and 3) mixed mobile/
manufactured home and travel trailer parks. No travel trailer shall be located
in a mobile or manufactured home park. No mobile or manufactured home shall be
located in a travel trailer park. In a mixed park, separate areas shall be
reserved for each type of home and for travel trailers. No mobile or
manufactured home shall be permitted in the travel trailer sector; no travel
trailer shall be permitted in the mobile or manufactured home sectors.
   B.   Drainage: All parks shall be located on a well drained site, properly
graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
Drainage shall not endanger any water supply.
   C.   Minimum Area: The minimum area of any park shall be one acre. Parks in
existence on the effective date of this article can continue to operate with
less than one acre in area; however, if the park is to be expanded, it must at
that time have a minimum area of one acre.
   D.   Intensity Of Development: Intensity of development shall be limited to
no more than eight (8) homes per gross acre for a mobile or manufactured home
park, and no more than twelve (12) travel trailers per gross acre, for a travel
trailer park. (Area used for sewerage treatment facilities shall not be
included in density computations.) Mobile and manufactured home spaces shall be
at least thirty feet (30') wide where pads are closest to driveways. Travel
trailer spaces shall be at least twenty five feet (25') wide where travel
trailers are located closest to the driveway.
   E.   Space And Location Restrictions:
      1.   Every space shall be clearly defined. All homes and travel trailers
shall be parked in such spaces so that, at the nearest point, they shall be ten
feet (10') from the service road, five feet (5') from the rear lot line and at
least ten feet (10') from any other home or travel trailer.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to locate any home or travel trailer less than
twenty five feet (25') from any public street or highway right of way, or so
that any part of such home or travel trailer will obstruct any roadway or
walkway of such park.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to permit a mobile or manufactured home to
occupy a travel trailer space, a travel trailer to occupy a mobile or
manufactured home space and for any mobile or manufactured home or travel
trailer to be located in a park unless in a space designated specifically for
that type of home or trailer.
      4.   All mobile and manufactured home spaces shall abut upon a sealed
surface driveway of not less than twenty feet (20') in width if on street
parking is prohibited, and twenty six feet (26') in width if on street parking
is permitted on one side of the street only. Driveways must have unobstructed
access to a public street or highway.
   F.   Vehicle Parking: In all parks existing at the effective date of this
article, parking on or adjacent to the street within the park is permissible as
long as it does not obstruct free movement of traffic. Whether or not a safety
hazard exists is a question to be determined by the planning commission, with
final appeal to the city council. If, upon final appeal before said city
council, it is determined that a safety hazard does in fact exist, the park
concerned will be required to comply with the following provisions:
      1.   In new mobile or manufactured home parks, at least two (2) clearly
defined parking spaces will be provided for each space either on or adjacent to
the space.
      2.   In new travel trailer parks, at least one parking space shall be
provided for each space either on, or adjacent to, the space.
   G.   Roadways: All roadways within a park which are to be dedicated to the
city shall be at least asphalt-oil-rock sealed and surfaced; all roadways not
dedicated to the city shall be at least crushed limestone.
   H.   Ingress And Egress: In developed areas of the city, new parks must
abut, and have their major means of ingress and egress on, at least a secondary
thoroughfare. Wherever possible, major access should be along a primary
thoroughfare.
   I.   Buffer Planting Strip: All parks shall have and maintain a buffer
planting strip, not less than three feet (3') in width, along all park
boundaries not bordering a street. Such strip shall consist of not less than
one row of shrubs spaced not more than eight feet (8') apart, which will
eventually grow to a height of not less than twelve feet (12'). Such strip may
also consist of an earthen berm or a fence, at least six feet (6') in height,
or a combination of berm, landscaping and/or fence. (1985 Code § 10-15)
9-5A-6: SERVICE BUILDINGS FOR TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS:
   A.   Required: Each travel trailer park shall be provided with at least one
service building adequately equipped with flush type toilet fixtures and other
sanitary facilities.
   B.   Building Requirements: Service buildings shall:
      1.   Be located twenty five feet (25') or more from any travel trailer
space;
      2.   Be of permanent construction and be adequately lighted;
      3.   Be of moisture resistant material, to permit frequent washing and
cleansing;
      4.   Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of
seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) during cold weather, and to supply adequate
hot water during times of peak demand; and
      5.   Have all rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively
screened.
   C.   Maintenance; Sanitation: All service buildings and the grounds of the
park shall be maintained in a clean condition and kept free of any condition
that will menace the health of any occupant or the public, or constitute a
menace. (1985 Code § 10-16)
9-5A-7: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Compliance With State And Local Regulations: Waste from showers,
bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop sinks, laundries and other
buildings within the park shall be discharged into a public sewer and disposal
plant, septic tank system or private sewer and lagoon system, of such
construction and in such manner as approved by the Oklahoma state health
department and in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the city.
   B.   Sewer Connection Specifications: Each home space shall be provided with
at least a three inch (3") sewer connection at least four inches (4") above the
surface of the ground. The sewer connection should be protected by a concrete
collar at least four inches (4") thick and have a minimum outside diameter of
twenty four inches (24"). Connection between the home drain and the sewer must
be watertight and self-draining. Homes with fixtures from which backsiphonage
may occur shall not be connected to the park's water system until the defect
has been corrected.
   C.   Connection To Public Sewer: In the event that a public sewer system is,
or becomes, available, within three hundred feet (300') of a park, connection
must be made to the public system within one hundred eighty (180) days.
   D.   Design; Location: The design of private sewage treatment facilities
shall be based on the maximum capacity of the park. Effluents from sewage
treatment facilities shall not be discharged into the watershed of the
municipal lake, or any other waters of the state. The disposal facilities shall
be located where they will not create a nuisance or health hazard to the park
or to the owner or occupants of any adjacent property. The Oklahoma state
health department must approve the type of treatment proposed and the design of
any disposal facilities and sewer systems, prior to construction.
   E.   Dumping Of Wastes: Every mobile or manufactured home occupying a park
space shall tie onto the park sewerage system and shall dump any accumulated
wastes into the system. Every travel trailer shall dump all accumulated waste
into a receptacle provided in the travel trailer park upon entering and upon
leaving the park. Such receptacles must be approved by the Oklahoma state
health department. Any other dumping of accumulated waste within the city is
prohibited.
   F.   Determination Of Sewerage Charges: The monthly sewerage charge shall be
based on the maximum home or travel trailer capacity of the park. The park
operator shall, by the tenth of each month, notify the city clerk of the
maximum number of spaces in use at any one time during the previous month. The
city clerk shall then adjust the sewerage fee to the actual use of the park.
Should the park operator fail to notify the city clerk of the prior month's
actual usage of trailer or home spaces, the sewerage fee shall be levied on the
maximum capacity of the park.
   G.   Watertight Connections: Sewer connections shall be watertight. Park
permittees shall maintain trailer and home connections to sewer and water
systems in good condition and be responsible that there is no sewerage or water
leakage on park premises.
   H.   Travel Trailer Spaces Exempt: No sewer connections shall be made to
travel trailer spaces. (1985 Code § 10-17)
9-5A-8: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Supply Of Water Required: An accessible, adequate, safe and potable
supply of water shall be provided in each park, capable of furnishing a minimum
of two hundred fifty (250) gallons per day, per space. Where a public supply of
water of such quality is available within three hundred feet (300'), or becomes
available within three hundred feet (300'), connection shall be made thereto
within one hundred twenty (120) days, and its supply shall be used exclusively.
Where private water supplies must be developed, the health official must
approve the location, construction and development of the water well, pipe
system and connections. No private source other than a water well shall be
used.
   B.   Connections To Buildings And Spaces: The water system of the park shall
be connected by pipes to all buildings and all spaces. Each home shall be
provided with a cold water tap at least four inches (4") above the ground. An
adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times, in the service
buildings.
   C.   Construction And Maintenance: All water piping shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with state and local law. The water piping system
shall not be connected with nonpotable or questionable water supplies, and
shall be protected against the hazards of backflow or backsiphonage. All water
connections shall be weathertight.
   D.   Drinking Fountains: Where drinking fountains are provided for public
use, they shall be of a type and in locations approved by the health officer.
   E.   Protection From Damage: Individual water service connections which are
provided for direct use by homes or travel trailers shall be of such
construction so that they will not be damaged by the parking of such homes or
travel trailers. The park system shall be adequate to provide twenty (20)
pounds per square inch of pressure at all home or travel trailer connections.
   F.   Travel Trailer Reservoirs: Provisions shall be made within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of each travel trailer space to supply water for travel
trailer reservoirs.
   G.   Pumps And Pipes: No well casing, pumps, pumping machinery or suction
pipes shall be located in any pit, room or space extending below ground level,
nor in any room or space aboveground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed,
unless such rooms, whether above or belowground, have free drainage by gravity
to the surface. All floors shall be watertight and sloped from the pump
pedestal to the drain, and floors shall extend at least two feet (2') from the
well in all directions. The pedestal shall not be less than twelve inches (12")
above the floor. This shall not be construed as prohibiting submersible pumps.
   H.   Water Storage Reservoirs: All water storage reservoirs shall be
watertight, and of impervious material; all overflows and vents of such
reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs are prohibited.
Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers, so as to prevent the
entrance of contaminated material. Overflow pipes from a reservoir shall not
connect to any pipe in which sewage or polluted water may back up.
   I.   Stop And Waste Cocks: Underground stop and waste cocks shall not be
installed on any connection.
   J.   Water Wells: No water well shall draw water from any lands reserved to
the city, for its use, except as may be otherwise permitted by ordinances of
the city.
   K.   Connections To Travel Trailer Spaces Prohibited: No water connections
shall be made to travel trailer spaces. (1985 Code § 10-18)
9-5A-9: REFUSE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Hazard Elimination: The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in
the park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage,
insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution.
   B.   Containers Required: All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight
and rodentproof containers, which shall be located within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of any home or travel trailer space. Containers shall be provided
in sufficient numbers and capacity to properly store all refuse.
   C.   Racks Or Holders For Containers: Racks or holders shall be provided for
all refuse containers. Such container racks or holders shall be so designed as
to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container
deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them. Lids for containers
shall be permanently connected to racks or holders with chains or other
flexible materials.
   D.   Refuse Collection And Transportation: All refuse shall be collected at
least once weekly, or as otherwise required by the health officer. Where city
garbage collection is not available, the park operator shall either employ a
private agency or provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and
transported in covered vehicles or covered containers.
   E.   Disposal Of Refuse: Where city or other private disposal service is not
available, the park operator shall dispose of the refuse by transporting to an
approved disposal site, as directed by the health official. Refuse shall be
buried only at locations and by methods approved by the health official, and in
accordance with the ordinances of the city.
   F.   Mandatory Use Of City Service: When city refuse disposal service is
available, it must be used. (1985 Code § 10-19)
9-5A-10: INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL:
   A.   Control Measures Required: Insect and rodent control measures to
safeguard public health, as required by the health official, shall be applied
in the park.
   B.   Fly And Mosquito Breeding Areas: Effective larvicidal solutions may be
required by the health official for fly or mosquito breeding areas which cannot
be controlled by other, more permanent measures.
   C.   Insects And Weeds: The health official may require the park operator to
take suitable measures to control other insects and noxious weeds.
   D.   Debris Accumulations: Accumulations of debris which may provide
harborage for rodents shall not be permitted in the park.
   E.   Rats And Other Rodents: When rats or other objectionable rodents are
known to be in the park, the park operator shall take definite action, as
directed by the health official, to exterminate them. (1985 Code § 10-20)
9-5A-11: ELECTRICITY; EXTERIOR LIGHTING:
   A.   Electrical Requirements: An electrical outlet supplying at least sixty
(60) amperes shall be provided for each home space. The installation shall
comply with all applicable state and local electrical codes and ordinances.
Such electrical outlets and extension lines shall be grounded and
weatherproofed. Plug receptacles shall also be grounded and weatherproofed. No
power supply line shall be permitted to lie on the ground, and no main power
line shall be suspended less than eighteen feet (18') above the ground, unless
otherwise approved by the city building official.
   B.   Street Lights: Streets and driveways within all parks shall be lighted
with street lights meeting the current standards of the illuminating
engineering society or one-half (1/2) candlepower, whichever is higher. (1985
Code § 10-21)
9-5A-12: FUELS; POWER SOURCES:
   A.   Fuel Storage Tanks: All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or
cylinders to mobile or manufactured homes shall be of acceptable material, as
determined by the city building inspector, and shall be permanently installed
and securely fastened in place. All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be
securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath the home
or less than five feet (5') from any home exit. All such installations shall
meet the requirements of applicable, adopted codes.
   B.   Power Sources: All power used for residential or nonresidential
purposes within the park shall be derived from electricity, natural gas or
solar energy sources. (1985 Code § 10-22)
9-5A-13: FIRE PROTECTION:
   A.   Litter: Park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other
flammable materials.
   B.   Water Supply: Where the water supply system does not provide at least
six inch (6") water mains, there shall be provided a two inch (2"), frost
protected water riser within three hundred feet (300') of each home or
building.
   C.   Fires: Fires shall be made only in stoves and other cooking and/or
heating equipment intended for such purposes. (1985 Code § 10-23)
9-5A-14: ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS:
   A.   Compliance With Local Regulations: All plumbing and electrical
alterations or repairs in the park shall be made in accordance with applicable
local regulations.
   B.   Skirting Of Mobile Homes: Skirting of mobile homes is permissible but
areas enclosed by such skirting shall be maintained so as not to provide a
harborage for rodents or create a fire hazard.
   C.   Construction; Permit: A building permit issued by the city clerk shall
be required before any construction on a mobile or manufactured home space or
any structural addition or alteration to the exterior of a home takes place. No
construction, addition or alteration to the exterior of a home located in a
park shall be permitted unless of the same type of construction or materials as
the home affected. All construction, additions or alterations shall be in
compliance with applicable local and state laws. No permit shall be required
for the addition of steps, canopies, awnings or antennas. (1985 Code § 10-24)
9-5A-15: REGISTRATION OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS:
   A.   Register Required; Information: Each park permittee shall keep a
register containing a record of all home and travel trailer owners and
occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The name and address of the owner or occupant of each home and any
motor vehicle;
      2.   The make, model, year and license of each mobile or manufactured
home and motor vehicle;
      3.   The state, territory or country issuing such license; and
      4.   The date of arrival and of departure of each home.
   B.   Inspection Of Register: The park operator shall keep the register
available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public
health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of
the information contained in the register. The register record of each occupant
registered shall not be destroyed for a period of one year following the date
of departure of the registrant from the park. (1985 Code § 10-25)
ARTICLE B.  MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
9-5B-1: Requirements
9-5B-1: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance With Subdivision And Zoning Regulations: Manufactured
housing and mobile home subdivisions shall comply with the adopted subdivision
regulations and zoning ordinance of the city, except as otherwise provided
herein.
   B.   Subdivision Size: The minimum size of such a subdivision shall be one
acre in area.
   C.   Residences Limited: No residences except mobile and/or manufactured
homes shall be permitted in such a subdivision.
   D.   Lot Width And Area: Minimum effective lot widths in said subdivision
shall be fifty feet (50'), measured at the front building line, and minimum lot
areas shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet, consistent with the adopted
zoning ordinance; provided, that at least a five foot (5') side yard shall be
provided on each lot beyond any home and additions thereto; and further
provided, that in areas not serviced by a public sewer, the minimum additional
lot area shall be determined by the health official on the basis of safe and
sanitary sewer service. The effective lot width of a mobile or manufactured
home lot shall be determined, for interior lots, by measuring at right angles
across the lot from one diagonal side line to the other, and for corner lots,
the measurement shall be made at right angles from the diagonal having the
greatest divergence from perpendicular to the street, through the midpoint of
the rear line of the required front yard, to the opposite lot line, or an
extension thereof.
   E.   Side Lot Lines: Side lines of lots in said subdivisions need not be at
right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
   F.   Adjacent To Public Street: Regardless of the effective lot width, said
subdivision lots must abut a public street for at least twenty five feet (25').
   G.   Greenbelt Planting Strip: All such subdivisions, except those developed
under residential-estates zoning district standards, shall have a greenbelt
planting strip of not less than twenty feet (20') in width along all
subdivision boundaries. Such greenbelt shall be composed of:
      1.   One row of deciduous and/or evergreen trees, spaced not more than
forty feet (40') apart;
      2.   Not less than three (3) rows of shrubs, spaced not more than forty
feet (40') apart; and
      3.   Not less than three (3) rows of shrubs, spaced not more than eight
feet (8') apart;
which shrubs will eventually grow to a height of not less than twelve feet
(12'). (1985 Code § 10-35)
ARTICLE C.  MODULAR HOUSING
SECTION:
9-5C-1: Treatment Of Modular Housing
9-5C-1: TREATMENT OF MODULAR HOUSING:
   A.   Criteria: Manufactured or mobile housing shall be considered as
permanent site or modular housing only when it meets the following (federal)
certification criteria:
      1.   The manufacturer must certify that the structure is designed only
for erection or installation on a site built permanent foundation. A "site
built permanent foundation" is a system of supports, including piers, either
partially or entirely below grade, which is:
         a.   Capable of transferring all loads imposed upon the structure into
soil or bedrock without failure;
         b.   Placed at an adequate depth below grade to prevent frost damage;
and
         c.   Constructed of concrete, steel, treated lumber or grouted
masonry.
      2.   The manufacturer must certify that the structure is not designed to
be moved once erected or installed on a site built permanent foundation.
      3.   The manufacturer must certify that the structure is designed and
manufactured to comply with the BOCA building code, or equivalent.
      4.   The manufacturer must certify that, to the manufacturer's knowledge,
this structure is not intended to be used other than on a site built permanent
foundation.
   B.   Certification As Modular Unit: Such certification shall be proof of the
housing unit's status as a "modular" unit. Without such certification, any
manufactured housing unit shall be considered a "mobile home", and treated as
such for purposes of regulation. (1985 Code § 10-45)
CHAPTER 6
OIL AND GAS DRILLING
SECTION:
9-6-1: Definitions
9-6-2: Municipal Drilling Permit Required
9-6-3: Application And Filing Fee
9-6-4: Issuance Or Refusal Of Permit
9-6-5: Required Bond And Insurance
9-6-6: Existing Wells
9-6-7: Zoning
9-6-8: Annual Permits
9-6-9: Regulatory Provisions
9-6-10: Penalty
9-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not
specifically defined herein shall have those meanings customarily attributable
thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. The following terms
used in this chapter are hereby defined to have the meanings set out below:
   ABANDONED WELL: Any natural production well in which production casing has
been run but which has not been operated for six (6) months; and each well in
which no production casing has been run, and for which drilling operations have
ceased for thirty (30) consecutive days.
   CIRCULATING MUD PITS: The working pit from which drilling muds are
continuously recirculated during the drilling process into and from the
drilling hole for the purpose of flushing from the drill bit cuttings, and as a
lubricant to reduce torque, drag, heat, friction and differential sticking
during the drilling process.
   DELETERIOUS SUBSTANCE: Any chemical, salt water, oil field brine, waste oil,
waste emulsified oil, basic sediment, mud or injurious substances produced or
used in the drilling, development, producing, transportation, refining and
processing of oil, gas or condensate.
   DISPOSAL WELL: Any well drilled or actually used for injection of salt water
or other substances into the earth at a point other or different than the point
of extraction or production thereof from the earth.
   ENHANCED RECOVERY: An operation by which fluid or energy is introduced into
a source of supply for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom.
   MUD: The drilling fluid used and recirculated through the drilling hole as a
lubricant to reduce torque, drag, heat, friction and differential sticking and
to flush drill bit cuttings from the hole during the drilling process.
   MUD PROGRAM: The planned usage of drilling fluid lubricants, specifying with
particularity the type, name and physical and chemical composition and
characteristics of all ingredients thereof, together with such laboratory and
other technical data as may be necessary or required by the city building
inspector to evaluate the same as pollutive, deleterious or otherwise.
   OIL AND GAS INSPECTOR: That person designated by the city administrator to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   OIL OR GAS WELL: Shall mean and include any well drilled, operated or
maintained for the production of oil, gas, casinghead gas or any of them or
their byproducts or derivatives.
   POLLUTION: The contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical,
or biological properties of any natural waters of the city, or such discharge
of any liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any water of the city as will or
is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful or detrimental or
injurious: a) to public health, safety, or welfare; b) to domestic, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other beneficial uses; c) or to
livestock, animals or aquatic life.
   RESERVE PIT: Any excavation, pit or receptacle designed or actually used to
receive, store or hold rocks, drill bit cuttings, shale, sand, fresh water or
drilling mud which contains no salt water, oil, oil derivatives, caustics,
acids or other deleterious substances harmful to soil, vegetation or injurious
to animal or human life.
   SLUSH PIT: Any excavation, pit or receptacle designed or actually used to
receive, store or hold waste oil, oil derivatives, sand, salt water or other
waste products or deleterious substances produced or used in the drilling,
swabbing, cleaning or reworking of any oil, gas or disposal well.
   WELL: Unless specifically qualified, any hole or holes, bore or bores, to
any depth for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas or liquefied
matter, or for the injection or disposal of any of the foregoing. (Ord. 369, 2-
26-2002)
9-6-2: MUNICIPAL DRILLING PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person or corporation to drill,
maintain or operate an oil, gas or disposal well within the corporate limits of
the city without first having procured a municipal drilling permit to do so, as
hereinafter provided. (Ord. 369, 2-26-2002)
9-6-3: APPLICATION AND FILING FEE:
   A.   Filing Of Application; Fee:
      1.   Every person hereafter desiring to drill, maintain or operate an
oil, gas or disposal well or to reenter, maintain, and operate an abandoned
well in the city shall file application therefor in writing in the form
required by the city clerk, signed by the applicant or his agent authorized to
sign the same.
      2.   A filing fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall accompany
the application. This filing fee is required for all permit applications within
the city. If the permit is denied, the city will retain a three hundred fifty
dollar ($350.00) processing fee and refund the rest.
      3.   No application shall request a permit to drill more than one well.
   B.   Required Information And Documents:
      1.   Such application shall specify the quarter section, township, range,
and the location within the quarter section thereof so as to identify said well
location within a particular ten (10) acre tract.
      2.   Such application shall specify all equipment to be utilized in the
drilling, operating or maintenance of such well with particularity; and the
"mud program", as that term is defined in section
9-6-1 of this chapter, shall be specified and attached in writing thereto, for
approval by the city clerk. Such application shall also include a statement of
provisions for water for the drilling rig.
      3.   Such application shall include a copy of the approved drilling
permit from the Oklahoma corporation commission and a copy of the staking plat.
      4.   Such application shall include the names of the mineral, surface,
and lease owners and the written approval of the landowners.
      5.   Such application shall include the name and address of the person
within the state of Oklahoma upon whom service of process upon applicant may be
made within this state; and in the case of any nonresident person who has no
such service agent within this state, there shall be attached to the
application the designation of such a service agent resident in Stephens
County, Oklahoma, and a consent that service of summons may be made upon such
person in any action to enforce any of the obligations of the applicant
hereunder.
   C.   Reentry Of Abandoned Well: Applications for reentry of an abandoned
well shall provide a statement of the condition of the well, the depth to which
the applicant proposes to deepen the well, the proposed casing program to be
used in connection with the proposed deepening, and evidence of adequate
current showing that the casing strings current pass the same tests that are
required in the case of the drilling of an original well.
   D.   Conversion Of Well: No person shall convert any well from natural or
primary production to a use for enhanced recovery or disposal without first
obtaining a municipal drilling permit. The application shall be in the same
form as that required for a permit to drill an original, with modifications as
determined by the city administrator. In addition, the application shall
include copies of all information supplied to the Oklahoma corporation
commission and a copy of the commission's approval of the project. (Ord. 369,
2-26-2002)
9-6-4: ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   Determination Of City Officials: Within thirty (30) business days after
the filing, the city clerk or city administrator shall determine whether or not
the application complies in all respects with the provisions of this chapter
and applicable federal and state law, and, if it does, shall recommend to the
mayor and city council that the permit be issued.
   B.   Recommendation Of Inspector: Upon the consideration of any application
for a permit required by the terms of this chapter, the oil and gas inspector
shall recommend approval or disapproval thereof to the mayor and city council,
who shall review the matter at a regularly scheduled meeting, and thereupon
uphold or reverse the recommendation with or without the addition of any
conditions thereto.
   C.   Conditions Of Permit: Each permit issued under the term of this chapter
shall:
      1.   By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this
chapter with the same force and effect as if this chapter were copied verbatim
therein;
      2.   By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of
applicable state law and the rules, regulations and standards adopted in
accordance therewith relating to the protection of human beings, animals and
natural resources;
      3.   Specify that the term of the permit shall be for a period of one
year from the date of issuance thereof, and for like period thereafter upon the
successful inspection of the permittee's well and operations, as is provided
for elsewhere herein;
      4.   Specify that such conditions imposed by the city as are by this
chapter authorized;
      5.   Specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the
permittee shall file and have approved the required bonds and certificate of
insurance in the appropriate amounts as provided for elsewhere herein.
   D.   Permit Issuance: If the permit be issued, it shall, in two (2)
originals, be signed by the city clerk, and the permittee, and when so signed
shall constitute the permittee's license to drill and operate in the city and
the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such
permit, such bonds as are required, and applicable state law, rules,
regulations, standards and directives. One executed original copy of the permit
shall be retained by the oil and gas inspector; the other shall be retained by
the permittee and shall be kept available for inspection by any city or state
law enforcement official who shall demand to see same.
   E.   Permit Denial; Refund Of Fee: If the permit be refused, or if the
applicant notifies the city in writing that he does not elect to accept the
permit as tendered and wishes to withdraw his application, or if the bonds of
the applicant be not approved, then upon the happening of any of these events,
the cash fee filed with the application shall be refunded to the applicant,
except that there shall be retained therefrom by the city the sum of three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) as a processing fee.
   F.   Posting Of Permit: A copy of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be posted on or near the well location. (Ord. 369, 2-26-2002)
9-6-5: REQUIRED BOND AND INSURANCE:
In the event a permit shall be issued by the city, no actual operations shall
be commenced until the permittee shall file with the city the required bond and
insurance as follows:
   A.   Bond:
      1.   A bond in the principal sum of at least twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00). The bond shall be executed by a reliable insurance company
authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and with the applicant as
principal, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons
concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and
conditions of this chapter in the operation of the well for either natural or
artificial production, injection or disposal. The bond shall become effective
on or before the date the same is filed with the city and remain in full force
and effect for at least twelve (12) months subsequent to the expiration of the
permit term, and, in addition, the bond will be conditioned that the permittee
will promptly pay fines, penalties and other assessments imposed upon the
permittee by reason of his breach of any of the terms, provisions and
conditions of this chapter, and that the permittee will promptly restore all
public streets, sidewalks, and other public property of the city which may be
disturbed or damaged in permittee operations, to their former condition; and
that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash,
waste, and other substances, and will, after abandonment, grade, level and
restore the property to the same surface condition, as practicable as is
possible, as existed prior to commencing operations; and further that the
permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability
attributable to granting the permit.
      2.   If, after the completion of a producing well, permittee has complied
with all of the provisions of this chapter, such as removing derrick and
clearing the premises, he may apply to the oil and gas inspector to have the
bond reduced to a sum of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for
the remainder of the time the well produces without reworking. During reworking
operations, the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount.
   B.   Liability Insurance:
      1.   In addition to the bond required in this section, the permittee
shall carry a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability
insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and
property damage, naming permittee and the city, issued by an insurer authorized
to do business within the state. The policy or policies in the aggregate shall
provide for the following minimum coverage:
         a.   Bodily injuries, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
person; three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident.
         b.   Property damage, two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00).
      2.   Permittee shall file with the city certificates of the insurance as
above stated, and shall obtain the written approval thereof, and such permittee
who shall act thereon promptly after the date of such filing. The insurance
policy or policies shall not be cancelled without written notice to the city at
least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the
event the policy or policies are cancelled, the permit granted shall
immediately thereupon terminate without any action on the part of the city, and
permittee's rights to operation under the permit shall cease until permittee
files additional insurance as provided herein. If, after completion of a
producing well, the permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this
chapter, such as removing derricks, clearing premises, and the like, he may
apply to the city to have the insurance policy or policies reduced as follows:
bodily injuries, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per person, one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per accident; and property damage fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00).
   C.   State Requirements: Any other bond or insurance required by the
Oklahoma corporation commission. (Ord. 369, 2-26-2002)
9-6-6: EXISTING WELLS:
Owners or operators of oil, gas or disposal wells heretofore drilled and
completed within the city shall not be required to procure the initial
municipal drilling permit hereinabove provided. However, it shall be incumbent
upon such owners and operators to furnish evidence of liability insurance
coverage and post the bond for the restoration of the land and plugging of the
well upon its abandonment in the form and amount above required for issuance of
a municipal drilling permit at the time of application for annual permit as
hereinafter provided, or within sixty (60) days after the effective date
hereof, whichever shall first occur, as a condition of continuing the operation
and maintenance of any well heretofore drilled and prior to commencing any
swabbing, cleaning or reworking operations of all oil, gas and disposal wells
heretofore or hereafter drilled within the city, and to comply with all of the
following provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 369, 2-26-2002)
9-6-7: ZONING:
Oil, gas or disposal wells shall be located within the city only in areas that
are zoned for agricultural or industrial use. (Ord. 369, 2-26-2002)
9-6-8: ANNUAL PERMITS:
Annual permits for the operation, maintenance, cleaning, swabbing and reworking
of all completed and operating oil, gas and disposal wells, now existing or
hereafter drilled, are hereby required, and shall be issued upon payment of
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per year and upon the filing of copies of
liability insurance policies and the restoration and plugging bond in the form
and amount required for the issuance of an initial drilling permit and upon
proof of renewal of the restoration and plugging bond for the ensuing year.
Such annual fee shall be paid and proof of insurance coverage filed and renewal
of said restoration and plugging bond made on the anniversary date of the
initial drilling permit, or if no such permit was required or obtained, within
sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 389, 3-26-2007)
9-6-9: REGULATORY PROVISIONS:
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person or corporation to violate
any of the following, and such violations are declared to be a public nuisance:
   A.   Pits:
      1.   Steel mud or circulating pits shall be used. Such pits and contents
shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within sixty (60) days
after completion of the well.
      2.   Earthen "slush pits", as herein defined, shall not be constructed,
built, maintained or used by any person or corporation at any location within
the city.
      3.   Earthen "reserve pits", as herein defined, which contain no salt
water, oil, oil derivatives, caustics, acids or other deleterious substances
harmful to soil, vegetation or injurious to animal or human life shall be
allowed to be constructed or used in connection with the drilling, swabbing,
cleaning out or reworking of oil or gas wells within the city, and the contents
thereof need not be transported from the premises to a disposal facility,
provided the same are leveled and the surface of the ground restored as nearly
as possible to its original condition within ninety (90) days after completion
of said drilling, swabbing, cleanout or reworking operations.
      4.   An earthen retaining wall of adequate size for the terrain shall be
constructed on the low side of all well sites situated within the city on
sloping or unlevel ground. The top of the retaining wall shall be at least as
high as the top of the Christmas tree or other wellhead connections on any
completed well, or at least as high as the ground at the point where surface
casing is set in the well when drilling.
      5.   All waste oil, salt water, liquid with oil content, gasoline or
other waste produced in connection with the drilling, testing, cleaning,
swabbing, reworking or operating of any oil, gas, or disposal well shall be
captured and retained in steel tanks or vessels and transported from the
premises to a disposal facility. In no event shall any of such substances be
permitted to escape from the premises owned, leased or controlled by the
persons carrying on such operations by seepage, overflow or otherwise, nor flow
across the surface of the ground, or upon any public way, into any storm or
sanitary sewer, drainage ditch, upon any gutter or paving or into any gully,
stream or tributary within the city.
   B.   Storage Tanks And Separators:
      1.   Crude oil storage tanks shall not be constructed, operated or used
except to the extent of one three hundred (300) barrel steel tank for oil
storage. Should the production of the well so require, different size tankage
or additional tankage may be approved by the city administrator.
      2.   A permittee may use, construct and operate a steel conventional
separator and such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for
treating oil with each of such facilities to be so constructed and maintained
as to be vaportight. Each oil and gas separator shall be equipped with both a
regulation pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head.
      3.   Storage tanks or other types of tanks containing flammable
substances used in connection with any oil, gas or disposal well within the
city shall have earthen embankments constructed around them of sufficient size
and height to be able to adequately contain one and one-half (11/2) times the
volume of such tanks in the event of a rupture thereof at the floor of such
tank. No drain plugs, openings or siphons shall be placed in the walls or dikes
which will permit the escape of any liquids through the same.
      4.   In no event shall any such tank be located nearer than one hundred
feet (100') to a dwelling or business structure, street or highway within the
city.
   C.   Fire Prevention: Adequate firefighting apparatus and supplies approved
by the city fire department shall be maintained on the drilling site at all
times during drilling and production operation. All machinery, equipment and
installations on all drilling sites within the city limits shall conform to
such requirements as may from time to time be issued by the fire department.
   D.   Well Location:
      1.   A permit may be issued for the drilling of an original well or for
the reentry of an abandoned well for each one-fourth (1/4) section of land
covering one hundred sixty (160) acres. Additional wells may be permitted,
provided the Oklahoma corporation commission approves such well location and
city staff and mayor and council are satisfied the public interest is
preserved. (Ord. 369, 2-26-2002)
      2.   No permit shall be issued for the drilling of an original well or
for the reentry of an abandoned well at any location which is nearer than five
hundred feet (500') from the well bore to any residence, residential or
commercial platted lot, commercial or office building, producing fresh water
well, or any building used as a place of public assembly, institution, church
or school. After the well has been completed and established as a producing
well, any person owning property adjoining the well site shall be allowed to
obtain a building permit for the establishment of a structure so long as the
structure is no closer than three hundred feet (300') from the well bore.
Further, on any reentry of an abandoned well, or redrilling of an existing well
on the same permitted location, the operator of said drilling site shall be
required to meet the five hundred foot (500') distance requirement set forth
above. (Ord. 381, 11-18-2004)
      3.   No oil, gas or disposal well shall be drilled, operated or
maintained, nor shall any operations in connection therewith be carried on or
conducted, within three hundred feet (300') of any church, school or hospital
building within the city.
   E.   Noise and Other Nuisances:
      1.   All oil operations, drilling and production operations shall be
conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as far as practicable, dust, noise,
vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted
practices incident to exploration for, drilling for and production of oil, gas
and other hydrocarbon substances. Proven technological improvements in
exploration, drilling and production methods shall be adopted as they become,
from time to time, available, if capable of reducing factors of nuisance and
annoyance. The motive power for all operations after completion of drilling
operations shall be electricity produced off site.
      2.   No steam, gasoline, natural gas, diesel or other internal combustion
engine of any kind shall be operated in conjunction with the drilling or
operation of an oil or gas well within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any
dwelling or business structure within the city. (Ord. 369, 2-26-2002)
      3.   In order to avoid unnecessary noise and nuisance, mufflers on
engines used in drilling operations shall be used as required by the city
administrator. Fracing, flaring of gas, or tripping operations shall be
conducted during daylight hours when possible. (Ord. 381, 11-18-2004)
   F.   Movement Of Heavy Equipment: No person shall move or cause to be moved
over, upon or across any paving or paved street or alley within the city, any
piece of machinery of extreme weight which may crack or injure such pavement,
except as herein provided. Prior to the moving of any such machinery over,
across or upon any paved street or alley within the city, application shall be
made to the city administrator and the route shall be designated by the city
administrator.
   G.   Maintenance, Fencing, Landscaping, Screening Of Facilities:
      1.   All lease equipment shall be painted and maintained in a good state
of appearance, and shall have posted in a prominent place a metal sign no less
than two feet (2') square in area upon which the following information shall be
conspicuous: permittee's name, lease name, location of the drill site by
reference to the United States survey, and identifying number of the permit
issued by the city.
      2.   The premises upon which any oil, gas or disposal well is drilled,
operated or maintained shall be kept free of all accumulations of rubbish,
litter, unused equipment or materials, excess rotary mud, salt water, waste oil
or oil byproducts and other waste, insofar as the same may be reasonably done
in the conduct of operations covered by this chapter.
      3.   Any person who completes any well for production shall enclose the
well, together with all surface facilities and storage tanks and any other
facilities and appurtenances thereto, by a substantial fence properly built so
as to ordinarily keep persons and animals out of the enclosure. All gates
thereto shall be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not within
the enclosure. Nothing herein mandates all such facilities be within the same
fenced area and the city administrator or his designee shall be authorized to
approve any plan which he believes ordinarily protects persons and animals from
danger.
      4.   Screening shall be required in the areas of operation which are in
any developed area or within one thousand feet (1,000') of any developed area,
park, school, church, public building, or place of public assembly. Landscaping
shall include screening by a fenced enclosure of at least eight feet (8') in
height and constructed from materials of a solid neutral color, compatible with
surrounding uses, and maintained in a neat, orderly, secure condition.
      5.   That part of the drilling rig adjacent to or facing any lake and
situated within one-half (1/2) mile of the normal elevation thereof shall be
covered with canvas, sheet metal or other suitable material at all times during
drilling operations.
      6.   Minimum setbacks for all screening shall in no case be less than
twenty five feet (25') from the ultimate right of way of any public street as
defined in the transportation plan of the city.
      7.   Prior to the issuance of any permit, a screening plan that meets the
requirements of this chapter shall be submitted for review and approval by the
city administrator or his designee.
   H.   Proper Equipment And Procedures:
      1.   Approved equipment, standard devices and ordinary methods such as
are commonly known and used in the oil and gas drilling and producing industry
for the safety and protection of property from damage due to drilling and
operating activities shall be used at all locations within the city. Failure on
the part of any owner, driller or operator to utilize such equipment, devices
or methods shall be the basis for injunction thereof by the city, or any person
affected thereby, in addition to the penalties therefor otherwise provided
therein.
      2.   At least seven hundred fifty feet (750') of surface casing shall be
set in each well after notification of intention to do so has been given the
Oklahoma corporation commission, whose representative shall be entitled to
inspect the installation thereof and direct the type and amount of cement to be
used in cementing the same in the hole.
      3.   All drilling wells shall be equipped with a master gate, or its
equivalent, adequate blowout preventers, flow lines and valves commensurate
with the working pressures involved.
      4.   Production casing of a size not less than four and one-half inch
(41/2") outside diameter, in good condition, shall be set no higher than the
top of the producing formation and cemented with a sufficient amount of cement
to obtain a maximum of five hundred feet (500') of annular fillup above the
casing. All of such production casing shall be tested by pressure methods for
either drilling the cement plug or perforating, if the cement is not drilled.
      5.   Upon completion of any flowing well, the wellhead equipment shall
have, on the tubing, at least one master valve plus a flow valve, and a valve
on the casing annulus. All wells shall be equipped with flow tubing of a size
at least two inch (2") inside diameter extending from not less than fifty feet
(50') from the top of the lowest producing formation.
      6.   All disposal wells shall be equipped with at least two inch (2")
inside diameter tubing set on a packer and a pressure gauge shall be installed
on the casing annulus at all times.
      7.   All drilling, reentry and operations at any well performed under
this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the best practices of the
reasonably prudent operator. All casing, valves and blowout preventers,
drilling fluid, tubing, bradenhead, Christmas tree and wellhead connections
shall be of a type and quality consistent with the best practices of such
reasonably prudent operator. Setting and cementing casing and running drill
stem tests shall be performed in a manner and at a time consistent with the
best practices of such reasonably prudent operator. Any permittee under this
chapter shall observe and follow the recommendations or regulations of the
American Petroleum Institute and the Oklahoma corporation commission.
      8.   Persons drilling, operating or maintaining any well shall use all
necessary care and take all precautions, which shall be reasonably necessary
under the circumstances to protect the public. The provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the preservation of the
public health, safety and welfare, and compliance with the terms hereof shall
not be deemed to relieve any person of any additional duty imposed by law.
(Ord. 369, 2-26-2002)
9-6-10: PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalty as provided in section
 1-5-1 of this code. Each day such violation is committed or continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such. (Ord. 369, 2-26-
2002; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Injunctive Relief: In addition, violation of any of the provisions
hereof declared to be a public nuisance shall be a basis for injunction at the
suit of the city, or at the suit of any person, firm or corporation adversely
affected thereby. (Ord. 369, 2-26-2002)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
Zoning Administration; Definitions   1
Zoning Districts   2
Use Regulations   3
Dimensional Standards   4
Development Standards   5
Review And Approval Procedures   6
Review And Decision-Making Entities   7
Nonconformities   8
Enforcement   9
CHAPTER 1
ZONING ADMINISTRATION; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Power To Zone
10-1-2: Relationship To Comprehensive Plan
10-1-3: Applicability
10-1-4: Exemptions And Exceptions
10-1-5: Purpose And Intent
10-1-6: City Administrator
10-1-7: Documents Adopted By Reference
10-1-8: Rules Of Interpretation
10-1-9: Rules Of Construction
10-1-10: Computation Of Time
10-1-11: Reduction Of Lot And Yard Areas Prohibited
10-1-12: Only One Principal Building Permitted On One Lot
10-1-13: Residential Development
10-1-14: Dedication Of Land For Streets
10-1-15: Conflicting Provisions
10-1-16: Severability
10-1-17: Acronyms And Definitions
10-1-18: Penalty
10-1-1: POWER TO ZONE:
   A.   For the purpose of promoting the health, safety and welfare of all
citizens of the community, the City Council is empowered to regulate and
restrict the height, number of stories and size of structures, the percentage
of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards and other open spaces, the
density of population and the location and use of structures and land.
   B.   For any of the above purposes, the City Council may divide the City
into zoning districts of such number, shape and area as may be deemed most
beneficial to the community. Within such zoning districts, the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of structures or land
may be regulated. All such regulations shall be uniform throughout each
district, but the regulations in any zoning district may differ from those in
other districts.
   C.   This title is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority of
title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-2: RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
Any zoning ordinance adopted by the City Council shall be made subsequent to
the preparation of, and in accordance with, the community's adopted
Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This title shall apply only to the incorporated areas of the City of
Marlow, Stephens County, Oklahoma.
   B.   No buildings, structures, or land shall be used or occupied; and no
building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity
with the regulations of this title.
   C.   A change of use shall conform to the standards, criteria, requirements,
and procedures of this title.
   D.   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to restrict the operation
of a bona fide farm or production of agricultural products including produce
and livestock, except where limitations are specifically enumerated. (Ord. 420,
12-18-2017)
10-1-4: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
The following general conditions or circumstances are exempt from the
provisions and requirements of this title:
   A.   Buildings or structures that are legally under construction on the date
of adoption of this title;
   B.   Buildings or structures for which a permit has been issued as of the
effective date of this title, provided that construction commences prior to the
expiration of the building permit, and continues until completed;
   C.   Development pursuant to an approved development plan or subdivision
plat approved prior to the effective date of this title, provided that
development commences not later than one year after the effective date of this
title; or
   D.   The proposed use of property lawfully approved as of the effective date
of this title. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-5: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   These regulations are enacted to promote the proper location, height,
bulk, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, sizes of
yard, courts, and the use of other open spaces, density, distribution of
population, and the use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry,
residence, recreation, agriculture, conservation, sanitation, protection
against floods, and public activities.
   B.   The purpose of these regulations is to:
      1.   Lessen congestion in the streets;
      2.   Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
      3.   Promote health and the general welfare;
      4.   Provide adequate light and air;
      5.   Prevent the overcrowding of land;
      6.   Avoid undue concentration of population;
      7.   Prevent urban sprawl;
      8.   Assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other
facilities and services;
      9.   Assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access
and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian;
      10.   Assure the provision of space for recreational, educational, and
other public purposes;
      11.   Promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of
neighborhoods;
      12.   Protect against blight and depreciation;
      13.   Secure economy in governmental expenditures;
      14.   Conserve the value of buildings; and
      15.   Encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and
structures. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-6: CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
The City Administrator is the chief administrative official of the City of
Marlow. For the purposes of this title, the City Administrator is assigned to
administer, interpret, and implement the standards, criteria, and procedures of
this title. The City Administrator may delegate such responsibilities in
writing to City staff. Throughout this title, the term "City Administrator" is
used to indicate the responsibility for specified actions, except where
specified actions are reserved or specifically delegated by law to another
official. In all instances, "City Administrator" means the "City Administrator
or designee". (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-7: DOCUMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
   A.   City Of Marlow Zoning Map: The City of Marlow Zoning Map, together with
all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this title.
   B.   Building And Construction Codes: All building and construction codes
adopted by the City of Marlow are hereby adopted by reference into this title.
In the event of a conflict between any building and construction codes and this
title, the stricter of the two (2) shall apply. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-8: RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   Specific provisions of this title shall be followed in lieu of
general provisions that may be in conflict with the specific provision.
      2.   In the interpretation and application of this title all standards,
provisions, and requirements shall be liberally construed in favor of the
objectives and purposes of the City and shall not be construed to either limit
or repeal any other powers granted under State Statutes.
      3.   Where provisions of this title conflict with other regulations, the
more stringent restrictions shall be applied.
   B.   Responsibility For Interpretations:
      1.   In the event that any question arises concerning the application of
regulations, standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other
provision of this title, the City Administrator shall be responsible for
interpretation.
      2.   Responsibility for interpretation by the City Administrator as set
forth in this section shall be limited to standards, regulations, and
requirements of this title, and shall not be construed to include
interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in this title.
Interpretation shall not be construed to override the responsibilities assigned
by the City Commission to any commission, board, or official named in other
sections or chapters of this title.
      3.   Should the enforcement of a Building or Construction Code adopted by
the City of Marlow create a conflict, the stricter of the two (2) shall govern.
(Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-9: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
   B.   Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the
plural include the singular.
   C.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter.
   D.   The word "person" includes those terms as defined in the definition of
person at subsection
10-1-17B of this chapter.
   E.   The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
   F.   "Or" may be read "and", "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires
it.
   G.   The term "written" or "in writing" shall include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
   H.   The term "day" means a calendar day.
   I.   The term "month" means a calendar month.
   J.   The word "week" shall mean seven (7) days.
   K.   The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-10: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the
discharge of any duty, the first or last day shall not be counted; and if the
last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the person having such privilege or duty
shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to
discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a
City of Marlow holiday, the person having the privilege or duty shall have
through the following day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty;
however, when the following day is a Saturday or Sunday, the person shall have
through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the
duty. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-11: REDUCTION OF LOT AND YARD AREAS PROHIBITED:
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this title shall be reduced
in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots
created after the effective date of this title shall meet at least the minimum
requirements established by this title. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-12: ONLY ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING PERMITTED ON ONE LOT:
No lot shall be occupied by more than one principal building or use. (Ord. 420,
12-18-2017)
10-1-13: RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT:
No lot shall contain more than one principal single family residential
building, and no dwelling unit shall be built on a lot which does not abut a
dedicated public street. Accessory buildings shall be smaller than the
principal building and shall be limited to thirty five feet (35') in height and
comply with setback regulations for the district. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-14: DEDICATION OF LAND FOR STREETS:
Whenever a parcel of land to be subdivided as a subdivision contains a street,
alley, or public way, such street, alley, or public way shall be dedicated to
the public at the location and details shown on the final plat. (Ord. 420, 12-
18-2017)
10-1-15: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The provisions of this title shall be held to be
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety,
and welfare.
   B.   Conflict With Other Public Laws, Ordinances, Regulations, Or Permits:
This title is intended to complement other City, State, and Federal regulations
that affect land use. This title is not intended to revoke or repeal any other
public law, ordinance, regulation, or permit. However, where conditions,
standards, or requirements imposed by any provision of this title are either
more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable standards imposed by any
other public law, ordinance, or regulation, the provisions that are more
restrictive or that impose higher standards or requirements, as determined by
the Director, shall govern.
   C.   Conflict With Private Agreements: This title is not intended to revoke
or repeal any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. However, where
the regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards
or requirements than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement, then
the requirements of this title shall govern. Nothing in this title shall modify
or repeal any private covenant or deed restriction, but such covenant or
restriction shall not excuse any failure to comply with this title. In no case
shall the City be obligated to enforce the provisions of any easements,
covenants, or agreements between private parties. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-1-16: SEVERABILITY:
   A.   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any provision of
this title, then such judgment shall not affect the validity and continued
enforcement of any other provision of this title.
   B.   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates the application of
any provision of this title, then such judgment shall not affect the
application of that provision to any other building, structure, or use not
specifically included in that judgment.
   C.   If any court of competent jurisdiction judges invalid any condition
attached to the approval of an application for development approval, then such
judgment shall not affect any other conditions or requirements attached to the
same approval that are not specifically included in that judgment. (Ord. 420,
12-18-2017)
10-1-17: ACRONYMS AND DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words
used herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as hereinafter set forth.
Unless the context already indicated to the contrary, words used in the present
tense include the future tense; words used in plural number include the
singular; the word "shall" is always mandatory; the words "used" or "occupied",
as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words
"intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied".
   A.   Acronyms:
 
AASHTO     American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials
ADA        Americans With Disabilities Act
BMP        Best Management Practices
CABO       Council of American Building Officials
dbh        Diameter at breast height
DEQ (ODEQ) Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality
DOT (ODOT) Oklahoma Department of Transportation
FCC        Federal Communications Commission
FEMA       Federal Emergency Management Agency
FIRM       Flood Insurance Rate Map
GIS        Geographic Information System
HVAC       Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
IBC        International Building Code
ICC        Interstate Commerce Commission
IFC        International Fire Code
IMC        International Mechanical Code
ITE        Institute of Transportation Engineers
LSC        Life Safety Code
NFPA       National Fire Protection Association
NOI        Notice of intent
NWI        National Wetland Inventory
PUD        Planned Unit Development District
RV         Recreational vehicle
USACE      United States Army Corps of Engineers
 
   B.   Definitions:
   ABANDON: To cease from actively using land or any premises for its intended
use for a time period greater than specified.
   ABANDONED BUILDING:
      1.   Any vacant building which by reason of lack of maintenance or by
reason of the boarding up of its doors and windows, or other reasons, has a
substantial adverse effect on the value of property in the immediate
neighborhood; or
      2.   A building, the principal use of which has been abandoned, and that
no longer has any function or use; or
      3.   Any railroad trestle or siding no longer in use; or
      4.   Any vacant building which is frequented by persons who are not
lawful occupants of such structure.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle not capable of being moved under its own
power, or with deflated tire or tires, or without tire or tires, or without
current license tags, which remains parked upon such street or highway for a
period of more than forty eight (48) hours.
   ABATE: To end a nuisance, emergency, or nonconformance.
   ABATEMENT: Any action taken to reduce, relieve, or suppress another
continuing action.
   ABATTOIR: See definition of slaughterhouse.
   ABUTTING: Having property or district lines in common; e.g., two (2) lots
are abutting if they have part or all of the property lines in common.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A subordinate building or portion of the
main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of
the building or premises.
   ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to
the main use of land or buildings located upon the same premises.
   AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and
animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural
activities. The operation of commercial feed pens, sales yards, slaughterhouses
and auction yards for cattle or hogs shall be deemed an industrial and not an
agricultural use and shall be brought under review to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   AIR RIGHTS: The rights to a space above a property, for development, usually
for a dissimilar use.
   AIR SPACE: The space above the land which might be subject to division and
sale either with, or separate from, the surface.
   AIRPORT: A place where aircraft can land and depart, usually equipped with
landing field facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations
for passengers.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, RETAIL SALES: A retail establishment, such as a liquor
store, licensed to sell alcoholic beverages such as beer, wine, and liquor. No
on-site consumption is allowed.
   ALLEY: A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, from which a secondary
means of access to the back or side of properties abutting a street is obtained
(not intended for general traffic circulation), and which may be used for
public utility purposes.
   ALTERATION: The following:
      1.   Any addition to the height or depth of a building or structure;
      2.   Any change in the location of any of the exterior walls of a
building or structure; and
      3.   Any increase in the interior accommodations of a building or
structure.
   ANIMAL BOARDING PLACE (See Also KENNEL): Any structure, land, or combination
thereof used, designed, or arranged for the boarding, breeding or care of dogs,
cats, pets, fowl, horses, or other domestic animals for profit, but exclusive
of animals used for agricultural purposes.
   ANIMAL, DOMESTIC: An animal that is tame or domesticated and not normally
found in the wild state. Hybrids of animals normally found in the wild state
are not included within the meaning of domestic animal.
   ANIMAL PET SHOP, RETAIL: A retail establishment offering small animals,
fish, or birds for sale as pets and where all such creatures are housed within
the building.
   ANIMAL SALES AND SERVICES: Animal sales and services uses, not incidental to
agricultural uses, which involve the selling, boarding, or care of animals on a
commercial basis. Accessory uses may include confinement facilities for
animals, parking, and storage areas.
   ANIMAL TRAINING SCHOOL: A facility that specializes in the training of
household animals.
   ANNEX: To incorporate a land area into the corporate limits of the City of
Marlow with a resulting change in the boundaries of City.
   APARTMENT:
     Apartment Building: A building designed for or occupied by three (3) or
more families with separate housekeeping facilities for each family. Such
building shall include: apartment houses, apartments and flats, efficiency
apartments, and studio apartment, but, not including boarding or rooming house,
hostels, or motels.
     Apartment, Garage: A dwelling unit accessory to a principal dwelling and
erected as part of a private garage, shop, or barn and shall be under the same
ownership as the principal dwelling, providing independent living quarters
including sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation facilities. The minimum
heated and cooled square footage shall be six hundred (600) and shall be fifty
percent (50%) of the heated and/or cooled square footage of the dwelling. The
principal dwelling and the garage apartment shall remain under the same
ownership. No more than one such accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on
a lot with a principal dwelling and such accessory unit shall be located within
the rear yard. The lot on which such is to be established shall be fifty
percent (50%) greater in area than the minimum standard size for the respective
district.
   APPEAL: A formal review of an administrative decision regarding provisions
of this title.
   AQUIFER: Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth
capable of containing or producing water from a well.
   ARBORETUM OR BOTANICAL GARDEN: A public or private facility for the
demonstration and observation of the cultivation of flowers, fruits,
vegetables, or ornamental plants.
   ART GALLERY OR MUSEUM, PRIVATE: Any permanent institution for the collection
and display of objects of art or science, not operated by a public or quasi-
public agency.
   ART GALLERY OR MUSEUM, PUBLIC: Any permanent institution for the collection
and display of objects of art or science, sponsored by a public or quasi-public
agency and open and available to the public.
   AS-BUILT PLANS: Detailed construction plans showing completed improvements
as constructed.
   ASSEMBLY, LIGHT: An establishment engaged only in the assembly of goods. No
manufacturing of parts occurs. Goods are shipped to the establishment,
assembled, packaged, and reshipped.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY, CONVALESCENT HOME, OR NURSING HOME: Residences for
those in need of medical attention that provide rooms, meals, personal care,
and supervision of self- administered medication.
   AUTO SALVAGE YARD: Any lot upon which two (2) or more motor vehicles of any
kind, which are incapable of being operated due to condition or lack of license
or registration, have been placed for the purpose of obtaining parts for
recycling or resale.
   BAR/NIGHTCLUB: A structure or part of a structure used primarily for the
sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages or liquor by the drink. Dancing and
musical entertainment are permitted.
   BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height
measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half (1/
2) of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground, or when
subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor
employed on the premises.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN: A facility where overnight accommodations are
provided to transients for compensation, with or without a morning meal, and
where the operators of the facility live on the premises. Signage for a bed and
breakfast use shall be non-illuminated and no larger than four (4) square feet.
All guest vehicles shall be parked in an orderly manner on the property of the
facility. The facility shall comply with all applicable Life Safety and
Building Code regulations.
   BERM: An earthen mound or embankment, usually two feet (2') to six feet (6')
in height, designed to provide visual interest, screen views, reduce noise, or
fulfill other such purposes.
   BLOCK: A parcel of land, intended to be used for development purposes, which
is entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way,
public walks, parks, rural lands, drainage channels or boundary lines of
municipalities, and not traversed by a through street.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 1 : A local quasi-judicial body, created by ordinance,
whose responsibility is to hear appeals concerning the strict interpretation of
this title, and to consider requests for variances under the terms of this
title.
   BOARDING, DORMITORY, OR ROOMING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where,
for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging
and meals, are provided for three (3) or more, but not exceeding six (6)
persons and not open to transient customers.
   BOAT AND/OR RV STORAGE: A facility where boats and/or recreational vehicles
are stored outside for seventy two (72) hours or more.
   BROADCASTING OR RECORDING STUDIO (NO TOWER): A building or portion of a
building used as a place for radio or television broadcasting or recording but
without a transmission tower.
   BUFFER ZONE: A strip of land established to protect one type of land use
from another with which it is incompatible. A buffer zone is comprised of a
buffer use which may, in addition to the normal range of open space and
landscaping uses, take the form of "transitional" uses, structures or yards.
   BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a zoned lot, after the minimum open
space requirements (coverage, yards and setbacks) have been met.
   BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, including any other
structure when separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of
such structure so separated, shall be deemed a separate building.
   BUILDING ADDITION: Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a
building which is connected by a common load- bearing wall other than a
firewall.
   BUILDING COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot area covered by the building;
the building coverage shall include all overhanging roofs.
   BUILDING FRONTAGE: The linear feet of the exterior wall of a building that
faces any road or street that provides a means of direct ingress and egress to
the lot.
   BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average line of the highest
and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the
highest point of coping of a flat roof, the deckline of a mansard roof or to
the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
   BUILDING LINE:
      1.   A line frequently drawn on a subdivision plat to indicate the
setback distance from the lot line. (Note: This line does not necessarily
coincide with the actual construction line of a building or structure; this is
only a minimum requirement.)
      2.   A line beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of
any building shall project, with the exception of roof overhang, walkways, and
the subsurface projection of footings; provided, however, that such overhang
does not exceed six feet (6') and does not encroach upon the adjacent property
or right-of-way.
   BUILDING PERMIT: A permit required before construction can be initiated.
Building permit provisions are contained in this Code.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL OR MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any
dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is
situated.
   BUILDING SITE: A single parcel of land in one ownership, occupied or
intended to be occupied, by a building or structure.
   BUS AND PASSENGER TRAIN TERMINAL: Any premises for the transient housing or
parking of motor-driven buses or trains and the loading and unloading of
passengers.
   CALIPER: The diameter of the tree trunk measured at six inches (6") above
ground level for a tree trunk having a diameter of four inches (4") or less and
the diameter of the tree trunk measured at twelve inches (12") above ground
level for a tree trunk having a diameter exceeding four inches (4").
   CAMPGROUND: An area or tract of land for which accommodations for temporary
occupancy are located or may be placed, including RV parks, tents, and major
recreational equipment, and which is primarily used for recreational purposes
and retains an open air or natural character.
   CAR WASH: A facility for the cleaning of automobiles, providing either self-
serve facilities or employees to perform washing operations.
   CARPORT: A permanently roofed structure, open on at least two (2) sides,
designed for, or occupied by, private passenger vehicles.
   CATERING SERVICE: An establishment that prepares food for service at a
remote site.
   CEMETERY: Land used or dedicated to the interment of human or animal
remains, including columbaria, mausoleums, mortuaries, and associated
maintenance facilities when operated in conjunction with, and within the
boundaries of, such cemetery.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A document issued by the building official
indicating the use of a particular building or land conforms to the
requirements of this title.
   CHILD CARE FACILITY: Child care uses include facilities that provide care
for children on a regular basis away from their primary residence. This
category does not include public or private schools or facilities operated in
connection with an employment use, shopping center, or other principal use,
where children are cared for while parents or guardians are occupied on the
premises or in the immediate vicinity. Accessory uses include offices,
recreation areas, and parking.
   CHILDCARE OR DAYCARE CENTER: Any place, home or institution which receives
three (3) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years, and not of
common parentage, for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or
custodians, when received for regular periods of time, for compensation;
provided, however, that this definition shall not include public and private
schools organized, operated or approved under the laws of this State, custody
of children fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction, children related by
blood or marriage within the third degree to the custodial person, or to
churches or other religious or public institutions caring for children while
their parents or legal guardians are attending services, or meetings or
classes, or engaged in church activities.
   CHURCH (PLACE OF WORSHIP): An institution that people regularly attend to
participate or hold religious services, meetings, and other related activities.
   CITY: The City of Marlow, Stephens County, Oklahoma.
   CITY COUNCIL: The Governing Body of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   CITY WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM: The City of Marlow water distribution and
wastewater collection systems, and all component parts, equipment, and
structures necessary to provide such services.
   CLUB OR LODGE: An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic,
social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or
like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the
general public.
   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A development pattern in which the uses are
"clustered", rather than spread evenly throughout a parcel as in conventional
lot by lot development. (Cluster development is used to preserve open space,
create workable land use mixtures, and save money by building fewer streets and
shorter utility lines.)
   CODE: The officially adopted "City Code" of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY: A degree-granting institution, other than a trade
school, that provides education beyond the high school level. The use includes,
but is not limited to, classroom buildings, offices, laboratories, lecture
halls, athletic facilities, and dormitories.
   COMMUNITY PLAYFIELDS AND PARKS: A tract of land owned by a governmental or
quasi-governmental entity and available to the public for recreational
purposes. This definition includes indoor recreational facilities, swimming
pools, playgrounds, and athletic fields.
   COMMUNITY SERVICE: Uses including buildings, structures, or facilities
owned, operated, or occupied by a governmental entity or private organization
to provide a service to the public.
   COMPATIBILITY: The characteristics of different uses or activities that
permit them to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict.
   COMPREHENSIVE OR MASTER PLAN: The officially adopted Comprehensive Plan or
plans for Marlow, Oklahoma, which provide long range development policies,
plans and programs for the Municipality and its developing areas, and which may
include, among other things, land use and housing elements, traffic circulation
elements, and community utilities and facilities elements.
   CONDITIONS TO ZONING APPROVAL (CONDITIONAL ZONING): A requirement adopted by
the City Council at the time of approval of a rezoning or special use permit
which places greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the use and
development of the subject property than provided in this title and is designed
to improve the negative effects of the rezoning or special use on neighboring
properties and to protect the public health, safety, or general welfare. This
shall be used in rare or extreme situations.
   CONDOMINIUM: A form of individual ownership within a multi- family building,
with joint responsibility for maintenance and repairs. In a condominium, each
apartment is owned outright by its occupant(s), and each occupant owns a share
of the land and other common property of the building.
   CONSTRUCTION: Any site, preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair,
alteration or similar action but excluding demolition, for or of public or
private right-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.
   CONVENIENCE STORE WITH GAS SALES: An establishment engaged in the sale of
convenience goods, such as, but not limited to, prepackaged food items,
tobacco, over-the-counter drugs, periodicals, and other household goods; and
which also provides the retail sale of petroleum products that are dispensed
through gasoline pumps and other supplies for motor vehicles.
   COOPERATIVE HOUSING: A multi-unit development operated by and for its
occupants. Individual occupants do not own their specific housing units
outright, but instead own shares in the enterprise.
   CORRECTIONAL FACILITY: A public or privately operated facility housing
persons awaiting trial or persons serving a sentence after being found guilty
of a criminal offense.
   COURTS AND COURT YARDS: Open, unoccupied spaces that are wholly or partially
enclosed.
   CREMATORIUM: A location containing properly installed, certified apparatus
intended for use in the act of cremation. This use does not include a funeral
parlor or public area.
   CRITICAL FACILITY: Any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would
create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life
and health. Critical facilities include:
      1.   Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly
volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials;
      2.   Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are
likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the
loss of life or injury during flood and storm events;
      3.   Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain
records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm
events; and
      4.   Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.
   CROSSWALK: A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use for
pedestrian use only and so designed as to provide access to adjacent streets or
lots.
   CUL-DE-SAC: A dead-end local street, of limited density, opened at one end
and closed at the other by a permanent turnaround.
   CULTURAL FACILITY: Displays or preserves objects of interest or provides
facilities for one or more of the arts or sciences. Accessory uses may include
parking, storage areas, offices, and gift shops.
   CURB CUT: The providing of vehicular ingress and/or egress between property
and an abutting public street.
   DEAD-END STREET: A street having only one end open for access to another
street, and other end being abruptly terminated with no turnaround.
   DECK: A raised, flat, and floored roofless platform adjoining a dwelling or
structure. A deck is not considered to be part of the structure for living area
measurement purposes; however, it is required to meet all front, side, and rear
yard setbacks. Flooring for a deck is generally made of wood materials set upon
piers.
   DEDICATION: The transfer of property from private to public ownership, under
adopted subdivision regulations, as a condition of subdivision plat approval.
   DENSITY: The number of persons or housing units per acre of land.
   DEVELOPER: Any person, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation
engaged in development or proposed development of land.
   DEVELOPMENT: Man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage
of materials or equipment.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT: A forestry term that takes the thickness
measurement of a tree at four and one-half feet (4.5') above the ground.
   DIRECTOR: The City Manager of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma, or his or her
duly designated representative.
   DRAINAGE STRUCTURE: A device composed of virtually non- erodible material
such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from
one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release
point for stormwater management, drainage control, and flood control purposes.
   DRIP LINE: The periphery of the area underneath a tree, which would be
encompassed by perpendicular lines extending from the exterior edges of the
crown of the tree. The area under or around the tree containing the fragile
feeder roots of the tree.
   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: Any establishment where food and/or beverages are sold
to the consumer, where motor vehicle parking space is provided, and where food
and/or beverages are intended to be consumed in a motor vehicle parked upon the
premises or where there is an option of consuming food either in a motor
vehicle or within the restaurant building.
   DRIVE-IN WINDOW: A portion of any building or structure from which business
is transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly with customers
located in a motor vehicle during such business transaction. Drive-in windows
shall have at a minimum one hundred fifty feet (150') of approach distance on
the property in which vehicles may queue prior to reaching the window.
   DRY CLEANING AND LAUNDRY SERVICE: An establishment where laundry or dry
cleaning is dropped off by customers or picked up by customers and that also
includes on-site laundry and/or cleaning activities, including related
operation of equipment and machinery. Establishments that do not include on-
site cleaning activities are classified as "general personal services".
   DUPLEX: A dwelling having separate apartments for two (2) families with two
(2) unique entrances and addresses.
   DWELLING: Any building, or portion thereof, which is used or designed for
residential purposes.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling having any portion of each of one or more
walls in common with adjoining dwellings.
   DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling having open space on all sides.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling designed for occupancy by three (3) or
more families living independently of each other, exclusive of auto or trailer
courts or camps, hotels or motels.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A residence designed for one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed to be occupied by not more than
two (2) families (also known as a "duplex").
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment, boardinghouse,
hotel or motel, designed primarily for occupancy by one family for living,
eating, and sleeping purposes.
   EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or
persons, of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes. A grant of one or
more property rights by a property owner to the general public, a public
utility, a governmental unit, or a private individual or corporation for the
use of a portion of the owner's land for a specific purpose, or use as a means
of access to other property. Easements shall be designated "public" or
"private" depending upon the nature of the usage.
   EASEMENT, DRAINAGE: An agreement allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or
other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land
subject to the drainage easement.
   EDUCATION: Education uses are public, private, and parochial institutions at
the primary, elementary, middle, high school, or post-secondary level, or trade
or business schools, which provide educational instruction to students.
Accessory uses include play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport
facilities, auditoriums, and before- or after-school day care.
   ELEMENTARY SCHOOL: An educational institution that satisfies the compulsory
education laws of the State of Oklahoma for students in elementary grades. This
definition includes both public schools and private schools that have a
curriculum similar to public schools.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME/MOBILE HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured
home or mobile home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes or mobile
homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities,
the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) is completed before the effective date of this title.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
   FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood or marriage, or a group of not
to exceed five (5) persons (excluding servants) not all related by blood or
marriage, occupying premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping
unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house,
hotel, club or similar dwelling for group use.
   FARM: A bona fide farm is the primary or principal use of land and buildings
for the purpose of conducting agricultural activities including, raising,
harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or
poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock; or
the production of plants, trees or timber. When agricultural activities are
secondary or an accessory to the principal residential or other use, the
property shall not be considered a bona fide farm.
   FARMERS MARKET: A retail establishment primarily engaged in the sale of
fresh fruits and vegetables.
   FILL: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has
been added; the depth above the original ground.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION, WITH DRIVE-THRU: An establishment that provides
banking services, lending, or similar financial services to individuals and
businesses. This definition includes those institutions engaged in the on-site
circulation of cash money and check-cashing facilities, but shall not include
bail bond brokers. The establishment has a drive-through facility.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION, WITHOUT DRIVE-THRU: Same as the definition for
financial institution, but with no drive-through facility.
   FINANCIAL SERVICE: Establishments that provide retail banking services,
mortgage lending, and similar financial services to individuals and businesses.
This classification includes those institutions engaged in the on-site
circulation of cash money and check-cashing facilities, but does not include
bail bond brokers. Accessory uses may include automatic teller machines,
offices, and parking.
   FITNESS AND RECREATIONAL SPORTS CENTER: A facility primarily featuring
equipment for exercise and other active physical fitness and/or recreational
sports activities, such as swimming, skating, racquet sports, aerobic dance,
gymnasium facilities, indoor soccer, yoga, and other kinds of sports and
fitness facilities.
   FLEA MARKET: Buildings or open spaces in which booths or sales areas are
provided for rent by various unrelated individuals to sell a variety of
merchandise. This does not include yard sales, garage sales, or farmers
markets.
   FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land area from the overflow of inland waters, or the unusual
and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.
   FLOODLIGHT: Any unshielded reflector type light fixture attached directly to
a building or post.
   FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source. (See definition of flood.)
   FLOOR: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a
garage used solely for parking vehicles.
   FLOOR AREA: The total square feet of floor space within the outside
dimensions of a building, including each floor level, but excluding carports,
garages, breezeways, porches, verandas, and balconies.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO: The floor area of the buildings on a lot, divided by the
lot area.
   FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE: Food and beverage service businesses serve
prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises. Accessory
uses may include food preparation areas, offices, and parking.
   FOSSIL FUEL STORAGE: A permanent facility for the storage of fossil fuels
and fossil fuel byproducts including, but not limited to, gasoline, diesel
fuel, and motor oil. Uses include those that store such products for
transportation. Storage of gaseous products such as liquefied natural gas
(LNG), compressed natural gas (CNG), butane, and propane for immediate use by
the final consumer are included in this definition.
   FRONTAGE: That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot, but not the ordinary side of a corner lot.
   FUNERAL SERVICES: An establishment for the preparation of the deceased for
burial and rituals connected with, and conducted before, burial or cremation.
This definition may include a facility for the permanent storage of cremated
remains of the dead.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or portion of a main building
used for the parking or temporary storage of the automobiles of the occupants
of the premises; provided, that not to exceed two (2) spaces may be rented to
persons not residing on the premises.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC: A garage operated as a business devoted primarily to the
repair, storage, maintenance, service or sales of motor vehicles, or any
combination thereof.
   GASOLINE SALES: Any area used for retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels, or
automobile accessories and incidental services. The use may only include
facilities allowed under either "major or minor vehicle service and repair" if
such use is allowed in the zoning district.
   GENERAL INDOOR RECREATION: An establishment offering entertainment, game
playing, or similar amusements to the public within an enclosed building. This
shall include, but is not limited to, arcades, bowling alleys, billiard
parlors, bingo parlors, laser tag parlors, and indoor shooting ranges.
   GENERAL INDUSTRIAL SERVICE: Establishments engaged in the storage, repair,
or servicing of agricultural, industrial, business, or consumer machinery,
equipment, products, or byproducts. Examples include but are not limited to:
construction materials storage; welding shops, machine shops; tool repair;
electric motor repair; repair of scientific or professional instruments; repair
or storage of heavy machinery; heavy truck servicing and repair; aircraft
servicing and repair; tire retreading or recapping. Accessory activities may
include retail sales, offices, parking, and storage.
   GENERAL OUTDOOR RECREATION: Intensely developed recreational uses such as
amusement parks, miniature golf courses, commercial tennis courts, batting
cages, skateboard or skate parks or courses, bicycle motocross courses, water
parks or slides, drive- in movie theaters, courses for paramilitary games, and
archery facilities.
   GENERAL PERSONAL SERVICES: An establishment that provides care, advice, aid,
maintenance, repair, treatment, or similar semi-technical, technical, or
experienced assistance, other than the practice of a profession and wholesale
or retail sale of goods. Examples include, but are not limited to, shoe repair,
beauty and barber shops, massage therapy, tanning salons; and dry cleaning
pick-up and drop-off shops that do not conduct dry cleaning on the premises.
   GOLF COURSE OR DRIVING RANGE: A tract of land laid out with a course having
nine (9) or more holes for playing the game of golf, including any accessory
clubhouse, driving range, office, restaurant, concession stand, picnic tables,
pro shop, maintenance building, restroom facility, or similar accessory use or
structure. This term shall not include miniature golf courses as a principal or
accessory use, nor shall it include driving ranges that are not accessory to a
golf course, nor shall it include lighted golf courses. Depending on the
district in which the course is located, the course may be either lighted or
unlighted.
   GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND CIVIC BUILDINGS: An office of a governmental
agency that provides administrative and/or direct services to the public, such
as, but not limited to: post offices, employment offices, public assistance
offices, or motor vehicle licensing and registration services.
   GRADE: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground
immediately surrounding the building or structure.
     Finished Grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after
cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.
     Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   GRADING: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition;
this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any
combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
   GREENBELT: An area of woods, parks, or open land designated for aesthetics
of a community or neighborhood.
   GROUND ELEVATION: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to
cutting or filling.
   GROUP HOME: A residential facility which provides a family living
environment including supervision and care necessary to meet the physical,
emotional, and social needs of its residents. The capacity of such facility
shall be at least four (4) residents but not more than fifteen (15) residents.
   GROUP LIVING: A use category that is characterized by residential occupancy
of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of
"household living". Generally, group living structures have a common eating
area for residents. The residents may receive care, training, or treatment, and
caregivers may or may not also reside at the site. Accessory uses commonly
include recreational facilities and vehicle parking for occupants and staff.
   GUEST COTTAGE: Living quarters within a detached accessory building located
on the same lot or parcel of land as the primary structure, used exclusively
for housing members of the family occupying the main building and their
nonpaying guests. Such quarters shall not be rented or otherwise used as a
separate dwelling. By no means shall such a use be considered a separate
primary structure and eligible for a minor subdivision if either resulting lot
created will be substandard in size.
   HARDSCAPE: Non-deleterious materials used to augment the beauty of a
landscaped area. "Hardscape" may include brick, stone or rock walls, fountains,
ponds, pools, planter or retaining walls, but it excludes artificial plants,
trees, or other artificial vegetation.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITY: Health care uses are characterized by activities
focusing on medical services, particularly licensed public or private
institutions that provide primary health services and medical or surgical care
to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, or other
physical or mental conditions. Accessory uses may include but are not limited
to laboratories, outpatient, or training facilities, and parking.
   HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from average elevation of the
proposed finished grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to
the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable
of a pitch or hip roof on a building. When referring to a tower or other
structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the
tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
   HELIPORT: An area designed to be used for the landing or takeoff of
helicopters, which may include all necessary passenger and cargo facilities,
fueling, and emergency service facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that meets one or more of the following
conditions:
      1.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historical Places
(as maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      3.   Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible under the State Historic Preservation Program, which has
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
      4.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places if the
local Historic Preservation Program has been certified by either an approved
State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or directly by
the Secretary of the Interior.
   HOME DAY CARE: State-licensed day care for children that takes place in the
provider's home, which does not employ anyone other than the resident provider.
   HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation carried on only by the inhabitants, which is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling purposes and does
not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the
main building; provided, that in connection with which, there is no sign or
display, and that no mechanical equipment is used or activity is conducted
which creates any noise, dust, odor or electrical disturbance beyond the
confines of the lot on which said occupation is conducted.
   HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION: An incorporated, nonprofit organization, operating
under recorded land agreements, through which: 1) each lot and/or homeowner in
a described land area is a member; 2) each lot is subject to a charge for a
proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities; and 3)
the charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property. Also known as a
property owners association (POA).
   HORTICULTURE NURSERY SALES: Land or buildings used to raise flowers, shrubs,
trees, and other plants for retail sale.
   HOSPITAL: A building or portion thereof for the accommodation of sick,
injured, or infirm persons. Services regularly include the keeping of patients
overnight.
   HOTEL OR MOTEL: A building or group of buildings under one ownership
containing six (6) or more sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed to be
occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged
with or without meals for compensation, but not including an auto or trailer
court or camp, sanitorium, hospital, asylum, orphanage or building where
persons are housed under restraint.
   HOUSEHOLD LIVING: A use category that is characterized by residential
occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A surface composed of any material that significantly
impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious
surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and
roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface.
   IMPROVEMENTS: Street grading, surfacing, installation of sidewalks, curb,
gutter, water, sanitary and storm sewer systems, culverts, bridges, and trees
as may be required by the City.
   INDUSTRIAL SERVICE: An establishment engaged in the repair or servicing of
agricultural, industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, or
products.
   INFILL: Development of vacant or remnant lands passed over by previous
development in the area.
   INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING OR USE: A building occupied by a nonprofit
organization or a nonprofit establishment for the use of the public.
   INSTRUCTIONAL SERVICES: A specialized instructional establishment that
provides on-site training of business, artistic, or commercial skills. Examples
include, but are not limited to, fine arts schools, computer instructional
services, and driving schools. This use does not include establishments that
teach skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade (e.g., carpentry), which
are classified under "trade schools".
   INTENSITY: The degree to which land is used (often used synonymously with
"density").
   JUNK OR SALVAGE: Used machinery, scrap, iron, steel, other ferrous and
nonferrous metals, tools, implements or portions thereof, glass, plastic,
cordage, building materials, or other waste that has been abandoned from its
original use and may be used again in its present or in a new form.
   JUNK YARD: Use of property for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale,
or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials,
used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and
equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or
other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
   JURISDICTION: The jurisdiction of the Marlow Municipal Planning Commission,
for purposes of zoning, which shall include all lands within the corporate
limits of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs, more than six
(6) months of age, are kept.
   LANDSCAPED AREA: The unpaved area that contains grass, shrubs, flowers,
ground cover, trees, or native plant materials of any kind and that may include
decorative fixtures or accouterments such as rock, pools, and planters. Does
not include artificial plants, trees, or vegetation.
   LANDSCAPED EDGE: Landscape area required to be provided adjacent to a street
or highway in multifamily and nonresidential areas.
   LANDSCAPED ISLAND: Unpaved area located within or protruding into a parking
lot or the center of an entry into a development's drive or street. The area of
a landscaped island is measured from back of inside curb to the back of inside
curb.
   LIBRARY, PUBLIC: A permanent facility for storing and loaning books,
periodicals, reference materials, audio and videotapes, and other similar media
for use by the public.
   LIGHT BUSINESS: A retail or service establishment that operates a low impact
business and has fewer than five (5) employees working at any given time.
   LIGHT SOURCE: The source of illumination and includes neon, fluorescent or
similar tube lighting, the incandescent bulb (including the light producing
elements therein) and any reflecting surface that, because of its construction
and/or placement, becomes in effect the source of illumination.
   LIVESTOCK: Domestic animals customarily raised or kept on farms for profit
or other purposes.
   LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: Space logically and conveniently located for bulk
pick-ups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and
accessible to such vehicles when required off street parking spaces are filled.
Required off street loading space is not to be included as off street parking
space in the computation of required off street parking space.
   LOT: A parcel of land, intended as a unit for the transfer of ownership or
for development, of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning ordinance
requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other
open spaces as are required. Such lot shall have frontage on a public street
and may consist of:
      1.   A single lot of record;
      2.   A portion of a lot of record;
      3.   A combination of complete lots of record, or of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record; or
      4.   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided, that in no
case of division or combination shall any lot or parcel be created which does
not meet the requirements of this title or the adopted subdivision regulations.
For the purpose of this title, the term does not include any portion of a
dedicated right-of-way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1733.png]
 
 
   LOT AREA: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of, and abutting on, two (2)
or more streets.
   LOT COVERAGE: The amount (percent) of impervious coverage, including the
surface parking, drives, and the building footprint, but excluding customary
patios and pools.
   LOT DEPTH: The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear
line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which runs through a block from street to street
and has nonintersecting frontage on two (2) or more streets.
   LOT, FLAG: A lot having only its driveway fronting on a public street, with
the result that only the width of the driveway is the frontage of the lot.
   LOT FRONTAGE: See definition of frontage.
   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: A relocation of the lot lines of two (2) or more lots
included in a plat which is filed of record, for the purpose of making
necessary adjustments to building sites.
   LOT LINES (PROPERTY LINE): The lines bounding a "lot", as defined herein. Or
the property boundary, abutting a right-of-way line, or any line defining the
exact location of a lot.
   LOT, MOBILE HOME: A parcel or tract of land for the placement of a single
mobile home and for the inclusive use of its occupants.
   LOT OF RECORD: A separate and distinct parcel of land, designated on a
legally recorded subdivision plat, a lot split plat or a legally recorded deed
filed in the records of the Stephens County Courthouse, and a copy provided to
the Marlow, Oklahoma, City Clerk.
   LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE: A double frontage lot which is designed to be
developed with the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means
of access provided on a minor street.
   LOT SPLIT: Any division of land into two (2) or more parcels for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, and which
constitutes a "subdivision", as defined in this section.
   LOT, TOWNHOUSE: A lot shown on a townhouse plat and intended as the site of
a single, attached dwelling unit.
   LOT WIDTH: The distance between the side lot lines, measured at the building
line, parallel to the street right-of-way line.
   MAJOR ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY, INDOOR: A use designed to accommodate
activities that generally draw five hundred (500) persons or more to specific
indoor events or shows. Activities are generally of a spectator nature.
Examples include auditoriums, performing arts centers, arenas, and coliseums.
Accessory uses may include restaurants, bars, concessions, parking, and
maintenance facilities.
   MAJOR ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY, OUTDOOR: A large open or partially enclosed
space used for games or major events, and partly or completely surrounded by
tiers of seats for spectators.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty
(40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred
twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term
shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph
except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer
voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42
USC section 5401, et seq. Manufactured housing is further defined and
classified in title 9, chapter 5 of this Code.
   MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY: A contiguous parcel of land, which has been
developed for the installation of manufactured homes. Manufactured homeowners
lease a site for the installation of their home, or lease both the home and
site. Manufactured home sales or storage lots for unoccupied units are not
manufactured home communities.
   MANUFACTURING AND PRODUCTION: An establishment engaged in the manufacturing,
processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, constructed,
raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be
finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for
transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or consumers. Custom industry
is included (i.e., establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production
of goods by hand manufacturing involving the use of hand tools and small-scale
equipment). Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, such
activity is a subordinate part of sales. Accessory activities may include
retail sales, offices, cafeterias, parking, employee recreational facilities,
warehouses, storage yards, repair facilities, truck fleets, and caretaker's
quarters.
   MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: Uses that do not meet the light manufacturing criteria
set forth herein. These uses have the potential to produce noise, vibrations,
smoke, dust, and odor that have the potential to cause adverse impacts.
Examples include, but are not limited to: refining or initial processing of raw
materials; rolling, drawing, or extruding of metals; asphalt batching plants;
sawmills; meat slaughtering or packing house; and manufacture or packaging of
cement products, concrete batch plants, feed, fertilizer, flour, glue, paint,
petroleum products, soap, turpentine, varnish, charcoal, or distilled products.
   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: An establishment engaged in the manufacture,
predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or
parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of
such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such
products, but excluding basic industrial processing. The manufacture, assembly,
research, or processing of products and goods occurs entirely within an
enclosed structure requiring no outdoor industrial wastewater treatment system,
and producing no airborne emissions, objectionable noise, glare, odor,
vibrations, smoke or dust associated with the industrial operation. Outdoor
storage of raw materials and products is permitted with proper screening.
Examples include, but are not limited to: airplane, automobile, or truck
assembly, remodeling, or repair; bottling works; boat building, computer chip
manufacturing; machine or blacksmith shops; metalworking or welding shops;
paint shops; and printing and publishing shops.
   MEDICAL OFFICE OR CLINIC: An establishment primarily engaged in furnishing,
on an outpatient basis, chiropractic, dental, medical, surgical, medical
imaging, or other services to individuals, including the offices of
chiropractors, physicians, dentists, and other health practitioners, medical
and dental laboratories, outpatient care and outpatient care facilities.
Patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions.
   MICRO FOOD AND BEVERAGE PRODUCTION: An establishment that produces, bottles,
and/or distributes small quantities of food or beverages that are not part of a
restaurant type use. Typical examples include, but are not limited to
microbreweries, nanobreweries, brewpubs, wine blending, and limited food
production.
   MIDDLE SCHOOL OR HIGH SCHOOL: An educational institution that satisfies the
compulsory education laws of the State of Oklahoma for students in secondary
education. This definition includes both public schools and private non-
boarding schools that have a curriculum similar to that in the permitted public
schools.
   MINI-STORAGE: A building or group of buildings in a controlled access
compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and
controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of customers' goods or
wares.
   MINING AND PROCESSING: Involves extractive operations, certain mineral
processing operations, and manufacturing operations, which directly utilize
minerals, at or near the source.
   MINING AND PROCESSING, MINERALS AND RAW MATERIALS: Places primarily devoted
to surface or subsurface mining, excavation, or extraction of metallic and
nonmetallic materials with essential on-site processing of such products.
Typical uses are a borrow pit, sandpit, quarry, or mine.
   MINING AND PROCESSING, OIL AND GAS: Places primarily devoted to subsurface
mining of oil and gas. Typical uses are oil and gas drilling operations.
   MOBILE HOME: A structure manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, or
manufactured after June 15, 1976, without certification of compliance with HUD
standards which is a movable or portable dwelling unit over thirty feet (30')
in length constructed to be towed on its own chassis, with or without permanent
foundation, consisting of a single or two (2) or more connected components. The
term does not include prefabricated, modular or unitized dwelling on a
permanent foundation, or travel trailer, camper, or similar recreational unit.
   MOBILE HOME PARK: A site with required improvements and utilities for the
long-term parking of two (2) or more mobile homes occupied for dwelling or
sleeping purposes. The site may include services and facilities for the
residents.
   MODULAR HOME: A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of
units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation
into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears
a seal of compliance with regulations of the City of Marlow Building Code.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A facility for freight pickup, distribution, and
storage. This may include intermodal distribution facilities for truck or
shipping transport.
   MOVIE THEATRE: An indoor theater for the showing of motion pictures.
   MUNICIPAL OR COMMUNITY RECREATION CENTER: A facility providing recreation/
pool facilities and/or meeting rooms, and typically oriented to the
recreational needs of the residents of the surrounding area.
   NATURAL GROUND SURFACE: The ground surface in its original state before any
grading, excavation or filling.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of this title.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING, LOT, OR STRUCTURE: Any building, lot or structure,
lawfully occupied or used at the time this title becomes effective, which does
not conform in part or wholly to any or all of the use, area, height, coverage,
off-street parking or any other regulations of the district in which it is
located.
   NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND: Any lawful use of land, existing at the time this
title becomes effective, which does not conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
   NONRESIDENTIAL MOBILE TRAILER: Any vehicle having the basic characteristics
of either a mobile home or travel trailer, but which is used for purposes other
than residential and is not being offered for sale (as indicated by a clearly
displayed sign on or near the trailer).
   NUISANCE: Whatever is injurious to the senses or an obstruction to the free
use of property so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment
of life or property by the public or community shall be deemed a "public
nuisance".
   OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE: A space on a lot directly accessible to the
building it serves for bulk pickups and deliveries by delivery vehicles.
   OFFICE: Office uses are characterized by activities generally focusing on
business or professional services. Accessory uses may include cafeterias,
health facilities, parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of
employees in the firm or building.
   OFFICE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL: An establishment that provides executive,
management, administrative, or professional services, but not involving the
sale of merchandise except as incidental to a permitted use. Typical examples
include, but are not limited to, real estate, insurance, property management,
investment, employment, travel, advertising, law, architecture, design,
engineering, accounting, call centers, and similar offices.
   OFFICE WAREHOUSE: A structure containing both offices and a warehouse for
storing products associated with the business. The office component of this use
shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the overall floor area of the
structure.
   OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP: The official map on which the current zoning
status of all land within the corporate limits of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma,
is depicted, and which, along with the zoning text, comprises the zoning
ordinance of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma.
   OPEN SPACE: Land which is free of structures or impervious surfaces which
are not directly related to the use of the open space.
   OUTSIDE STORAGE: The placement or containment of goods, materials, or
equipment other than within a building, for purposes of keeping such goods,
materials, or equipment for processing, use, sale, or transfer to other
locations.
   OVERLAY DISTRICT: A defined geographic area that encompasses one or more
underlying zoning districts and that imposes additional requirements above
those required by the underlying zoning district. An overlay district can be
coterminous with existing zoning districts or containing only parts of one or
more such districts.
   PACKAGE SHOP: An establishment that sells alcoholic beverages only in sealed
containers whose contents may not lawfully be consumed on the premises.
   PARCEL: A lot or contiguous group of lots, in single ownership or under
single control, and usually considered as a unit for purposes of development.
   PARKING AREA: All property used for off-street parking vehicular aisles and
access ways, loading zones, interior and perimeter landscaping, and other
outdoor vehicular use areas.
   PARKING LOT: An area or plot of land used for the storage or parking of
motor vehicles.
   PARKING LOT ISLAND: A strip of property, which separates groups of parking
spaces from other groups of parking spaces or internal driveways.
   PARKING SPACE: A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed,
sufficient in size to store one automobile, together with a permanently
surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley, and
permitting ingress or egress of an automobile.
   PARKING STRUCTURE: A structure designed with one or more levels partially or
fully enclosed, used for the parking of motor vehicles. The facility may be
above, below, or partially below ground. This use does not include private
carports or garages.
   PARKS AND OPEN SPACE: Park and open space uses focus on natural areas,
consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping or outdoor recreation, community
gardens, or public squares. Lands tend to have few structures. Accessory uses
may include but are not limited to clubhouses, playgrounds, maintenance
facilities, concessions, caretaker's quarters, and parking.
   PERCOLATION TEST: An indicator of the suitability of an area for subsoil
effluent disposal, obtained by testing for the rate at which the undisturbed
soil will absorb water per unit of surface area.
   PERMIT: The authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity
under the provisions of this title.
   PERMITTED USE: A use allowed by right within the applicable zoning district,
subject to all applicable requirements of this title.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture,
public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or
private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other
political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal
entity. Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the word "person", as
applied to partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   PERSONAL CARE HOME: A building or group of buildings, a facility, or place
in which is provided beds and other facilities and services including room,
meals and personal care for non-family ambulatory adults. This term does not
include buildings which are devoted to independent living units which include
kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and
servicing some or all of their own meals or boarding facilities which do not
provide personal care.
   PERSONAL SERVICES: Establishments that provide individual services related
to personal needs directly to customers at the site of the business, or that
receives goods from or returns goods to the customer, which have been treated
or processed at that location or another location.
   PLACE OF ASSEMBLY: A building or structure, or group of buildings or
structures, intended primarily for the conducting of organized assembly. May
include, but are not limited to religious facilities, assembly halls, and
fraternal/social clubs. Accessory uses may include meeting rooms and childcare
provided for persons while they are attending assembly functions.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): Development intended to encourage both
residential and non-residential land uses according to a master development
plan, with related covenants and restrictions. Developments within a PUD
project may have flexibility in the application of development standards when
approved according to a master development plan, and to promote the
conservation of natural resources, more efficient use of land, and, efficiency
in the extension of streets and utilities.
   PLANNING COMMISSION: A five (5) member body appointed by the Mayor and
Council to evaluate proposed land use changes and administer land development
controls in the City.
   PLAT: A map, prepared to scale, of a particular piece of real estate signed
and stamped by a registered land surveyor certified by the State.
   PRINCIPAL USE: The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building
thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used,
occupied, or maintained.
   PRIVACY FENCE: Wood, metal, or masonry structure not less than six feet (6')
and not greater than eight feet (8') in height from average adjacent grade.
   PRIVATE OR RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS: A private legal restriction on the use of
land, contained in the deed to the property, or otherwise formally recorded.
   PRIVATE WATER AND SEWAGE SYSTEM: A system owned and operated by a community
corporation or an individual serving two (2) or more premises and approved by
the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality.
   PROPERTY LINE: The boundary of any lot, parcel, or tract.
   PUBLIC HEARING: An open public meeting for which interested parties may
discuss a specific issue in an orderly manner before a public body.
   PUBLIC NOTICE: A means of informing the general public of a particular event
in a fair and timely manner.
   PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY: The conduct of publicly owned safety and emergency
services, such as, but not limited to, fire stations, police stations, and
emergency medical and ambulance service.
   PUBLIC WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM: A water or sewer system built and owned by, or
dedicated to and accepted by, the City of Marlow, Oklahoma. All other such
systems shall be deemed private systems.
   RACE TRACK (Auto, Dog, Or Horse): A measured course where animals or
machines are entered in competition against one another or against time,
including tracks used only in the training of animals.
   RECOMBINATION OF LOTS: Rearrangement of lot boundaries from those already
established.
   RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR: Indoor recreation and entertainment
uses provide recreation or entertainment activities within an enclosed
environment. Accessory uses may include concessions, snack bars, parking, and
maintenance facilities.
   RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR: Outdoor recreation and entertainment
uses provide recreation or entertainment activities outside of an enclosed
environment. Accessory uses may include, but are not limited to, concessions,
snack bars, parking, and maintenance facilities.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular-type portable structure built on a single
chassis, without permanent foundation, which can be self-propelled and driven,
or can be towed or hauled by a light duty truck, and primarily designed as
temporary living accommodation for recreation, camping, and travel use.
Examples of recreational vehicles include travel trailers, truck campers,
camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK (RV PARK): See definition of campground or tourist
trailer camp.
   RECYCLING CENTER (Outdoor/Indoor): A facility in which recoverable resources
such as newspapers, glassware, plastics, and metal cans are recycled,
reprocessed, and treated to return such products to a condition in which they
can again be used for production. This facility is not a junkyard or salvage
yard.
   RESEARCH LABORATORY: A facility for conducting medical or scientific
research, investigation, testing, or experimentation; however, this does not
include facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as
incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. This definition includes
electronic and telecommunications laboratories, including assembly.
   RESIDENTIAL: Pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as homes,
townhomes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment
complexes, which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which
are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein.
   RESTAURANT: An establishment, however designated, at which food is sold for
consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or refreshment stand at a
public facility or nonprofit community swimming pool, playground, park, or
marina operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility shall not
be deemed a restaurant.
   RETAIL (SALES): Establishments engaged in the sale, lease, or rent of new or
used products to the public. No outdoor display of merchandise is permitted
unless specifically authorized by this title. Accessory uses may include
offices, parking, storage of goods, and assembly, repackaging, or repair of
goods for on- site sale.
   RETAIL, GENERAL: Retail establishments not elsewhere classified that provide
goods directly to the consumer, including, but not limited to: apparel shops,
appliance sales, auto parts store, bait shop, bakeries, bookstores, camera
shops, clothing stores, convenience stores without gas pumps, department
stores, electronic stores, factory outlet stores, florists, grocery stores,
furniture stores, hardware and building material sales, pet shops, pawn shops,
pharmacies, shoe stores, and toy stores.
   RETAIL, LARGE: A building that meets the definition of "general retail" and
is seventy five thousand (75,000) square feet or greater.
   REZONING: An amendment to, or a change in, this title. Rezonings may take
any of three (3) forms:
      1.   A comprehensive revision or modification of this title text and map;
      2.   A text change in zoning district requirements;
      3.   A change in the zoning district designation of a particular parcel
or parcels, as shown on the official zoning district map, either by petition of
a private individual or by administrative action of the Municipal Planning
Commission.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land, occupied or intended to be occupied, by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, roadway, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees or another
special use.
   ROADWAY: That portion of any street designated for vehicular traffic; where
curbs are in place, that portion of the street between the curbs.
   SCHOOL: A facility that provides a curriculum of academic instruction, such
as kindergartens, elementary schools, middle schools, junior high schools, and
high schools.
   SCRAP OPERATIONS: Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale,
dismantling or processing of used or waste materials that are not intended for
reuse in their original form. Typical uses include but are not limited to junk
yards or salvage yards.
   SCREENING: The method by which a view of one site from another adjacent site
is shielded, concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques include fences, walls,
hedges, berms, or other features.
   SECONDARY LIVING QUARTERS: One additional dwelling unit detached from the
principal dwelling under the same ownership, providing independent living
quarters including sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation facilities. The
owner of the property shall be required to live in the principal dwelling upon
the same lot the secondary quarters is constructed. Minimum heated and cooled
square footage shall be seven hundred twenty (720) and maximum square footage
shall be no more than fifty percent (50%) of the heated and/or cooled square
footage of the principal dwelling. The principal dwelling and the secondary
living quarters shall remain under the same ownership. No more than one such
accessory living quarters shall be permitted on a lot with the principal
dwelling and shall be located within the rear yard area. The lot on which such
use is to be established shall be fifty percent (50%) greater in area than the
minimum standard lot size for the respective district.
   SEPTIC TANK: A watertight receptacle that receives a discharge of sewage
from a building, sewer, or part thereof and is designed and constructed to
permit settling of solids from this liquid, digestion of the organic matter,
and discharge of the liquid portion into a disposal area.
   SERVICE STATION: A building or lot where gasoline, oil, and greases are
supplied and dispensed to the motor vehicle trade, and/or where battery, tire
and other similar sales and services are rendered.
   SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the front, rear, or side
lot lines and the existing or proposed edges of the structure. The term
"required setback" means a line beyond which a building is not permitted to
extend under provisions set forth in this title establishing minimum depth and
widths of yards. Eaves not exceeding twenty four inches (24") are exempt from
setback requirements. Eaves in excess of twenty four inches (24") are not
exempt from setback requirements to the extent they exceed twenty four inches
(24").
   SETBACK, FRONT YARD: The minimum horizontal distance between the street
right-of-way line (front lot line) and the main building or structure,
(including a garage or any projection thereof, other than steps) required to
create a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines.
   SETBACK, REAR YARD: The minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line (alley easement line, if one exists) and the rear of the main building (or
any projections other than eaves, steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed
porches) required to create a yard extending across the rear of the lot and
measured between side lot lines. On corner lots, the rear yard shall be
considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least
dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all
cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
   SETBACK, SIDE YARD: The minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line
and the side of the main building (or any projections thereof, other than steps
and 2 foot eaves) required to create a side yard extending from the front lot
line to the rear lot line.
   SEWER, PUBLIC: A system that is owned, maintained and operated by the City
of Marlow, and approved by the State Department of Environmental Quality.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: The following:
      Adult Amusement Or Entertainment: Amusement or entertainment businesses
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or on materials
depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or specified areas as
defined in this title, including, but not limited to, topless or bottomless
dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainment.
      Adult Bookstore: An establishment having as a significant portion of its
stock in trade, books, film, tape, photographs, magazines, or other periodicals
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas.
      Adult Motel: A motel wherein material is presented, as a part of the
motel services, via closed circuit TV or otherwise, which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or
specified anatomical areas.
      Adult Motion Picture Arcade: Any arcade or similar facility to which the
public is permitted or invited to make use of coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled, still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices which are
maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis or depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical
areas.
      Adult Motion Picture Theatre: An enclosed building used for presenting
material in a theater, or theater formats, which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or
specified anatomical areas.
      Massage Parlor: Any place where for any form of consideration or
gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments, or any other treatment of manipulation of the human body
occurs as part of or in connection with sexual conduct; also, any place where
any person providing any such treatment, manipulation or service related
thereto, exposes specified anatomical areas.
      Model Studio: Any place, other than a university or college art class,
where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display
specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such
consideration or gratuity.
      Sexual Conduct: As used in this definition shall mean:
      1.   The stimulation, fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, vulva, or female breasts;
      2.   Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or anal copulation;
      3.   Sadomasochistic practices; and
      4.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in items 1 through 3 of this definition.
      Sexual Encounter Center: Any building or structure which contains or is
used for commercial entertainment where the patron directly or indirectly is
charged a fee to engage in personal contact with or to allow personal contact
by, employees, devices, or equipment or by personnel provided by the
establishment which appeals to the prurient interest of the patron, to include
but not to be limited to bath houses, massage parlors, and related or similar
activities.
      Specified Anatomical Areas: As used in this definition shall mean:
      1.   Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breasts below a
point immediately above the top of the areola;
      2.   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
The definition of sexually oriented businesses is not intended to include as a
permitted use, or authorize property to be used, for conduct which constitutes
an offense under the laws of the City of Marlow, or applicable State or Federal
laws.
No part of this definition will be deemed to disenfranchise any member of the
healing arts licensed by the State of Oklahoma to perform manipulation of body
parts as part of their profession or counseling of said persons by licensed
practitioners.
   SHOOTING RANGE: An outdoor facility wherein firearms are shot at targets
under strict rules of conduct and safety.
   SHOPPING CENTER: Two (2) or more commercial establishments planned and
managed as a single unit with common off-street parking and loading facilities
provided on the property.
   SIGN: Any device or display consisting of letters, numbers, symbols,
pictures, illustrations, announcements, cutouts, insignia, trademarks or
demonstrations, including all trim and borders, which is used or intended to be
used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed in view
of the general public.
      Animated Sign: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting, either
natural or artificial, to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
      Banner Sign: Any sign having characters, letters, or illustrations
applied to cloth, paper, or fabric of any kind, with only such material as
backing, which is mounted to a pole or building by one or more edges. National,
state, or municipal flags or the official flag of a business or institution
shall not be considered a banner.
      Billboard: A freestanding sign greater than one hundred twenty five (125)
square feet per sign face. Such signs are permitted in certain districts of the
City regardless of content of the sign, subject to regulations contained within
this title.
      Bracket Sign: Any sign, single- or double-faced, mounted on brackets,
poles or beams, projecting at an angle from the front or side of any building
and supported solely by brackets or beams attached to the building.
      Bulletin Board: A sign used to announce meetings or programs to be held
on the premises of a church, community recreation center, school, auditorium,
library, museum or similar non-commercial places of public assembly.
      Canopy Sign: Any sign, attached to or made part of the front, side, or
top of a canopy structure, excluding awnings and marquees, projecting beyond
the structure and/or extending along said structure, that is generally designed
and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
      Construction Sign: Any sign advertising the construction actually being
done on the premises where the sign is located. The sign may also include the
contractor's name, the owner's name, the architect's name and the name of the
institution providing financial services.
      Directional Sign: Any sign located on the premises to direct the public
to any parking areas, facility, or service located on the premises, or to
direct traffic on the premises.
      Double-Sided Sign: A structure with two (2) parallel and directly
opposite signs with their faces oriented in opposite directions.
      Electric Message Centers: Any sign which changes the message or copy on
the sign face mechanically or electronically by movement or rotation of the
panels or slats or by changing electronic display on the sign face (see also
definition of  sign: multiple message sign).
      Entrance Sign: Any sign placed at the intersection of a public street and
a public or private entryway into an apartment complex, condominium complex,
office complex, industrial complex or other building or buildings with
multifamily residential dwelling units or multiple commercial units.
      Externally Illuminated Signs: Any sign illuminated by an external light
source directed primarily toward such sign.
      Flag: A usually rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design that is
used as a symbol of a government, as a signaling device, or as a decoration.
      Flashing Sign: An illuminated sign on which artificial light is not
maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in
use.
      Freestanding Or Ground Sign: Any sign supported by uprights or braces
which are permanently placed into the ground, and not supported by or suspended
from any building. Includes the term "monument sign".
      Garage Sale Sign: Any sign pertaining to the sale of personal property
in, at, or upon any residentially zoned property.
      Handbill: A printed sheet to be distributed by hand.
      Height, Sign: The vertical distance measured from the lowest adjacent
street grade to the highest point of the sign or sign structure.
      Identification Sign: Any sign which indicates the name, owner or address
of a residence, office or business, but bearing no advertising.
      Incidental Sign: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking",
"entrance", "exit", and other similar directives.
      Internally Illuminated Sign: Any sign which has characters, letters,
figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes
located within the interior parts of the sign.
      Mobile Sign: Any sign that can be moved by ordinary means from one
location to another.
      Multiple Message Sign: Any sign which changes the message or copy on the
sign face mechanically or electronically by movement or rotation of the panels
or slats or by changing electronic display on the sign face.
      Nameplate: Any sign depicting a name that is generally stationary and
unlit.
      Nonconforming Sign: A sign existing at the effective date of the adoption
of this title which could not be built under the terms of this title.
      Off Premises Sign: Any sign depicting a commercial or non-commercial
entity not located on the entity's property.
      On-Site, On-Premises, Or Point Of Business Sign: A sign which directs
attention to a business, profession, or industry located upon the premises
where the sign is displayed, to types of products sold, manufactured, or
assembled, and/or to service or entertainment offered on said premises, but not
a sign pertaining to the preceding if such activity is only minor and
incidental to the principal use of the premises.
      On-Site Perimeter Light Pole Mounted Sign: Any sign depicting a
commercial or non-commercial entity located upon the premises where the sign is
displayed, which is attached to a perimeter private light pole.
      Political Signs: Any sign concerning candidacy for public office or
urging action on any ballot issue in a forthcoming public election, or
pertaining to or advocating political views or policies.
      Portable Sign: Any sign, whether on its own trailer, wheels, chassis, or
otherwise movable support, which is manifestly designed to be transported from
one place to another.
      Projecting Sign: Any sign which is affixed to any building, wall, or
structure and which extends beyond the building, wall, and structure, building
line or property line.
      Promotional Business Sign: Any sign, permanent or temporary, that can be
used for the promotion of a business.
      Real Estate Sign: Any on-premises structure showing that the premises
upon which it is located is either for sale, for lease or for rent, or open for
inspection.
      Roof Sign: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof
of a building, supported by the roof structure.
      Sandwich Or Sidewalk Sign: Any sign, double- or single- faced, which is
portable and may readily be moved from place to place.
      Sign Maintenance: The replacing, repairing or repainting of part of a
sign structure; periodic changing of bulletin board panels; or renewing of copy
made unusable by ordinary wear and tear, weather, or accident.
      Signable Area: The total area upon which a message is displayed on any
sign. For double-face signs, the side with the largest signable area shall be
used in computing signable area. If the two (2) faces of a double-face sign are
of unequal area, the signable area shall be the area of the larger face. For
wall signs consisting entirely of products shaped in the form of letters or
other figures attached directly to a wall or roof, the signable area shall
consist of the net geometric area measured by the smallest possible single
square or rectangle enclosing the display surface of the sign including the
outer extremities of all letters, characters and delineations.
      Snipe Sign: Any sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or
otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences or other objects where the
advertising material thereon is not applicable to the present use of the
premises upon which the sign is located.
      Standard Public Sign: Any sign erected by the Federal Highway Department,
State Highway Department, Turnpike Authority, County, or the City of Marlow.
      Temporary Sign: Any sign or device which is not permanently attached to
the ground or other permanent structure, which is designed to be mobile or is
designed to remain in place for a limited time. This includes, but is not
limited to, signs which are designed to be transported regularly from one
location to another, signs which are designed with wheels, regardless of
whether the wheels remain attached to the sign, or signs tethered to an
existing structure.
      Wall Sign: A single faced sign which is in any manner attached or fixed
flat to an exterior wall of a building or structure; any sign that shall be
affixed parallel to the wall or painted on the wall of any building in such a
manner as to read parallel to the wall on which it is mounted, in such a way
that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background
surface of the sign; provided, however, said wall sign shall not project more
than twelve inches (12") from the face of the building and shall not project
above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building. Individual letters
in addition to the box type (e.g., letters and symbols on an attached backing)
sign may also be installed as a wall sign.
      Window Sign: Any sign displayed to an outside observer on or through a
window or covering a window, which may include a door.
   SITE PLAN: A sketch, prepared to scale, accurately and with complete
dimensioning to include: the boundaries of a site and the location of all
buildings, structures, uses, significant trees, and proposed site development
construction for a specific parcel of land.
   SITE VARIANCE: A variance granted to vary from regulations and restrictions
for allowed uses in zoning districts, such as setbacks, minimum lot sizes, etc.
   SLAUGHTERHOUSE: A building where livestock is slaughtered and prepared for
distribution to butcher shops or retail sales establishments such as grocery
stores. A slaughterhouse is designed to accommodate the confinement and
slaughtering of live animals and may include packing, treating, storage, or
sale of the product on the premises.
   SOLAR RIGHT: A right to an unobstructed line of sight path from a solar
collector to the sun, which permits radiation from the sun to impinge directly
on the solar collector.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL: A method or system of solid waste disposal in which
the waste is disposed or buried in layers, compacted by earth or disposed by
incineration.
   SPECIFIC USE PERMIT: A permit approved and issued for use or development,
which must be acquired before a specific use can be constructed or started.
   SPOT ZONING: Zoning a relatively small area differently from the zoning of
the surrounding area. "Spot zoning" can be appropriate or inappropriate, based
upon whether or not the nature of the change is appropriate, or arbitrary and
inappropriate.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: The first placement of permanent construction on a
site, such as the pouring of footings or any work beyond the stage of
excavation. For a structure without a basement or poured footings, the start of
excavation; or for a structure without a basement or poured footings, the start
of construction includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the
structure or any part thereof on its pilings or foundation, or the affixing of
any prefabricated structure or modular or mobile home on its permanent site.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, land clearing,
grading or filling, excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations,
erection of temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed
subsurface footing, installation of sewer, gas or water pipes or electric or
other service lines from the street, or existence on the property of accessory
buildings (such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not a
part of the main structure).
   STORAGE YARD: Any lot or portion of a lot that is used for the sole purposes
of the outdoor storage of fully operable motor vehicles, construction
equipment, construction materials, or other tangible materials and equipment.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and
disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood
damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality
degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general
welfare.
   STORY: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if
there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it.
   STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection
of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet (3') above the top floor
level and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is
finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living
quarters shall be counted as a full story.
   STREET: A right-of-way which provides vehicular access to abutting property,
including but not limited to, any highway, alley, street, avenue, public place,
underpass, or overpass in the City dedicated or devoted to public use.
   STREET CLASSIFICATION: For the purpose of providing for the development of
all trafficways and right-of-way in the City of Marlow, Oklahoma, and for their
future improvement, reconstruction, realignment and necessary widening, each
existing trafficway and right-of-way has been designated within the Marlow
Comprehensive Plan, and classified therein.
   STREET, HALF: Any street platted twenty five feet (25') or more in width,
where, at the time of the approval of the plat, it is the intent of the City
Council that said street dedication shall constitute only a part of the total
street right-of-way width.
   STREET, MAJOR: A street or road which provides for through traffic movements
of light and heavy vehicles between or around areas and across the City. Access
to abutting property may be provided and street or road design speeds shall
exceed thirty (30) mph.
   STREET, MINOR: Those streets which are used primarily for access to the
abutting property.
   STREET, OPENED: A street shall be deemed to be opened if it is either of the
following:
      1.   Available for public uses and maintained by the City; or
      2.   Was constructed to City standards and specifications.
   STREET, PRIVATE: A twenty foot (20') (minimum) access easement designed and
built to City of Marlow standards and specifications dedicated perpetually for
use by residences/lots. The City shall be responsible for neither maintenance
nor City services within the easement, and such shall be stated on the plat of
record.
   STREET, PUBLIC: Right-of-way dedicated to the City of Marlow held or owned
by the City for public street purposes.
   STREET, STUB: A dead-end street at adjoining property lines intended for
future extension to serve the development of adjoining areas.
   STREET, UNOPENED: A street or any part thereof shall be deemed to be
unopened if it is not cleared, graded and available for public use.
   STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building used for residential, business,
agricultural, religious, or other purposes, which is occupied by a private or
nonprofit organization, or which is owned by State or local government or an
agency thereof. The term may include a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home. The term also includes
a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does
not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such
construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are
within an enclosed building on the premises.
   SUBDIVISION: The division or re-division of land (vacant or improved) or
airspace, into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites, areas, units or
plots, any one of which, when divided, has an area of less than ten (10) acres,
for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for development, or the dedication,
vacation or realignment of any public or private right-of-way or easement.
   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: Any subdivision comprising four (4) lots or more, or any
subdivision involving a new street or change in an existing street.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR: Any subdivision comprising three (3) lots or less, and
not involving a new street or change in an existing street.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, taking place during a 5-year period, in which
the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value
of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note:
The market value of the structure should be: 1) the appraised value of the
structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or 2) in the
case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This
term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless
of the actual amount of repair work performed.
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however,
include: 1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing
violations of State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been
identified by the City Administrator, and not solely triggered by an
improvement or repair project, or 2) any alteration of a "historic structure"
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a "historic structure".
   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Telecommunications facilities transmit analog or
digital voice or communications information between or among points using
electromagnetic signals via antennas, microwave dishes, and similar structures.
Supporting equipment includes buildings, shelters, cabinets, towers, electrical
equipment, parking areas, and other accessory development.
   TEMPORARY USE: Also akin to conditional use. Any use of zoning or property
on a short term basis.
   TOURIST TRAILER CAMP/RV PARK: Any tract of land upon which two (2) or more
tourist or travel trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are
located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations.
   TOWNHOUSE: One of a series of two (2) or more attached dwelling units,
separated from one another by continuous, vertical walls without openings, from
basement floor to the roof deck, and tight against the same or through the
roof, and which are intended to have ownership transferred in conjunction with
a platted lot.
   TRADE SCHOOL: A secondary or higher education facility primarily teaching
usable skills that prepares students for jobs in a trade or in industry,
construction, or commerce, and meeting all applicable State requirements for a
facility of its type.
   TRANSITIONAL CARE FACILITY: A building or buildings in which is provided
long-term but not permanent living accommodations for one or more persons who
are in need of short term or long-term housing assistance, and in which may
also be provided meals and social services including physical therapy, social
therapy, emotional therapy, counseling, rehabilitation, or substance abuse
recovery assistance.
   TRANSMISSION OR TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER (Including Any Facility With Tower):
A structure in a fixed location used as an antenna or to support antennas for
the primary purpose of transmitting and/or receiving electronic signals. This
definition includes nonresidential broadcast, communication, transmission, and
similar towers, either freestanding or attached to an adjacent broadcasting or
transmitting facility.
   TRANSMITTING STATION (No Tower): Any facility utilized for the transmission
of broadcast information but without a transmission tower.
   TRANSPORTATION FACILITY: A use category that includes facilities that
receive and discharge passengers and freight. Accessory uses include but are
not limited to freight handling areas, concessions, offices, parking, and
maintenance and fueling facilities.
   TRAVEL TRAILER: Any vehicle or similar portable structure mounted on wheels,
designed and intended primarily for short-term (under 2 weeks) occupancy for
dwelling or sleeping or other purposes, and not exceeding twenty five feet
(25') in length.
   TREE REMOVAL: Any intention or negligent act which:
      1.   Cuts down or otherwise physically destroys a tree;
      2.   Will cause a tree to decline and die, including but not limited to:
  a. Causing damage to the root system by application of toxic substances,
operation of machinery, change in natural grade by excavation or filling above
the root system or around the trunk;
  b. Causing damage from injury or fire resulting in pest infestation;
  c. Causing damage from extensive pruning or trimming.
   TURF: A surface layer of earth containing mowed grass with its roots.
   UNDERDEVELOPED PARCEL/VACANT LOT: A parcel or lot on which there is no
permanent structure or part thereof designed for human habitation, occupation,
or use.
   USE OR OCCUPIED: The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are
designed, arranged, intended, or occupied and maintained. Used and occupied
include the words "arranged, designed or intended to be used", and the word
"occupied" shall be deemed to include the words "arranged, designed or intended
to be occupied".
   USE PERMITTED ON REVIEW (CONDITIONAL USE): A use deemed appropriate in a
zoning district, but only upon review of the proposed use by the Planning
Commission to determine whether or not specified conditions, as detailed in
this title, are met.
   USED CAR LOT: Any parcel of land used for storage, display and sales of used
automobiles and where no repair work is done except the necessary
reconditioning of the cars to be displayed and sold on the premises.
   UTILITY: This category includes both major utilities, which are
infrastructure services providing regional or community-wide service, and minor
utilities, which are infrastructure services that need to be located in or near
the neighborhood where the service is provided. Services may be publicly or
privately provided. Accessory uses may include, but are not limited to control,
monitoring, data, or transmission equipment.
      Utility Facility, Major: A service of a regional nature that normally
entails the construction of new buildings or structures, and that typically has
employees on the site on an ongoing basis. Examples include, but are not
limited to, water works, reservoirs, power or heating plants, or steam
generating plants.
      Utility Facility, Minor: A service that is necessary to support
development within the immediate vicinity and that involves only minor
structures. Employees typically are not located at the site on an ongoing
basis. Examples include, but are not limited to utility lines, electric
transformer stations; gas regulator stations; telephone exchange buildings; and
well, water, and sewer pumping stations.
   VACANT BUILDING: See definition of abandoned building.
   VARIANCE: A device obtained from the Board of Adjustment, which grants a
property owner relief from certain provisions of this title when, because of
the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographic condition of the
property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as
distinguished from an inconvenience or a desire to make more money.
   VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL: An establishment engaged in the display, sale,
leasing, or rental of new or used motor vehicles. Vehicles include, but are not
limited to, automobiles, light trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles,
motorcycles, boats, personal watercraft, utility trailers, all-terrain
vehicles, and mobile homes.
   VEHICLE SERVICE AND REPAIR, MAJOR: An establishment engaged in the major
repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, vans, trailers,
recreational vehicles, boats, mobile homes, or snowmobiles. Services include
engine, transmission, or differential repair or replacement; body, fender, or
upholstery work; and painting.
   VEHICLE SERVICE AND REPAIR, MINOR: An establishment engaged in light
maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups; oil change or lubrication;
carburetor cleaning; muffler replacement; brake repair; tire shops; and
detailing and polishing. Vehicle parts are sold and are ordinarily installed on
the premises. Major automotive repairs are prohibited except where specifically
permitted by terms of a specific use approval.
   VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT: Vehicles and equipment uses include a broad range of
uses for the maintenance, sale, or rental of motor vehicles and related
equipment. Accessory uses may include incidental repair and storage, offices,
and sales of parts.
   VESTED RIGHT: A right which has become absolute and fixed, and cannot be
denied by subsequent changes in conditions or regulations. For example, there
is no vested right to have a zoning district classification remain the same
forever, but once construction has legally been allowed and initiated on a
structure, there is a right to maintain that particular use regardless of the
zoning district classification given the property.
   VETERINARY CLINIC/ANIMAL HOSPITAL: An office or a clinic of a veterinarian
where small animals or household pets are given medical, surgical, or health
maintenance treatment. The boarding of animals is limited to short-term care
incidental to the treatment clinic and must be a secondary use of the property.
   VETERINARY CLINIC, LARGE ANIMAL: An office or clinic of a veterinarian where
small animals or household pets, as well as large animals, are given medical,
surgical or health maintenance treatment. The boarding of large animals is
limited to clinics of at least five (5) acres and is limited to short-term care
incidental to the treatment clinic and must be a secondary use of the property.
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's zoning regulations. A structure or other
development without proper certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required by this title, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   VISIBILITY TRIANGLE: The area of land described as either of the following:
      1.   The triangular area of property on each side of a driveway formed by
the intersection of the driveway and the public right-of-way line and the third
side being a line connecting the ends of the two (2) other sides; or
      2.   The triangular area of property located at a corner formed by the
intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way with two (2) sides of the
triangular area along the abutting public right-of-way lines, measured from
their point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the
ends of the two (2) other sides.
   VISITOR ACCOMMODATION: For-profit facilities where lodging is provided to
transient visitors and guests for a defined period.
   WAREHOUSE: A structure used for storing materials, goods, or property.
   WAREHOUSE AND FREIGHT MOVEMENT: Establishments engaged in the storage or
delivery of goods. Accessory uses may include offices, truck fleet parking, and
maintenance areas.
   WASTE AND SALVAGE: Waste and salvage firms receive solid or liquid wastes
from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location. The
category includes uses that collect sanitary wastes, or uses that manufacture
or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material or
processing of scrap or waste material. Waste and salvage uses also include uses
that receive hazardous wastes from others. Accessory uses may include recycling
of materials, offices, and repackaging and shipment of byproducts.
   WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment primarily engaged in the sale or
distribution of goods and materials in large quantity to retailers or other
businesses for resale to individual or business customers. Manufacturing,
resource extraction, bulk storage of hazardous materials, or scrap or salvage
operations are excluded.
   YARD: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the
side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least
horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
   YARD, FRONT: That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-
way line and the principal building of the lot and extending across the front
of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. The front yard of a corner lot
shall be that yard abutting the street with the least frontage, unless
otherwise determined on a recorded plat or in a recorded deed. The front yard
of a lot existing between two (2) streets not intersecting at a corner of the
lot, shall be that yard abutting the street on which adjoining properties face,
unless otherwise determined on a recorded plat or in a recorded deed.
   YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between lot
lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than eaves,
steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots, the rear
yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its
least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in
all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
   YARD, SIDE: A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line, and being the minimum
horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building
or any projections, other than steps and two foot (2') eaves.
   ZERO LOT LINE: A development approach in which a building may be sited on
one or more lot lines (conceivably, all but 1 of the sides of the building
could be on the lot lines), in order to allow more flexibility in site design
and to increase the amount of usable open space on the lot.
   ZONING ORDINANCE: The officially adopted zoning ordinance of the City of
Marlow, Oklahoma.
   ZOO: An area, building, or structures that contain wild animals on
exhibition for viewing by the public. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 2, chapter 2 of this Code.
10-1-18: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this title shall
be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-5-1 of this Code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Districts Established, Zoning Map
10-2-2: Agricultural Districts
10-2-3: Residential Districts
10-2-4: Commercial And Industrial Districts
10-2-5: Special Purpose And Overlay Districts
10-2-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED, ZONING MAP:
This chapter establishes the City's zoning districts and contains statements of
purpose for each of the districts.
Chapter 3, "Use Regulations", and chapter 4, "Dimensional Standards", of this
title, identify the uses allowed within the districts and the dimensional
standards applying to development in the districts, respectively.
   A.   Zoning Districts Established: The following zoning districts are
established:
TABLE 2.1-1
ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
 
District Type Abbreviation District Name
Agricultural                   A-1General Agricultural District
                               A-2Suburban District
                               R-EResidential Estate District
                               R-1Single-Family Dwelling Residential
                                     District
                               R-2Two-Family Dwelling Residential
                                     District
Residential                    R-3Multiple-Family Dwelling Residential
                                     District
                               R-4High Density Apartment Residential
                                     District
                               R-MManufactured Home Community/Mobile
                                     Home Park District
                               C-1Downtown Central Business Commercial
                                     District
                               C-2General Commercial District
Commercial and industrial      C-3Planned Neighborhood Shopping Center
                                     Commercial District
                               I-1Light Industrial District
                               I-2Heavy Industrial District
                               P-FPublic Facilities District
Special purpose and overlay    PUDPlanned Unit Development District
districts                      DT Downtown Overlay
                               BW Broadway Overlay
 
   B.   Zoning Map:
      1.   The zoning districts are shown on the "City of Marlow Zoning Map"
(zoning map). The boundaries of the zoning districts established in this title
are delineated upon the zoning map and adopted as part of this title.
Procedures for amending the zoning map are in section
10-6-3 of this title, applications to amend the zoning map (rezonings).
      2.   In the event of uncertainty in the exact boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the zoning map, the Planning Commission, upon written
application or upon its own motion, shall recommend the location of such
boundaries to the Board of Adjustment and the Board of Adjustment shall make
the final determination.
   C.   Relationship To Overlay Districts: All lands within the City shall be
designated as one of the base zoning districts listed in sections
10-2-2 through
10-2-4 of this chapter. In addition, some lands may be designated as one or
more of the overlay districts listed in section
10-2-5 of this chapter. Where the property is designated as an overlay district
as well as a base zoning district, the regulations governing development in the
overlay district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing
development in the underlying base district. In the event of an express
conflict between the two (2) sets of standards, the standards for the overlay
district shall control. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-2-2: AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   General Agricultural District (A-1):
      1.   The A-1 District is established for the following:
         a.   To provide for the continued use of land for predominately
agricultural purposes;
         b.   To preserve undeveloped areas until they can feasibly be
developed at urban standards and with adequate public safeguards of health,
safety, and welfare; and
         c.   To provide a base (or holding) zoning classification for all
newly annexed property.
   B.   Suburban District (A-2):
      1.   The A-2 District is established for the following:
         a.   To provide a location for the land situated on the fringe of the
urban area that may be either agricultural or suburban in nature;
         b.   To accommodate a variety of urban and suburban uses, including
single-family dwelling units, residential uses with farm animals on acreages
and agricultural endeavors of a limited scale; and
         c.   To promote compatibility between uses and to encourage and
provide an orderly transition from agricultural to urban uses. (Ord. 420, 12-
18-2017)
10-2-3: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   General Purposes Of Residential Districts: The residential zoning
districts contained in this section are intended to:
      1.   Provide appropriately located areas for residential development that
are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and with standards for public
health, safety, and general welfare;
      2.   Allow for a variety of housing types that meet the diverse economic
and social needs of residents;
      3.   Protect the scale and character of existing residential
neighborhoods and community character;
      4.   Discourage any use that would generate traffic or create congestion
on neighborhood streets other than the normal traffic that serves the residents
of the district; and
      5.   Discourage any use that, because of its character or size, would
create additional requirements and costs for public services that are in excess
of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for the
intended type of residential uses.
   B.   Residential Estate (R-E): The R-E District is intended to promote and
encourage a suitable environment for residential development on large parcels
of land at a low rate of urban population density. It is the intent of this
district to encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for
single-family dwellings, and to prohibit commercial and industrial use or any
other use that would substantially interfere with development or continuation
of single-family dwellings or any use not performing a neighborhood function.
On- site sewage disposal may be used in this district; future rezonings to the
R-E District should be consistent with the City's plans for sanitary sewer line
extension.
   C.   Residential District (R-1): The R-1 District is intended to promote and
encourage the construction of and continued use of land for single-family
dwellings with a greater density than the R-E District but a lesser density
than the R-2 District. The district allows related recreational, religious, and
educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a
balanced community. The district prohibits commercial, office, and industrial
uses or any other use or encroachment that would substantially interfere with
the development or continuation of single-family dwellings in the district.
   D.   Residential District (R-2): The R-2 District is intended for the
construction of and the continued use of the land for single- family, two-
family dwellings, and townhouses. The district allows related recreational,
religious, and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic
elements of a balanced community. The district prohibits commercial, office,
and industrial uses or any other use or encroachment that would substantially
interfere with the development or continuation of single-family dwellings in
the district.
   E.   Residential District (R-3): The R-3 District is intended for single-
family dwellings, two-family dwellings, townhouses, and garage apartments at a
higher density than allowed in the R-1 and R-2 Districts. The district allows
related recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required
to provide the basic elements of a balanced community. The district prohibits
commercial, office, and industrial uses or any other use or encroachment that
would substantially interfere with the development or continuation of single-
family dwellings in the district.
   F.   Residential District (R-4): The R-4 District is intended to accommodate
the development of multifamily units, including apartments and condominiums, in
neighborhoods with medium to high residential densities. It is the intent of
this district, through proper site planning and design, to provide
compatibility of uses in zoning, assure privacy and individuality by adequate
screening techniques, protect adjacent property values, and make provisions for
usable open space (exclusive of parking areas and streets). The district allows
related recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required
to provide the basic elements of a balanced community.
   G.   Manufactured Home Community/Mobile Home Park (R-MHC): The R-MHC
District is intended to encourage the development of properly planned
manufactured home parks and subdivisions and to establish standards for the
size, design, and quality of manufactured home communities. (Ord. 420, 12-18-
2017)
10-2-4: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   General Purposes Of Commercial And Industrial Districts: The commercial
and industrial zoning districts contained in this section generally are
intended to:
      1.   Provide appropriately located areas consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for retail, service, office, and industrial uses;
      2.   Strengthen the City's economic base and provide employment
opportunities close to home for residents of the City and surrounding
communities; and
      3.   Minimize any negative impact of nonresidential development on
adjacent residential districts.
   B.   Downtown Central Business Commercial District (C-1): The C-1 District
establishes and preserves the downtown business area in a manner that generally
accommodates a wide range of retail and consumer or personal uses, in a setting
conducive to, and safe for, a high volume of pedestrian traffic. Compatible
residential uses are allowed in order to promote increased daily activity
levels and re-use and development of existing structures. The district is
unique in that on-street parking for consumers is allowed and provided and
encourages the development and use of off street parking for employee vehicles
and delivery vehicles.
   C.   General Commercial District (C-2): The C-2 District is intended to
provide for the range of commercial and retail uses oriented towards both
vehicular and pedestrian traffic and will accommodate both quick stop and
longer visit shopping.
   D.   Planned Neighborhood Shopping Center Commercial District (C-3): The C-
3 District is intended for small, compact commercial uses within or surrounded
by residential areas, compatible in scale and character with surrounding
residential uses, to serve the convenience needs of the immediately surrounding
neighborhood.
   E.   Light Industrial District (I-1): The I-1 District is intended to
provide for light manufacturing, processing, service, storage, wholesale, and
distribution operations with all operations contained within an enclosed
building. The intent is to preserve this land for light industrial and service-
oriented commercial uses.
   F.   Heavy Industrial District (I-2): The I-2 District is intended to
provide for heavy industrial development of a potentially noxious nature,
including heavy manufacturing, storage, major freight terminals, waste and
salvage, resource extraction, processing, and other related uses. The intent is
to preserve this land especially for industry in locations with access to major
streets as designated on the Comprehensive Plan map, as well as locations
generally accessible to railroad transportation. Because of the objectionable
influences that may be created in this district, a buffer or additional setback
strip is necessary around this district to protect other zoning districts,
except the I-1 Light Industrial District.
   G.   Public Facilities District (P-F): This district is intended to
accommodate governmental, public recreational, public utility, public
educational, and institutional facilities. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-2-5: SPECIAL PURPOSE AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS:
   A.   Planned Unit Development District (PUD): Planned Unit Development (PUD)
is established as a supplemental zoning district that provides an alternative
to conventional development, and requires approval under the procedure in
section
10-6-4 of this title. The PUD provisions are established for one or more of the
following purposes:
      1.   To permit and encourage innovative land development while
maintaining appropriate limitation on the character and intensity of use and
assuring compatibility with adjoining and proximate properties;
      2.   To permit greater flexibility within the development to best utilize
the physical features of the particular site;
      3.   To encourage the provision and preservation of meaningful open
space;
      4.   To encourage integrated and unified design and function of the
various uses comprising the planned unit development; and
      5.   To encourage a more productive use of land consistent with the
public objectives and standards of accessibility, safety, infrastructure and
land use compatibility.
   B.   Downtown Overlay (DT): This district is intended to protect the
historic character of the downtown core. Efforts will be made to protect
existing historic structures and general character through rehabilitation and
adaptive use. New construction will be complementary to existing buildings in
terms of mass, scale, and height. Any necessary determinations shall be made
through the City's Governing Body and Planning and Zoning Commission. The
boundaries of this district shall be along Main Street from Fourth Street to
the west and First Street to the east and the adjoining two (2) blocks to the
north and south of Main Street.
   C.   Broadway Overlay (BW): This district is intended to protect the
historic character of the Broadway character specifically the protection of
specimen street trees and historic homes. This district serves as a transition
from higher intensity highway uses and the historic downtown. Uses may include
a variety of residential, office, retail, and commercial uses that will make
use of existing structures when possible with minimal impact on surrounding
residential areas. The boundaries of this district shall be all properties
within five hundred feet (500') of Broadway (U.S. Highway 81) from Chickasaw
Street to the south and Steele Street to the north to not disrupt the Downtown
Overlay (DT). (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 3
USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Table Of Allowed Uses
10-3-2: Use On Review Permit Standards
10-3-3: Accessory Uses And Structures
10-3-4: Temporary Uses And Structures
10-3-1: TABLE OF ALLOWED USES:
Table 3.1-1 of this section lists the principal uses allowed within all base
zoning districts. Each of the listed uses is defined in chapter 1 of this
title, definitions.
   A.   Explanation Of Table Abbreviations:
      1.   Permitted Uses: "P" in a cell indicates that the use is allowed by
right, without special conditions other than those imposed upon other uses by
right in the district. Permitted uses are subject to all other applicable
regulations of this title, including the specific use permit standards in this
chapter and the standards in chapter 5, "Development Standards", of this title.
      2.   Use On Review:
         a.   "R" in a cell indicates that, in the respective zoning district,
the use is allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the
procedures of section
10-6-5, "Use On Review Permits", of this title. Specific review uses are
subject to all other applicable regulations of this title, including the
specific use permit standards in this chapter and the requirements of chapter
5, "Development Standards", of this title. Specific use permit standards are
noted through a cross reference in the last column of the table.
         b.   The "R" designation in table 3.1-1 of this section in a given
district does not constitute an authorization or an assurance that such use
will be permitted. Rather, each specific use permit application shall be
evaluated as to its probable effect on adjacent properties and surrounding
areas, and may be approved or denied as the findings indicate appropriate.
      3.   Prohibited Uses: A blank cell indicates that the use is prohibited
in the respective zoning district.
   B.   Table Organization: In table 3.1-1 of this section, land uses and
activities are classified into general "use categories" and specific "use
types" based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics, such
as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how
goods or services are sold or delivered, and site conditions. This
classification provides a systematic basis for assigning present and future
land uses into appropriate zoning districts. This classification does not list
every use or activity that may appropriately exist within the categories, and
specific uses may be listed in one category when they may reasonably have been
listed in one or more other categories. The use categories are intended merely
as an indexing tool and are not regulatory.
   C.   Use For Other Purposes Prohibited: Approval of a use listed in table
3.1-1 of this section and compliance with the applicable specific use permit
standards for that use authorizes that use only. Development or use of a
property for any other use not specifically allowed in table 3.1-1 of this
section and approved under the appropriate process is prohibited.
   D.   Classification Of New And Unlisted Uses: It is recognized that new
types of land use will develop and forms of land use not anticipated may seek
to locate in the City. In order to provide for such situations, a determination
as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use
shall be made. When application is made for a use category or use type that is
not specifically listed in table 3.1-1 of this section, the procedure below
shall be followed.
      1.   The City Administrator shall provide an interpretation as to the
zoning classification into which such use should be placed. In making such
interpretation, the City Administrator shall consider its potential impacts,
including but not limited to: the nature of the use and whether it involves
dwelling activity; sales; processing; type of product, storage and amount, and
nature thereof; enclosed or open storage; anticipated employment;
transportation requirements; the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic
material, and vibration likely to be generated; and the general requirements
for public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer.
      2.   Appeal of the City Administrator's decision shall be made to the
Board of Adjustment following procedures under subsection
10-6-9A, "Appeals Of Administrative Decisions", of this title.
   E.   Uses Permitted In A Planned Unit Development: A PUD may include one or
more of the uses permitted by right or specific use permit within the general
zoning district or districts within which the PUD is located; provided however:
      1.   When located in whole or in part within any of the residential
districts (except R-MHC), the PUD may include one or more of the dwelling types
permitted within that residential district; and
      2.   The permitted uses, whether principal or accessory uses, may be
reallocated within the PUD irrespective of the general zoning district
boundaries pursuant to an outline development plan or amendment thereof
approved as provided in section
10-6-4 of this title.
   F.   Table Of Allowed Uses:
TABLE 3.1-1
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
 
Key:
 P = Permitted
 R = Use on Review
 
Use Category Use Type Zoning District
                      A-1 A-2 R-E R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-MHC C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 I-2 P-F
Residential uses:                                                 
                          Boarding, dormitory, and        R    R R   
                          rooming house
Group living              Convalescent home,
                          nursing home, or assisted R R R R R P P  R P P P  P
                          living facility
                          Group home                      R    R R   
                          Dwelling, duplex              P P R        
                          Dwelling, manufactured    R       R       
                          home
                          Dwelling, multi-family         R P  P P     
Household living          Dwelling, single-family       P P P        
                          attached
                          Dwelling, single-family   P P P P P R R        
                          detached
                          Manufactured home                R       
                          community
Public/institutional uses:                                        
                          Child care center              R R  P P P R  R
Child care facility       Day care center/nursery        R R  P P P R  R
                          Home day care             R R  R R          
                          Cemetery                  R R          R  P
                          Crematorium, without
                          funeral parlor or public             R P  
                          area
Community service         Government administration      R R  P P P P  P
                          and civic buildings
                          Municipal or community    P P  P P P P  P P R P R P
                          recreation center
                          Places of assembly        R R  R R R R  P P P R  P
                          Public safety facility         R R  P P P P P P
                          Art gallery or museum,    R R R R R R   P P P P  P
Cultural facility         public
                          Library, public           R R R R R R R  P P P R  P
                          College or university,             P P R  P
                          private school
Education                 Elementary                 R  R R R R  P P P   P
                          Middle school or high      R   R R R  P P P   P
                          school
                          Trade, vocational school           R P P P P
Health care facility      Hospital                           R P   P
                          Medical office or clinic        R  P P P   P
                          Arboretum or botanical    P P R R R R   R R    R
                          garden
Parks and open space      Campground/RV park        R        R      
                          Community playfields and  P P  P P R R  R R    P
                          parks
                          Broadcasting or recording         P P P R   
                          studio, no tower
Telecommunication         Tower (including any       P  R R R R R R P P P P P
facility                  facility with tower)
                          Transmitting station, no            R P P  
                          tower
                          Airport                               P R
Transportation facility   Bus and passenger train             R R P  
                          terminal
                          Heliport                              P  
                          Solar energy system       R R             
                          Utility facility, major              R P R
Utility                   Utility facility, minor             R R P P
                          Wind turbine/wind energy  R            R  
                          system
Commercial uses:                                                  
Agriculture               Agriculture               P P             
                          Animal pet shop, retail   P        P P R    
                          Animal training school            R P P P   
                          Kennel                            R P P P   
Animal sales and services Veterinary clinic/animal  P R       R P P P   
                          hospital
                          Veterinary clinic, large  P          R P P  
                          animal
                          Financial institution,            P P P    
Financial service         with drive-thru
                          Financial institution,            P P P    
                          without drive-thru
                          Bar/nightclub                     R R R    
                          Catering service                  P P P P   
                          Fruit and vegetable       P R       P P P    
                          market
Food and beverage service Restaurant, drive-in              P P P    
                          Restaurant, with drive-           P P P P   
                          thru
                          Restaurant, without               P P P P   
                          drive-thru
                          Office, business or               P P P P R  
Office                    professional
                          Research laboratory               R P P P R  
                          Dry cleaning and laundry          P P P    
                          services
Personal services         Funeral services                  P P P    
                          General personal services         P P P R   
                          Instructional services            P P P R   
                          Art gallery or museum,            P P P    
                          private
                          Fitness and recreational                
Recreation and            sports center
entertainment, indoor     General indoor recreation         R P P P   
                          Major entertainment               R P P    
                          facility
                          Movie theater                     P P P    
                          General outdoor           R R  R R R R  P P P   P
                          recreation
                          Golf course or driving            R P P P  R
                          range, lighted
                          Golf course or driving            R P P P   
Recreation and            range, unlighted
entertainment, outdoor    Major entertainment               R P P    
                          facility
                          RV campground/park                 R R R   
                          Race track (auto, dog, or          R R R   
                          horse)
                          Shooting range                     R R R R  
                          Zoo                                     
                          Alcoholic beverages,              R R R    
                          retail sale
                          Convenience store with    R        R P P    
                          gas sales
                          Horticulture nursery      P R       R P P P P  
Retail (sales)            sales
                          Open-air market or flea   R        R R R R   
                          market
                          Retail, general                   P P P R   
                          Retail, large                     R P P R   
                          Sexually oriented                   R R   
                          business
                          Boat and/or RV storage             R P R P  
                          Car wash                          R P P P P  
                          Gasoline services                 R R P R P  
                          Parking structure                 R R R    
Vehicles and equipment    Vehicle sales and rental          R P P P   
                          Vehicle service and
                          repair, minor (no outdoor         R P P P   
                          or limited storage of
                          vehicles unless screened)
Visitor accommodation     Bed and breakfast          R R  R R P  P P R    
                          Hotel or motel                    P P P    
Industrial uses:                                                  
                          Fossil fuel storage                  R P  
Industrial service        General industrial                   P P  
                          service
Manufacturing and         Assembly, light                      P P  
production                Manufacturing, heavy                  P  
                          Manufacturing, light                 P P  
                          Minerals and raw          P R  R R R R R R R R R P  
Mining and processing     materials
                          Oil and gas               P R  R R R R R R R R R P  
                          Mini-storage                       R R P P  
                          Motor freight terminal                P  
Warehouse and freight     Office warehouse                    R P P  
movement                  Storage yard                         S P  
                          Warehouse                           R P P  
                          Wholesale establishment             R P P  
                          Auto salvage yard                     P  
                          Recycling center (outdoor            R P  
Waste and salvage         or indoor)
                          Scrap operations                      R  
                          Solid waste disposal                  R  
 
(Ord. 420, 12-18-2017; amd. Ord. 433, 9-24-2019)
10-3-2: USE ON REVIEW PERMIT STANDARDS:
When reviewing requests for use on review permits, the Planning Commission may
require that the applicant furnish plans and data concerning the operation,
location, function, and characteristics of any use of land or building
proposed.
The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council that certain
safeguards and conditions concerning setbacks, ingress and egress, off-street
parking and loading arrangements, and location or construction of buildings and
uses and operation be required. The foregoing standards are considered to be
minimal. The Planning Commission may recommend additional standards and
conditions.
The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure
compliance with the intent of this title, require such development standards
and operational conditions and safeguards as are indicated to be important to
the welfare and protection of adjacent property and the community as a whole.
   A.   Residential uses:
      1.   Manufactured Homes In A-1 Districts: In the A-1 District,
manufactured homes are permissible on lots of at least five (5) acres in size.
      2.   Manufactured Home Communities/Mobile Home Park:
         a.   Access to the park/subdivision/community shall be from a major
street.
         b.   Manufactured/mobile homes shall set back at least fifty feet
(50') from all property lines.
      3.   Convalescent Home, Nursing Home, Or Assisted Living Facility: In the
A-1, A-2, R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts, the use shall abut a major street.
   B.   Public and institutional uses: (Section
10-3-1, table 3.1-1 of this chapter lists some of these uses with categories
such as personal services, recreation.)
      1.   Arboretum Or Botanical Garden:
         a.   In the R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts, the use shall abut a
major street.
         b.   No sales are allowed with this use, except through gift shops
that are approved accessory uses.
      2.   Art Gallery Or Museum: In the A-1, A-2, R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-
3 Districts, the use shall abut a major street.
      3.   Cemetery:
         a.   Cemeteries shall have a minimum net area of forty (40) acres.
         b.   All principal vehicular entrances and exits shall be on major
streets. Access lanes (i.e., acceleration and deceleration lanes) shall be
provided on all principal entrances.
         c.   Cemeteries may be permitted to have funeral homes or crematories
as accessory uses.
         d.   Structure or building line setbacks shall be one hundred feet
(100') from arterial streets and fifty feet (50') from non-major streets.
         e.   No gravesite shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of a
future street right-of-way.
      4.   Crematorium, Without Funeral Parlor Or Public Area:
         a.   All vehicular access shall be from a major street.
         b.   All buildings shall set back at least fifty feet (50') from all
property lines.
      5.   Library: In the A-1, A-2, R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts, the use
shall abut a major street.
      6.   Place Of Assembly: Any place of assembly use shall meet the
following standards:
         a.   Where an assembly use is originally approved by specific use or
PUD, any subsequent associated development that increases the intensity of the
use on the site by more than what has been approved shall require an amendment
to the specific use or PUD. For the purposes of this section, an increase in
intensity shall be measured as: 1) an increase in vehicular trips generated
and/or 2) an increase in impervious surface by five percent (5%) or more.
         b.   Developments designed to accommodate more than one gathering,
ceremony, or meeting within any two-hour window shall be required to provide
overflow parking spaces: one space for every two and one-half (21/2) persons of
maximum fire-rated occupancy in addition to the standard parking requirements
listed in section
10-5-3 of this title.
         c.   Places of assembly shall be located on a parcel with a minimum
net lot area of two (2) acres. No parking shall be permitted within a required
front yard or building line setback, within agriculture (A-1, A-2) or any
residential (R) zoning district.
      7.   Schools:
         a.   All colleges, universities, private schools, high schools and
trade schools shall have their principal vehicular entrance and exit on a major
street. Ingress and egress to local streets shall be prohibited. Elementary and
middle schools may have ingress and egress to local streets if it will not
cause adverse impacts on surrounding properties.
      8.   Child Care Centers: Child care centers and day care centers/
nurseries are permitted uses on review in the public facilities zoning
district.
   C.   Commercial uses:
      1.   Animal Hospitals, Animal Training School, Kennel, And Veterinary
Clinic: All such uses shall have their principal entrance and exit on a major
street and if serving large animals shall be located on land no less than five
(5) acres.
      2.   Recreational Vehicle Campground/Park: Applications for recreational
vehicle campgrounds/parks shall comply with and show the method of complying
with the following standards:
         a.   No trailer, RV, or other similar vehicle shall be allowed for
more than fourteen (14) days.
         b.   No trailer, RV, or other similar vehicle will be parked for sale
or display.
         c.   Only hard-surfaced roads shall be used throughout the grounds.
         d.   Each campground shall provide facilities for the appropriate
disposal of waste water, trash, and related items.
         e.   The following items shall be graphically shown on the
application:
            (1)   All RV pad locations.
            (2)   Pathways.
            (3)   Provisions for utility hookups.
            (4)   Parking facilities.
            (5)   Restroom facilities.
            (6)   Water/wastewater treatment facilities.
            (7)   Dumpster locations and provisions for other trash
receptacles.
            (8)   Playground facilities.
            (9)   Compliance with ADA guidelines.
            (10)   Landscaping.
            (11)   Lighting.
            (12)   Signage.
            (13)   Stormwater detention.
      3.   Recreation And Entertainment, Outdoor: All uses of this type
requiring a specific use permit shall abut a major street.
      4.   Vehicle Sales And Rental: Applications for vehicle sales and rental
shall comply with the following standards:
         a.   The minimum lot size shall be two and one-half (21/2) acres, and
the site shall have a minimum of two hundred feet (200') street frontage.
         b.   Such uses shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200')
from any residential district, school, hospital, park, government office, or
place of public assembly.
         c.   No outdoor speakers shall be allowed within five hundred feet
(500') of a residential area.
         d.   Vehicle sales and rental are discouraged in multitenant
commercial areas.
   D.   Industrial uses:
      1.   Assembly, Light: No outdoor storage or assembly is allowed.
      2.   Solid Waste Disposal: This use shall be approved in accordance to
State and Federal regulations and guidelines and shall be situated on land no
less than forty (40) acres.
      3.   Mini-Storage:
         a.   Building And Equipment Setbacks:
            (1)   A mini-storage facility shall be set back a minimum of
seventy five feet (75') from any arterial street or limited access highway
right-of-way.
            (2)   Mini-storage facilities shall meet the side and rear setbacks
required by the underlying zone district or development plan, as applicable.
         b.   Operational Requirements:
            (1)   The mini-storage facility shall have a security system
requiring the use of cards, keypads, keys or similar security devices limiting
access to tenants and to fire, police, and emergency service officials when
required.
            (2)   Self-storage units shall be used solely for the purpose of
storage of goods and possessions and shall not be used for conducting or
operating a business, hobby, or any type of activity not related to the storage
of personal property.
            (3)   No mini-storage unit shall be used for the storage of
explosives, ammunition or hazardous or flammable materials and the operator/
owner of a mini-storage facility shall include such requirement in its written
agreement with each tenant.
            (4)   No outdoor storage is permitted on the site of the mini-
storage facility.
      4.   Auto Salvage Yard:
         a.   Such uses shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200')
from any residential district, school, hospital, park, government office, or
place of public assembly.
         b.   All such uses shall be so screened by ornamental walls or opaque
fences that are at least eight feet (8') in height.
         c.   Provision shall be made to prevent any contamination of the
domestic water supply or excessive surface runoff from the property into
adjoining lands or streams. The drainage plan that carries water off the site
shall be subject to the approval of the City Administrator. (Ord. 420, 12-18-
2017; amd. Ord. 433, 9-24-2019)
10-3-3: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Purpose: This section authorizes the establishment of accessory uses
that are incidental and customarily subordinate to principal uses. An accessory
use is "incidental and customarily subordinate" to a principal use if it
complies with the standards set forth in this section.
   B.   Approval Of Accessory Uses And Structures: All principal uses allowed
in a zoning district shall be deemed to include those accessory uses,
structures, and activities typically associated with the use, unless
specifically prohibited in this title. All accessory uses shall be subject to
the standards in this section, as well as any specific use permit standards
applicable to the associated principal use as set forth in section
10-3-2 of this chapter.
   C.   General Standards: All accessory uses and structures shall comply with
the general standards in this subsection.
      1.   Compliance With This Title:
         a.   All accessory uses and structures shall be subject to the
dimensional requirements of chapter 4 of this title unless otherwise specified
in this title.
         b.   Accessory uses shall comply with all standards of this title
applicable to the principal use with which they are associated. Parking
requirements shall be met for both the principal use and any accessory use.
      2.   Dimensional Standards For Accessory Buildings And Structures:
         a.   Same Lot: The accessory use or structure shall be conducted and/
or located on the same lot(s) as the principal use.
         b.   Size:
            (1)   In the R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-E Districts, the maximum size of
any accessory building shall be no larger than the size of the original
dwelling unless otherwise approved by a use on review permit. No accessory
building shall be constructed until the construction of the main building has
been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used unless the
main building is also being used.
            (2)   In commercial and industrial districts, an accessory use
shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the building square footage
associated with the principal use.
      3.   Same Ownership Required: The principal use and the accessory use
shall be under the same ownership.
      4.   Same Utility Meter Required: The principal use and the accessory use
shall utilize the same utility meter with the exception of an approved
accessory dwelling unit.
      5.   Temporary Accessory Uses And Structures: Temporary accessory uses
and structures shall be governed by the temporary use permit procedures and
standards set forth in sections
10-6-7 of this title and 10-3-4 of this chapter.
   D.   Additional Standards For Specific Accessory Uses And Structures:
      1.   Home Occupations: A home occupation may be permitted as an accessory
use to a principal dwelling unit in any of the residential districts, provided
that:
         a.   Size/Area: The business or service is located within the existing
dwelling or an associated existing accessory building, and does not exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the combined floor area of the structures or five
hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less.
         b.   Employees And Residency: The principal person or persons
providing the business or service shall reside in the dwelling on the premises.
The home occupation shall employ no more than one person who does not reside on
the premises.
         c.   Neighborhood Compatibility:
            (1)   All vehicles used in connection with the home occupation
shall be of a size, and located on the premises in such a manner, so as to not
disrupt the quiet nature and visual quality of the neighborhood, and there
shall be no more than two (2) vehicles per home occupation.
            (2)   There shall be sufficient off-street parking for patrons of
the home occupation, with the number of off-street parking spaces required for
the home occupation to be provided and maintained in addition to the space or
spaces required for the dwelling itself pursuant to section
10-5-3, "Off-Street Parking And Loading", of this title.
            (3)   No additional parking areas other than driveways shall be
located in the required front setback.
            (4)   There shall be no advertising devices on the property, or
other signs of the home occupation, which are visible from outside the dwelling
or accessory building.
            (5)   The property shall contain no outdoor display or storage of
goods or services that are associated with the home occupation.
            (6)   Wholesale or retail sales of goods shall not occur on the
premises.
            (7)   The home occupation shall not create traffic or parking
congestion, noise, vibration, odor, glare, fumes, or electrical or
communications interference that can be detected by the normal senses off the
premises, including visual or audible interference with radio or television
reception.
         d.   Prohibited Home Occupations: The following uses, because of their
impacts on the surrounding residential area, shall not be permitted as home
occupations: auto repair or motorized implement repair; dance, music or other
types of instruction (if more than 4 students are being instructed at one
time); dental offices; medical offices; the painting of vehicles, trailers or
boats; private schools with organized classes; motor vehicle towing operation;
barber shops having more than one chair, beauty shops having more than one
chair; welding shops; convalescent/nursing homes; bed and breakfast and other
such transient lodging; plumbing, electrical or HVAC operations where more than
one signed vehicle is involved.
      2.   Swimming Pools And Associated Equipment: Swimming pools may be
placed in rear yards and rear building line areas upon approval and issuance of
a building permit in any agricultural (A) or residential (R) districts. No
swimming pool, nor any part of it, inclusive of decks and equipment, shall be
placed in any utility easement, or drainage easement. No swimming pool, nor any
part of it, shall be closer than five feet (5') of any property line. All
aboveground swimming pools shall be at least twenty five feet (25') from any
major street.
      3.   Storage Buildings/Accessory Structure: Storage buildings/accessory
structures may be placed in rear yards in any agricultural (A) or residential
(R) districts, but shall be located at least five feet (5') from the rear and
side property lines. No part of the building, however, shall be located within
a utility easement. All buildings (permanent or temporary) are subject to a
review through the City's building permit process.
      4.   Outdoor Display And Sales: Outdoor display and/or sale may be
allowed as an accessory use for all commercial uses. It is the intent of this
title to allow the display of merchandise for sale, but not where the display
of such items impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or creates
an unsafe condition. The display of goods shall meet all of the following
requirements:
         a.   Procedural Requirement: Outdoor display and/or sale shall require
approval of the City Administrator or designee. All new site plans must show
the location of such areas in accordance with this section. Existing
nonresidential uses must submit a plan showing the location of the outdoor
display or sales areas and how the requirements of this section are to be met.
Approval may be subject to appropriate conditions by the City Administrator or
designee.
         b.   Where Permitted With Approval:
            (1)   All outdoor display of goods shall be located immediately
adjacent to the storefront and not in drive aisles, loading zones, fire lanes,
or parking lots.
            (2)   The area used for outdoor display or sales shall not occur on
the sides and rear of buildings and shall be limited to no more than one-half
(1/2) of the length of the storefront, unless increased by the City
Administrator or designee after taking into account aesthetic and safety
concerns or other relevant factors. In the case of a shopping center, the
"storefront" shall include the entire frontage of the shopping center, meaning
that the total amount of display for all the in-line tenants combined shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the aggregate storefront of the overall shopping
center.
            (3)   The area of outdoor display or sales shall not encompass the
width of the entrance doors to the facility as projected straight out from the
facility. For example, if the width of the entrance doors is ten feet (10'),
then there shall be at least a ten foot (10') clearance from the doors as
projected straight out and away from the facility.
            (4)   No goods shall be attached to a building's wall surface.
            (5)   The height of the outdoor display shall not exceed six feet
(6'), unless an exception to this provision has been granted by the City
Administrator.
            (6)   The outdoor display area shall take place on an improved
surface such as the sidewalk or pavement, and be clearly marked by a
contrasting paint color.
            (7)   No outdoor displays shall be allowed in required landscape
areas.
         c.   No Pedestrian Obstruction: At least five feet (5') along the
parking lot side of the display shall be maintained free of obstruction to
allow for pedestrian and handicap movement, such that handicapped pedestrians
and others do not have to enter the parking lot or drive aisle to walk around
the display.
      5.   Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage may be allowed as an accessory use
through the site plan review process and subject to compliance with the
following requirements:
         a.   Each outdoor storage area shall be incorporated into the overall
design of the primary structure on the site and shall be located at the rear of
the primary structure.
         b.   Goods stored in an approved outdoor storage area shall be limited
to those sold on the premises as part of an associated primary use.
         c.   No materials may be stored in areas intended for vehicular or
pedestrian circulation.
         d.   If installed, exterior lighting shall meet the functional needs
of the facility without adversely affecting adjacent properties or the
neighborhood. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-3-4: TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Purpose: This section allows for the establishment of certain temporary
uses of limited duration, provided that a temporary use permit, if required, is
properly obtained pursuant to subsection
10-6-7B of this title and provided that the temporary use complies with the
standards of this section and that applicant pays the required fee.
   B.   Temporary Uses Allowed: The following temporary uses are allowed
provided they comply with the general standards of subsection D of this
section:
      1.   Retail sales of products, including but not limited to, Christmas
trees, nursery products or agricultural produce, in any nonresidential district
for a period not to exceed the number of days specified in the temporary use
permit. Display of products need not comply with the yard and setback
requirements of this title provided that no display shall be located within an
area restricted by the vision clearance area requirements of chapter 4 of this
title.
      2.   Temporary office space and equipment storage when accessory to an
approved construction project. Such uses shall be located on the site no more
than thirty (30) days prior to the start of construction and removed no more
than thirty (30) days after completion of such project.
      3.   Sales offices on residential development sites in any zoning
district until all lots or houses are sold or leased. Use of the sales office
for sites outside of the project is prohibited.
      4.   Expansion or replacement facilities, consisting of transportable
buildings (excluding manufactured or mobile homes) that are pre-constructed and
arrive at the site ready for occupancy and are readily removed and installed at
other sites. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to the following:
         a.   Expansion of existing religious assembly facilities, health care
facilities, and government offices following the approval of filed plans and
applications for the permanent alteration/expansion of these facilities.
         b.   Temporary classroom space for existing schools.
         c.   Temporary office space for construction and security personnel
during the construction of an approved development for which a grading or
building permit has been issued.
         d.   Temporary space for a nonresidential use following the
destruction of a building by fire or other catastrophic event and/or during
remodel/rehabilitation construction.
         e.   Temporary office space (1 per site) for hiring, membership
solicitation, apartment office/leasing, and general office use following the
issuance of a building permit for the construction of a permanent office
building.
      5.   Temporary space for residential accessory use following the
destruction of a building by fire, catastrophic event and/or remodel/
rehabilitation efforts. This includes, but is not limited to, storage
containers (i.e., POD type containers) or trash containers (i.e., dumpsters)
where such container:
         a.   Is stored outside, along street-rights-of-way and utility
easements.
         b.   Such container may be onsite no more than ten (10) days prior to
the start of reconstruction and no more than ten (10) days after reconstruction
is completed.
         c.   The container may be permitted no longer than one hundred eighty
(180) days, or for the life of a valid building permit, whichever ends first.
         d.   In no case will said container be placed in any sight-triangle or
interfere with traffic visibility, or block any sidewalk area.
         e.   Where conditions preclude placement out of the right-of-way,
these types of containers may be placed at the curb-edge with written approval
from City Administrator.
         f.   Storage containers or trash receptacles shall not exceed eight
feet (8') in width, nor twenty feet (20') in length, nor eight feet (8') in
height.
      6.   Temporary storage space for residential accessory use, when a
residence is being vacated or being prepared for occupancy. The owner may apply
for a temporary use permit for one storage container (i.e., POD type container
or 1 trash enclosure, i.e., dumpster), as follows:
         a.   Temporary storage use shall not exceed thirty (30) days.
         b.   Storage unit (POD) shall be located on private property or
driveway only.
         c.   Storage unit shall be located on paved surface only. In no case
shall this unit be placed in a landscape or grass area.
         d.   In no case shall the storage unit be placed within any sight-
triangle or interfere with traffic or driveway visibility, or block any
sidewalk.
         e.   Storage containers or trash receptacles shall not exceed eight
feet (8') in width, nor twenty feet (20') in length, nor eight feet (8') in
height.
      7.   The City Administrator may approve other temporary uses or
structures using the process established in subsection
10-3-1D, "Classification Of New And Unlisted Uses", of this chapter.
   C.   Temporary Use Permits:
      1.   Permit Required: All temporary uses and structures shall obtain a
temporary use permit pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection
10-6-7B of this title. A temporary use permit shall be reviewed, approved, or
revoked only in accordance with the regulations of subsection
 10-6-7B of this title and this section.
      2.   Permit Exemptions: Notwithstanding subsection C1 of this section,
the following temporary uses are deemed approved in any district and do not
have to obtain a temporary use permit, provided that the proposed temporary use
complies with the general requirements in subsection D of this section:
         a.   Events utilizing City property, public streets, or public rights-
of-way, provided that the applicant shall coordinate the event with the Special
Events Coordinator and comply with any conditions required by the Police and
Fire Departments;
         b.   Up to seven (7) one-day garage or yard sales per year per
dwelling unit;
         c.   Temporary car washes lasting no more than seven (7) days per
year;
         d.   Gatherings of less than one hundred (100) people, such as block
parties, nonprofit bazaars, and fundraisers; and
         e.   Temporary uses that occur wholly within an enclosed permanent
building.
   D.   General Requirements For All Temporary Uses And Structures: All
temporary uses or structures shall meet the following general requirements,
unless otherwise specified in this title:
      1.   Permanent alterations to the site are prohibited.
      2.   Unless otherwise stated in this title or in the terms of the
temporary use permit, the temporary use shall expire thirty (30) days after
approval of the temporary use permit.
      3.   All temporary signs associated with the temporary use or structure
shall be removed when the activity ends. All signage must be pre-approved.
      4.   The temporary use or structure shall not violate any applicable
conditions of approval that apply to a principal use on the site.
      5.   The temporary use standards of this section do not exempt the
applicant or operator from any other required permits, such as Health
Department permits.
      6.   If the property is undeveloped, it shall contain sufficient land
area to allow the temporary use or structure to occur, as well as any parking
and traffic movement that may be associated with the temporary use.
      7.   If the property is developed, the temporary use shall be located in
an area that is not actively used by an existing approved principal use, and
that would support the proposed temporary use without encroaching or creating a
negative impact on existing buffers, open space, landscaping, traffic
movements, pedestrian circulation, or parking space availability.
      8.   Tents and other temporary structures shall be located not to
interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use located on the
property. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 4
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Table Of Dimensional Standards
10-4-2: Measurements And Exceptions
10-4-1: TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS:
This section contains tables that list the requirements for lot dimensions and
building bulk, density, location, and height for all types of development. All
primary and accessory structures are subject to the dimensional standards set
forth in the following tables. These general standards may be further limited
or modified by other applicable sections of this title. General rules for
measurement and exceptions are in section
10-4-2 of this chapter.
   A.    Agricultural District Standards:
TABLE 4.1-1
DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY STANDARDS - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
 
                     Lot Dimensions   Minimum Setbacks (Ft.)
                             Minimum                  Side     Side        Maximum
District Use         Lot     Lot      Front Rear      Abutting Abutting    Height
                     Area    Frontage (Ft.) (Ft.)     Property Property In (Ft.)
                             (Ft.)                    In Same  Residential
                                                      District District
         Agriculture 10      300      None  None      None     25          75
                     acres
                                            50 ft.,
         Single                             or 20% of
A-1      family      5 acres 200      50    lot       25       50          50
         detached                           depth,
                                            whichever
                                            is less
         Other uses  10      300      50    25        25       50          501
                     acres
                     Minimum                50 ft.,
                     1/                     or 20% of
         Single      2 acre                 lot
A-2      family             150      50    depth,    15       25          50
         detached    Maximum                whichever
                     20                     is less
                     acres
         Other uses  5 acres 200      50    50        25       25          50
 
Note:
   1.    The maximum height of all uses other than dwellings may be increased
by 1 foot for every additional foot in setback provided beyond the minimum
front setback requirement.
   B.   Residential District Standards:
TABLE 4.1-2
DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY STANDARDS - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 
             Lot Dimensions      Minimum Setback Requirements
                                                  Side -
             Minimum   Minimum                    Corner Or
District Use Lot       Lot       Front  Side -    Adjacent             Maximum
             Area (Sq. Frontage  (Ft.)  Interior  To Public Rear (Ft.) Height
             Ft.)      (Ft.)1           (Ft.)     Street/
                                                  Alley
                                                  (Ft.)
R-E Single-family          21,780                60 50 10 15 20 35
    Other uses             43,560                70 50 10 15 20 50
R-1 Single-family detached 10,000                60 25 5  10 10 35
    Other uses             12,000                70 25 5  10 10 50
    Single-family detached 8,000                 45 25 5  10 10 35
R-2 Duplex                 8,000 (4,000 per DU)  60 25 5  10 10 35
    Other uses             12,000                70 25 5  10 10 50
    Single-family detached 7,000                 45 25 5  10 10 35
R-3 Duplex                 7,000 (3,500 per DU)  60 25 5  10 10 35
    Other uses             12,000                50 25 5  10 10 50
    Single-family detached 4,500 (4,000 per DU)  35 25 5  10 10
R-4 Duplex                 8,000 (4,000 per DU)  50 25 5  10 10 See note 2
    Multi-family           22,000 (2,300 per DU) 70 25 5  10 10
    Other uses             22,000                50 25 5  10 10
 
Notes:
   1.    The frontage of any wedge-shaped lot that meets the requirements of
minimum lot sizes may be less than the minimum lot frontage requirements of
this table, so long as the applicable minimum lot frontage requirement is met
at the front building line. Lots must have at least 30 feet of frontage at the
front property line.
   2.    No height restriction unless abutting single-family detached
residential. When abutting single-family detached residential, building shall
be set back 2 feet for every foot in height above 35 feet.
   C.   Manufactured Home Community/Mobile Home Park District Standards:
TABLE 4.1-3
DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY STANDARDS - MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
 
         Minimum Tract Requirements5                        Minimum Lot Requirements4
                      Minimum Width   Building Setback            Setback  Separation
               Area                                From           From             From
District Total Per    Principal Else- From Public  Side And Area  Internal Between Boundary
         Area  Mobile Entrance  where Thoroughfare Rear           Street   Mobile  Of
               Home2                               Boundary       Or       Homes   Mobile
                                                   Lines3         Drive6           Home Lot
         1     4,000            100                         4,000
R-MHC    acre1 sq.    50 ft.    ft.   35 ft.       25 ft.   sq.   20 ft.   12 ft.  15 ft.
               ft.                                          ft.
 
Notes:
   1.    The park or subdivision will be on a minimum 1 acre lot with adequate
drainage, and approved water and sewer service. The park or subdivision will
not contain more than 8 manufactured units per acre.
   2.    There shall be 2,500 square feet of common space for each acre or
major fraction of acreage in the park.
   3.    A greenbelt or solid fence is required along all exterior lot lines.
Fencing must meet all adopted fencing regulations and guidelines. Greenbelts in
width not less than side yard requirements for an adjoining residential
district consisting of 1 or more rows of plants not more than 4 feet apart
which shall be maintained at a minimum of not less than 6 feet in height and a
maximum of not more than 12 feet in height; and the same growth requirements
shall apply when greenbelts are adjacent to non-residential districts. In no
case will the fence or greenbelt deter from sight of oncoming or turning
traffic in the area of the manufactured/mobile home park/community.
   4.    Each manufactured home/mobile home shall be anchored and have
underpinning of a material as required by the Building Code adopted by the City
of Marlow. Travel trailers or RVs shall not be permitted in this zone as a
primary residence.
   5.    A site plan showing the details of development shall be submitted for
approval upon compliance with additional conditions imposed by the Planning
Commission and/or City Council to implement the intent of this title.
   6.    All home spaces shall be accessible by an interior roadway at least 30
feet wide, paved at least 20 feet in width with unobstructed access to a public
street.
   D.   Nonresidential District Standards:
TABLE 4.1-4
DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY STANDARDS - NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 
         Lot Dimensions     Minimum Setbacks (Ft.)
                                                Side        Side Or
                  Minimum              Side     Abutting    Rear        Maximum
District          Lot                  Abutting Property In Abutting    Height
         Lot Area Frontage  Front Rear Property Non-        Property In (Ft.)
                  (Ft.)1               In Same  Residential A-2 Or
                                       District District    Residential
                                                            District
C-1 None           None         None         None    10             50 ft. or 4
                                                                    stories
                                                     1 story: 50
                                                     ft.
                                                      
                                                     Greater than 1
                                                     story and less
                                                     than 75 ft.
C-2 None           100          50           30 0 30 tall: 75 ft.   None
                                                      
                                                     Over 75 ft.
                                                     tall: minimum
                                                     distance is
                                                     equal to
                                                     building
                                                     height
    Minimum 12,000
    sq. ft.                                                         50 ft. or 4
C-3               100          30           20 0 30 30             stories
    Maximum: 2.49
    acres
    Minimum 12,000 50 (100 if   25 (50 if
I-1 sq. ft.        fronts State fronts State 30 0 20 50             See note 1
                   highway)     highway)
    Minimum 21,780 50 (100 if   25 (50 if
I-2 sq. ft. (1/    fronts State fronts State 30 0 50 50             See note 1
    2 acre)        highway)     highway)
P-F None           None         20           20 0 20 30             None
 
Note:
   1.    No height restriction unless abutting A-2 or residential zoning
district. When abutting an A-2 or residential district, building shall be set
back an additional 2 feet for every foot in height above 50 feet.
(Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-4-2: MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Setbacks:
      1.   General Setback Requirements:
         a.   Required Setbacks:
            (1)   Setbacks shall be unoccupied and unobstructed by any
structure or portion of a structure from thirty inches (30") above grade
upward; provided, however, that fences, walls, trellises, poles, posts,
ornaments, furniture and other customary yard accessories may be permitted in
any setback subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction
of visibility.
            (2)   A building, structure, or lot shall not be developed, used,
or occupied unless it meets the minimum setback requirements set forth in
section
10-4-1 of this chapter for the zoning district in which it is located, except
as otherwise established in this title or unless a variance has been granted.
            (3)   A setback or other open space required by this title shall
not be included as part of a setback or other open space required by this title
for another building or structure or lot.
         b.   Projections Into Required Setbacks, General: The following
structures may project into required front, side or rear setbacks as specified
in this subsection, and shall not be considered in determining lot coverage:
            (1)   Paved terraces. Paved terraces may project into any required
setback, provided that no structures placed there shall violate other
requirements of this title and are at least five feet (5') from the lot line.
            (2)   Unroofed landings, decks, bay windows, stairs and balconies.
Unroofed landings, decks, bay windows, and stairs may project into required
setbacks, provided that no portion other than a handrail shall extend higher
than thirty inches (30") above the finished grade level. Unroofed balconies may
project into a required side or rear yard provided these projections are at
least five feet (5') from the lot line.
            (3)   Incidental architectural features. Cornices, awnings, eaves,
canopies, sunshades, gutters and downspouts, flues, belt courses, headers,
sills, lintels, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features
may project not more than two feet (2') into any required yard.
            (4)   Roofs over porches and other exterior approaches. Roofs over
porches, stairways, landings, terraces, or other exterior approaches to
pedestrian doorways may encroach up to five feet (5') into a front setback,
provided that, where such roof projections encroach within the setback, the
roof projections shall comprise no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
length of the building's facade. The covered porch or entrance area encroaching
into the setback shall remain exterior to the building and enclosed by no more
than a railing.
            (5)   Projections into easements and rights-of-way prohibited.
Projections shall not extend or encroach into any easement(s) or right(s)-of-
way except through license agreements.
            (6)   Handicap ramps. The City Administrator may allow the
installation of handicap access ramps in required front, side, and rear
setbacks.
            (7)   Private carports. The City Administrator may allow a private
carport to project into a required rear yard/back yard setback, in accordance
with other requirements of this title provided that the projection would not
result in trespass from one property to another.
         c.   Contextual Front Setbacks: The following exceptions to the front
setback requirements for dwellings abutting local streets, not collector or
arterial streets, are authorized for a lot in any district. (See illustration
4.1 of this subsection A1c.)
            (1)   If there are dwellings on both abutting lots with front
setbacks of less than the required depth for the district, the front setback of
the lot need not exceed the average front setback of the abutting dwellings.
            (2)   If there is a dwelling on one abutting lot with a front
setback of less than the required depth for the district, the front setback for
the lot need not exceed a depth one-half (1/2) way between the setback of the
abutting lot and the required front setback depth.
ILLUSTRATION 4.1
CONTEXTUAL FRONT SETBACKS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1735.png]
 
(The required front district setback in the illustration is 25 feet, shown by
the dotted line. There are existing houses on sites A, C, and E. A house built
on site B may have a front setback of just 15 feet, which is the average of the
front setbacks of the 2 abutting lots. A house built on site D may have a front
setback of 20 feet, which is half-way between the front setback on the abutting
lot that is lower than the district requirement (Lot C) and the required front
setback.)
         d.   Double-Frontage Lots: In the case of double-frontage lots, front
setbacks shall be provided on all frontages, unless the prevailing front
setback pattern on adjoining lots allows for an exception under the contextual
front setback provision above.
         e.   Corner Sight Distance (aka Sight Or Vision Clearance Triangle):
On any corner lot on which a front and side yard are required, no wall, fence,
structure, sign, or any plant growth that obstructs sight lines at elevations
between two and one-half feet (21/2') and six feet (6') above any portion of
the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be maintained in a triangle formed by
measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot
lines a distance of twenty five feet (25') along the front and side lot lines
and connecting the points so established to form a right triangle on the area
of the lot adjacent to the street intersection.
   B.   Height:
      1.   Height Requirements Generally: No building shall be erected or
altered that will exceed the height limit for the respective zoning district,
unless otherwise provided in subsection B2 of this section or elsewhere in this
title.
      2.   Fire Protection And Suppression Systems:
         a.   No building or structure shall be erected or altered in any
district, not including the industrial districts, which will exceed two (2)
stories or thirty five feet (35') in vertical height above the mean lot
elevation, without the installation of an approved fire protection and
suppression system as established in the current, adopted codes of the City of
Marlow, Oklahoma.
         b.   No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered in
any industrial zoning district that will exceed three (3) stories or fifty feet
(50') above the mean lot elevation without the installation of an approved fire
protection and suppression system as established in the current, adopted codes
of the City of Marlow, Oklahoma.
      3.   Height Exceptions For Appurtenances: Except as specifically provided
elsewhere in this title, the height limitations contained in this title do not
apply to cupolas, flagpoles, chimneys, heating and ventilation equipment,
elevator housings, stairwell towers or similar appurtenances; provided,
however, the following:
         a.   The appurtenance does not interfere with Federal Aviation
Regulations;
         b.   The appurtenance does not extend more than twenty five feet (25')
above the maximum permitted building height, except for flagpoles, and church
belfries that must be of greater height in order to function;
         c.   The appurtenance is not constructed for the purpose of providing
additional floor area in the building;
      4.   Height Exceptions For Religious Assembly Uses: The steeple, bell
tower, minaret, spire or comparable structure associated with a particular
religious assembly shall not be prohibited by the height restrictions of
section
10-4-1 of this chapter, provided that:
         a.   The identified structure is structurally attached as part of the
primary building;
         b.   The identified structure is not habitable higher than the
permitted zoning height requirement for the rest of the structure;
         c.   The identified structure is of the type commonly associated
either with the call to worship or the identity of the congregation;
         d.   The identified structure contains no symbols or words or similar
items on its outer surface that are not associated with worship;
         e.   The construction plans for the identified structure shall be
structurally engineered and the plans signed and sealed by a licensed
structural engineer; and
         f.   The apex of the identified structure does not exceed one hundred
feet (100') above the finished grade elevation at the base of the structure.
The City Council expressly finds this provision is an accommodation that is
reasonably necessary by virtue of State and Federal legislation (commonly
called RLUIPA) intended to balance religious liberties with government
regulations such as Zoning and Building Codes. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-5-1: General Provisions
10-5-2: Transportation And Access
10-5-3: Off-Street Parking And Loading
10-5-4: Signs
10-5-5: District-Specific Standards
10-5-6: Telecommunication Towers
10-5-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The standards in this chapter apply to the physical layout and
design of development in Marlow. These provisions address the physical
relationship between development and adjacent properties, public streets,
neighborhoods, and the natural environment, in order to implement the
Comprehensive Plan vision for a more attractive, efficient, and livable
community. The specific purposes of this chapter include:
      1.   To strengthen and protect the image, identity, and unique character
of Marlow and thereby to enhance its business economy;
      2.   To protect and enhance residential neighborhoods, commercial
districts, and other areas by encouraging physical development that is of high
quality and is compatible with the character, scale, and function of its
surrounding area;
      3.   To preserve the quality of life by creating meaningful open space
and providing buffers between incompatible uses and along roadways; and
      4.   To provide appropriate standards to ensure a high quality appearance
for Marlow and promote good design while also allowing flexibility,
individuality, creativity, and artistic expression.
   B.   Applicability: The standards of this chapter apply to all development
within the jurisdiction of this title, unless specifically exempted by the
terms of this chapter. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-5-2: TRANSPORTATION AND ACCESS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to support the creation of a
highly connected transportation system within the City in order to provide
choices for drivers, bicyclists, and pedestrians; increase effectiveness of
Municipal service delivery; promote walking and bicycling; connect
neighborhoods to each other and to local destinations such as employment,
schools, parks, and shopping centers; reduce vehicle miles of travel and travel
times; improve air quality; reduce emergency response times; mitigate the
traffic impacts of new development; and free up arterial capacity to better
serve regional long-distance travel needs.
   B.   Streets And On-Site Vehicular Circulation:
      1.   Street Standards: All streets shall meet the standards and
requirements of the Marlow subdivision regulations.
      2.   Street Connectivity:
         a.   Purpose: Street and block patterns should include a clear
hierarchy of well-connected streets that distribute traffic over multiple
streets in order to avoid traffic congestion on principal routes. Within each
residential development, the access and circulation system should accommodate
the safe, efficient, and convenient movement of vehicles, bicycles, and
pedestrians through the development and provide ample opportunities for linking
adjacent neighborhoods, properties, and land uses. Local neighborhood street
systems are intended to provide multiple direct connections to and between
local destinations such as parks, schools, and shopping. These connections
should knit separate developments together rather than form barriers between
them.
         b.   Connections To Vacant Land: Where new development is adjacent to
vacant land, all streets, pedestrian and bicycle paths, and access ways in the
development's proposed street system shall continue through to the boundary
lines of the area to provide for the orderly subdivision of such adjacent land
or the transportation and access needs of the community. At least two (2)
points of access shall be provided per half mile.
         c.   Street Access: No principal building or a residence shall be
constructed on a lot that does not abut a public street, except in a PUD or
other development in which a property owner's or homeowner's corporation is
chartered with responsibility for maintenance and other concerns related to
private access ways. The frontage of such a lot in which the principal building
or residence is constructed shall not be less than that required for that
district.
      3.   Access Onto Major Streets And Highways:
         a.   The centerline of driveways onto major streets and highways shall
be located as far as the lot width permits from street intersections, and at
least two hundred fifty feet (250') away from the centerline of the
intersecting street.
         b.   For nonresidential and multifamily developments, the number of
driveways per lot along major street frontage shall be not more than one per
three hundred feet (300') of lot width. All curb cuts shall be spaced at least
two hundred fifty feet (250') apart, centerline-to-centerline. In addition, the
centerline of the access point shall either align with or be offset at least
two hundred feet (200') from any access points on the opposite side of the
major street or highway when a raised center median within the major street or
highway is not present. The number of driveways along highway frontage shall be
limited to one per one hundred fifty feet (150') of lot width.
         c.   Ingress or egress from any single-family or two-family
residential lots to any major street or highway shall be in accordance with the
Subdivision Code. Whenever feasible, all single-family residential lots shall
have direct thoroughfare access only from minor residential streets.
         d.   Access points shall be located at the time of site plan submittal
for each tract or lot.
      4.   Residential Streets: Minor residential streets shall be so laid out
that the use by through traffic will be discouraged. Traffic calming techniques
such as curvilinear alignments, "T" intersections, traffic circles, and street
offsets are encouraged to reduce speeds and cut-through traffic.
      5.   Residential Connectivity: Residential developments with more than
twenty (20) dwelling units shall include a minimum of two (2) separate points
of access that lead to two (2) separate locations on a major street(s) or
highway. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-5-3: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Purpose: This section is intended to provide for the location and
design of off-street parking areas to accommodate motor vehicles, while
balancing the needs of pedestrians, and bicyclists. Parking areas are secondary
and supportive to the primary land uses on the site, and parking lot design
should emphasize the primary facade and orient pedestrians toward the principal
entranceways and walkways.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   Generally:
         a.   The off-street parking and loading standards of this section
shall apply to all parking lots and parking structures accessory to any new
building constructed and to any new use established in every district.
         b.   The requirements of this section shall apply to all temporary
parking lots and parking lots that are the principal use on a site.
      2.   Expansions And Enlargements: Where an existing parking area is
altered or expanded to increase the number of spaces to a total of more than
twenty (20), the standards of this section shall apply.
      3.   Downtown Overlay District Exempted: Off-street parking is not
required for uses in the DT District.
   C.   Computation Of Parking And Loading Requirements:
      1.   Fractions: When measurements of the number of required spaces result
in a fractional number, any fraction shall be rounded up to the next higher
whole number.
      2.   Multiple Uses: Lots containing more than one use shall provide
parking and loading in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all
uses, unless otherwise modified by the parking alternatives in subsection G of
this section.
      3.   Area Measurements: Unless otherwise specified, all square footage-
based parking and loading standards shall be computed on the basis of gross
floor area of the use in question. Structured parking within a building shall
not be counted in such measurement.
      4.   Computation Of Off-Street Parking: Required off-street loading
spaces shall not be included as off-street parking spaces in computation of
required off-street parking spaces.
      5.   Parking For Unlisted Uses: Parking requirements for uses not
specifically listed in table 5.3-1 of this section shall be determined by the
City Administrator based on the requirements for the closest comparable use.
The City Administrator may alternately require the submittal of a parking
demand study that justifies estimates of parking demand based on the
recommendations of the Institute of Transportation Engineers, and includes
relevant data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same or
comparable to the proposed use in terms of density, scale, bulk, area, type of
activity, and location.
      6.   Approval Required: Listed uses in the tables in this section does
not indicate acceptance of use by the City, its staff or any board, council or
commission.
   D.   Off-Street Parking Requirements:
      1.   Schedule A: Unless otherwise expressly stated in this title, off-
street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with table 5.3-1 of this
subsection (does not constitute approval):
TABLE 5.3-1
OFF-STREET PARKING SCHEDULE A
 
Use Category Use Type Minimum Parking Spaces Required
Residential uses:                                      
                          Boarding, dormitory, and    1 per bed
                          rooming house
                                                      1 per 2 beds/rooms
                          Convalescent home, nursing  (whichever is greater),
Group living              home, or assisted living    plus 1 space per 2
                          facility                    employees on largest
                                                      shift
                                                      1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per
                          Group home                  100 square feet of
                                                      assembly area
                          Dwelling, duplex            2 per unit
                          Dwelling, mobile/           2 per unit
                          manufactured home
                          Dwelling, multifamily       2 per unit
                          Dwelling, single-family     2 per unit
                          attached
                          Dwelling, single-family     2 per unit
                          detached
Household living          Dwelling, zero lot line     2 per unit
                                                      2 per unit (include
                          Mobile/manufactured home    visitor parking - 2
                          park                        spaces per 3 mobile
                                                      homes)
                                                      2 per unit (include
                          Mobile/manufactured home    visitor parking - 2
                          subdivision                 spaces per 3 mobile
                                                      homes)
Public/institutional uses:                             
                                                      1 per 400 square feet
                          Child care center           plus 1 additional space
                                                      for pickup and delivery
                                                      of children
                                                      1 per 400 square feet
Child care facility       Day care center/nursery     plus 1 additional space
                          school                      for pickup and delivery
                                                      of children
                                                      2 per dwelling unit plus
                          Home day care               1 space for day care
                                                      patrons
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Cemetery                    "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                          Crematorium, without        1 space per 400 square
                          funeral parlor or public    feet of office area
                          area
                          Government administration   1 per 300 square feet of
Community service         and civic buildings         building area
                          Municipal or community      1 per 300 square feet of
                          recreation center           building area
                                                      1 per 4 seats in meeting
                          Place of assembly           area or 1 per 100 square
                                                      feet in meeting area
                                                      without seats
                          Public safety facility      1 per 300 square feet of
                                                      building area
                          Art gallery or museum,      1 per 400 square feet of
Cultural facility         public                      building area
                          Library, public             1 per 300 square feet of
                                                      building area
                          College or university,      1 per 400 square feet of
                          private school              building area
                          Elementary school           1 per 800 square feet of
Education                                             building area
                          Middle school or high       1 per 400 square feet of
                          school                      building area
                          Trade school                1 per each 2 students,
                                                      based on design capacity
                                                      1 per 2 beds plus 1 space
                          Hospital                    per 300 square feet of
Health care facility                                  office area
                          Medical office or clinic    1 per 250 square feet of
                                                      building area
                          Arboretum or botanical      1 per 300 square feet of
                          garden                      gross area
                                                      1 per camp site plus 1
Parks and open space      Campground/RV park          per employee on largest
                                                      shift
                          Community playfields and    See subsection D3,
                          parks                       "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                          Broadcasting or recording   1 per 300 square feet of
                          studio (no tower)           building area
Telecommunication         Tower (including any        No parking requirement
facility                  facility with tower)
                          Transmitting station (no    1 per 200 square feet of
                          tower)                      building area
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Airport                     "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                          Bus and passenger train     See subsection D3,
Transportation facility   terminal                    "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Heliport                    "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Utility facility, major     "Schedule C", of this
Utility                                               section
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Utility facility, minor     "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
Commercial uses:                                       
                                                      See subsection D3,
Agriculture               Agriculture                 "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                          Animal pet shop, retail     1 per 300 square feet of
                                                      retail area
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Animal training school      "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
Animal sales and services Kennel                      1 per 200 square feet of
                                                      building area
                          Veterinary clinic/animal    1 per 200 square feet of
                          hospital                    building area
                          Veterinary clinic, large    1 per 200 square feet of
                          animal                      building area
                                                      1 per 300 square feet,
                          Financial institution, with plus stacking spaces per
Financial service         drive-thru                  subsection E of this
                                                      section
                          Financial institution,      1 per 300 square feet of
                          without drive-thru          building area
                                                      1 per 100 square feet
                          Bar/nightclub               (including outdoor
                                                      serving/seating areas)
                          Catering service            1 per 300 square feet of
                                                      building area
                          Fruit and vegetable market  1 per 300 square feet of
                                                      retail area
                                                      1 per 100 square feet
                          Restaurant, drive-in        (including outdoor
Food and beverage service                             serving/seating areas)
                                                      1 per 100 square feet
                                                      (including outdoor
                                                      serving/seating areas)
                          Restaurant, with drive-thru plus stacking
                                                      requirements per
                                                      subsection E of this
                                                      section
                          Restaurant, without drive-  1 per 100 square feet
                          thru                        (including outdoor
                                                      serving/seating areas)
                          Office, business or         1 per 300 square feet of
Office                    professional                building area
                          Research laboratory         1 per 500 square feet of
                                                      building area
                          Art gallery or museum,      1 per 400 square feet of
                          private                     building area
                          Fitness and recreational    1 per 250 square feet of
                          sports center               building area
Recreation and            General indoor recreation   1 per 250 square feet of
entertainment, indoor                                 public area
                          Major entertainment         See subsection D3,
                          facility                    "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                          Movie theatre               1 per each 4 seats
                                                      provided
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          General outdoor recreation  "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                          Golf course or driving
                          range, unlighted or          
                          lighted:
                           Golf course               6 per hole
                           Driving range             1.5 spaces per tee
                           Buildings                 Additional 1 per 400
                                                      square feet
Recreation and            Major entertainment         1 per each 4 seats
entertainment, outdoor    facility                    provided in the main
                                                      seating area(s)
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          RV campground/park          "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                          Race track (auto, dog, or   1 per each 4 seats
                          horse)                      provided in the main
                                                      seating area(s)
                          Shooting range              1 per bay
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Zoo                         "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                          Dry cleaning and laundry    1 per 300 square feet of
                          service                     building area
                          Funeral services            1 per 4 seats of main
                                                      assembly room
                          General personal services:   
Retail (personal service)  Under 2,000 square feet   1 per 250 square feet
                            (gross floor area)
                           2,000 square feet or more 1 per 300 square feet
                            (gross floor area)
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Instructional services      "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                          Alcoholic beverages, retail 1 per 300 square feet of
                          sale                        retail space
                                                      1 per dispensing station
                          Convenience store with gas  plus 1 space per 200
                          sales                       square feet of retail
                                                      space
                          Horticulture nursery sales  1 per 300 square feet of
                                                      retail area
                          Open-air market or flea     See schedule B of this
Retail (sales)            market                      section
                          Retail, general             1 per 300 square feet of
                                                      retail area
                          Retail, large               1 space per 300 square
                                                      feet of retail area
                          Sexually oriented business:  
                           Bar, restaurant, or       1 space per 100 square
                            entertainment space       feet
                           Retail sales/rental space 1 space per 300 square
                                                      feet of retail area
                          Boat and/or RV storage      1 per 50 vehicles stored
                          Car wash                    1 per 500 square feet of
                                                      building area
                                                      1 per dispensing station
                          Gasoline sales              plus 1 space per 200
                                                      square feet of retail
                                                      space
                          Parking structure           See subsection H of this
Vehicles and equipment                                section
                                                      1 per 400 square feet of
                          Vehicle sales and rental    office sales area, plus 1
                                                      space per 1,000 square
                                                      feet outdoor display area
                          Vehicle service and repair, 1 per 400 square feet of
                          major                       building area
                          Vehicle service and repair, 1 per 400 square feet of
                          minor                       building area
                                                      1 per bedroom, plus 2
                          Bed and breakfast           spaces for primary
                                                      residence
                                                      1 per room, plus 1 space
Visitor accommodation                                 per employee on largest
                          Hotel or motel              shift, plus 1 space per
                                                      300 square feet of
                                                      meeting or restaurant and
                                                      bar area
Industrial uses:                                       
                          Fossil fuel storage         1 per employee on largest
                                                      shift
Industrial service                                    See subsection D3,
                          General industrial service  "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                          Assembly, light             1 per 1,500 square feet
                                                      of building area
Manufacturing and         Manufacturing, heavy        1 per 1,500 square feet
production                                            of building area
                          Manufacturing, light        1 per 1,500 square feet
                                                      of building area
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Minerals and raw materials  "Schedule C", of this
Mining and processing                                 section
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Oil and gas                 "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                          Mini-storage                1 per 3,000 square feet
                                                      of covered storage space
                          Motor freight terminal      See schedule B of this
                                                      section
                          Office warehouse            See schedule B of this
Warehouse and freight                                 section
movement                  Storage yard                See schedule B of this
                                                      section
                          Warehouse                   See schedule B of this
                                                      section
                          Wholesale establishment     See schedule B of this
                                                      section
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Auto salvage yard           "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Scrap operations            "Schedule C", of this
Waste and salvage                                     section
                          Recycling center (outdoor   See subsection D3,
                          or indoor)                  "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
                                                      See subsection D3,
                          Solid waste disposal        "Schedule C", of this
                                                      section
 
      2.   Schedule B: Uses that reference "schedule B" in table 5.3-1 of this
section shall provide the following minimum number of off- street parking
spaces listed in table 5.3-2, "Off-Street Parking Schedule B", of this
subsection D2. Most uses subject to this schedule will engage in more than one
type of activity. Unless otherwise approved, lots containing more than one
activity shall provide parking and loading in an amount equal to the total of
the requirements for all activities.
TABLE 5.3-2
OFF-STREET PARKING SCHEDULE B
 
Activity Number Of Spaces Required (Building)
Indoor sales area                                      1 per 250 square feet
Indoor storage/warehousing/ vehicle service/            
manufacturing area:
 1 - 3,000 square feet                                1 per 300 square feet
 3,001 - 5,000 square feet                            1 per 650 square feet
 5,001 - 10,000 square feet                           1 per 750 square feet
 10,001 - 50,000 square feet                          1 per 1,250 square feet
 50,001 square feet +                                 1 per 1,500 square feet
Offices                                                1 per 300 square feet
Outdoor sales or display area (3,000 square feet or    1 per 750 square feet
less)
Outdoor sales or display area (over 3,000 square feet) 1 per 2,000 square feet
 
      3.   Schedule C: Uses that reference "schedule C" in table 5.3-1 of this
section have widely varying parking and loading demand characteristics, making
it impossible to specify a single off- street parking or loading standard. Upon
receiving a development application for a use subject to Schedule C standards,
the City Administrator shall apply the off-street parking and loading standard
specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or
establish minimum off-street parking requirements on the basis of a parking and
loading study prepared by the applicant. Such a study shall include estimates
of parking demand based on recommendations of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE), or other acceptable estimates as approved by the City
Administrator, and should include other reliable data collected from uses or
combinations of uses that are the same as or comparable with the proposed use.
Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of
activity, and location. The study shall document the source of data used to
develop the recommendations.
   E.   Stacking Spaces For Drive-Through Uses: In addition to meeting the off-
street parking requirements of this section, drive- through facilities
specified in table 5.3-3 of this subsection shall comply with the following
minimum stacking space standards:
TABLE 5.3-3
SCHEDULE OF STACKING SPACES
 
Type Of Use                            Minimum Stacking Spaces Measured From
Car wash, automatic                    1                       Bay entrance
Car wash, full service                 1                       Bay entrance
Car wash, self-service                 1                       Bay entrance
Financial institution, with drive-thru 2                       Teller window
Gasoline sales gas pump island         30 feet from each end of island
Restaurant, with drive thru            4                       Pick-up window
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1737.png]
 
   F.   Handicapped Parking Requirements:
      1.   Residential Uses: Handicapped-accessible parking for residential
uses shall be provided at the rate of one space per each dwelling unit that is
designed for occupancy by the handicapped.
      2.   Nonresidential Uses: Handicapped-accessible parking spaces shall be
provided for uses other than residential at the rate shown in table 5.3-4 of
this subsection:
TABLE 5.3-4
HANDICAPPED PARKING FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES
 
Total Number Of Required Parking Spaces Number Of Required Handicapped Spaces
   1 - 25   1
   26 - 50  2
   51 - 75  3
   76 - 100 4
   101 - 1505
   151 - 2006
   201 - 3007
   301 - 4008
   401 - 5009
   501 - 1,02 percent of total spaces
   Above 1,020 spaces, plus 1 space for each 100 over 1,000 spaces or
               fraction thereof
 
   G.   Parking Alternatives: The City Administrator may approve alternatives
to providing the minimum number of off-street parking spaces in accordance with
the following standards:
      1.   Shared Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements in table 5.3-1 of this section; provided, however,
required parking spaces may be provided on the lot containing the uses the
required parking is intended to serve or may be provided in common off-street
parking facilities. The City Administrator may approve such shared parking
facilities for developments or uses if the shared parking spaces will be
located within six hundred feet (600') of an entrance to the building the
parking is intended to serve (measured along the shortest legal pedestrian
route).
      2.   Off-Site Parking: The City Administrator may approve the location of
required off-street parking spaces on a separate lot from the lot on which the
principal use is located if the off- site parking complies with all of the
following standards:
         a.   Location: No off-site parking space may be located more than six
hundred feet (600') from an entrance (measured along the shortest legal
pedestrian route) of the use it is intended to serve. Off-site parking spaces
may not be separated from the use served by a street right-of-way with a width
of more than eighty feet (80'), unless a grade-separated pedestrian walkway, a
traffic signal, a shuttle bus, or other traffic control is provided or remote
parking shuttle bus service is provided.
         b.   Control Of Site: Required parking spaces for residential uses
must be located on the site of the use or within a tract owned in common by all
the owners of the properties that will use the tract.
         c.   Ineligible Activities: Required parking spaces for persons with
disabilities may not be located off-site.
      3.   Other Eligible Alternatives: At the City's discretion, the City
Administrator may approve any other alternative to providing off-street parking
spaces on the site of the subject development if the applicant demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the City Administrator that the proposed plan will protect
surrounding neighborhoods, maintain traffic circulation patterns, and promote
quality urban design to at least the same extent as would strict compliance
with otherwise applicable off-street parking standards.
   H.   Parking Lot Dimensions And Design Standards:
      1.   Location And Setbacks:
         a.   Off-Street Parking Lots:
            (1)   All Districts: Unless otherwise approved under the parking
alternatives subsection above, the off-street parking lot shall be located
within two hundred feet (200'), exclusive of street and alley widths, of an
entrance of the principal use it is intended to serve, and shall have direct
access to a street or alley.
            (2)   Residential Or Adjacent To Residential Districts: No parking
area accessory to a nonresidential use shall be permitted within a front yard
setback if the use is located in a residential district or immediately abutting
the front yard of a residential use.
            (3)   Downtown District: In the DT District, no parking shall be
permitted within a front yard setback.
            (4)   Property Lines: Vehicles shall not hang over property lines.
This shall be accomplished by one of the following:
   (A) Pavement shall set back at least three feet (3') from the property line.
   (B) A fence or other form of barrier shall be installed that prevents
vehicles from overhanging the property line.
   (C) A mutual access easement is provided that allows cross access between
the properties.
 
      2.   Dimensions Of Parking Spaces: Parking layout dimensions for required
off-street parking spaces and aisles shall be in accordance with or in
proportion to the standards set forth in illustrations 5.8 through 5.11 of this
subsection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1739.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1741.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1743.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6fc18fb3ed1dfd057317cc383b13212a87bac8b3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1745.png]
 
      3.   Recreational Vehicle Spaces: Parking spaces for recreational
vehicles, if provided, shall be a maximum of ten feet (10') by forty feet
(40').
      4.   Construction And Drainage: All parking areas shall be constructed
and drained in accordance with the area surrounding the site. Highway
construction must obtain required State licenses.
      5.   Maintenance: Parking facilities shall be continually maintained in
compliance with the approved site and/or subdivision plan and shall be free of
litter and debris at all times.
      6.   Surface Requirement: All parking spaces required by this section
shall be paved with a sealed, all-weather surface pavement of asphalt or
concrete. For purposes of this section, an area used for secured storage of
vehicles that is anticipated to last for more than four (4) months without
interruption is exempt from this paving requirement.
      7.   Vehicular Circulation: All parking areas shall be located and
designed so as to avoid undue interference with the use of public streets and
alleys. Parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that all
vehicles may enter an abutting street in a forward direction. The backing of a
motor vehicle onto a public street from a parking area is prohibited, except
from a residential parking area that does not exceed two (2) spaces per
dwelling unit. Parking spaces must be directly accessible to a parking aisle.
      8.   Driveways: Driveways for single-family residences shall not exceed
twenty five feet (25') in width, exclusive of curb returns.
   I.   Off-Street Loading Requirements: Development of any nonresidential or
public/institutional use shall require provision of off-street loading spaces
in conformance with the following minimum requirements:
      1.   Types Of Loading Berths: Required off-street loading space shall be
provided in berths that conform to the following minimum specifications:
         a.   Type A berths shall be at least sixty feet (60') long by ten feet
(10') wide by fourteen feet, six inches (14'6") high, inside dimensions.
         b.   Type B berths shall be at least thirty feet (30') long by ten
feet (10') wide by 14 feet, six inches (14'6") high, inside dimensions.
         c.   Type C berths shall be located in the rear of a lot and may
utilize part of an adjacent alley. The building setback shall be a minimum of
five feet (5') from the property line along the alley for the entire width of
the lot.
      2.   Number Of Spaces: The following numbers and types of berths shall be
provided for the specified uses in table 5.3-5, "Off- Street Loading Berths",
of this subsection I2 provided. The uses specified in this subsection shall
include all structures designed, intended, or arranged for such use.
TABLE 5.3-5
OFF-STREET LOADING BERTHS
 
Use Aggregate Gross Floor Area (Square Feet) Berths Required Type
Public/institutional uses:                                                   
                                 7,000 - 24,000                  1            B
                                 24,000 - 50,000                 2            B
  Cultural facilities            50,000 - 100,000                3            B
                                 Each additional 50,000 or major 1 additional B
                                 fraction thereof over 100,000
 Educational facilities         Over 14,000                     1            B
  Human health care facilities   10,000 - 100,000                1            B
                                 Over 100,000                    2            B
                                 12,000 - 36,000                 1            A
  Railroad freight terminals and 36,000 - 60,000                 2            A
  other transportation           60,000 - 100,000                3            A
  facilities                     Each additional 50,000 or       1 additional A
                                 fraction thereof over 100,000
Commercial uses:                                                             
                                 7,000 - 24,000                  1            B
  All commercial establishments  24,000 - 50,000                 2            B
  not otherwise specified        50,000 - 100,000                3            B
                                 Each additional 50,000 or major 1 additional B
                                 fraction thereof over 100,000
                                 25,000 - 40,000                 1            B
  Visitor accommodations and     40,000 - 100,000                2            B
  office uses                    Each additional 100,000 or
                                 major fraction thereof over     1 additional B
                                 100,000
Industrial uses:                                                             
                                 12,000 - 36,000                 1            A
                                 36,000 - 60,000                 2            A
  All industrial uses            60,000 - 100,000                3            A
                                 Each additional 50,000 or major 1 additional A
                                 fraction thereof over 100,000
 
      3.   Uses Not Specifically Mentioned: In the case of a use not
specifically mentioned in this section, the requirements for off-street loading
facilities shall be the same as the use mentioned in this section that, in the
opinion of the City Administrator, has most similar parking characteristics to
the use mentioned in terms of loading classification.
      4.   Concurrent Different Uses: When any proposed structure will be used
concurrently for different purposes, final determination of loading
requirements shall be made by the City Administrator, but in no event shall the
loading requirements be less than the total requirements for each use based
upon its aggregate gross floor area.
      5.   Location Of Off-Street Loading Facilities: Off-street loading
facilities required under this section shall be in all cases on the same lot or
parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. The required off-
street loading space shall not be part of the area used to satisfy the off-
street parking requirements unless approved by the City Administrator based on
the adequacy of the site to accommodate both simultaneously. The placement of
off-street loading facilities adjacent to residential areas or in an area with
a residential zoning classification shall be prohibited. Mitigation techniques,
including appropriate site design measures, may be required by the City
Administrator.
      6.   Manner Of Using Loading Areas: No space for loading or unloading of
vehicles shall be so located that a vehicle using such loading space projects
into any public street. Loading spaces shall be provided with access to an
alley, or, if no alley adjoins the lot, with access to a street. Any required
front, side, or rear yard may be used for loading unless otherwise prohibited
by this title. Design and location of entrances and exits for required off-
street loading areas shall be subject to the approval of the City Administrator
based on consideration of the traffic flow and traffic safety.
         a.   Off-Street Loading Area Screening: Off-street loading areas shall
be designed and located to reduce the visual and acoustic impacts of its
functions on adjacent properties and public streets. Non-enclosed off-street
loading areas shall be screened with durable, sight-obscuring walls and/or
fences of between six feet (6') and eight feet (8') in height. Screening
materials shall be the same as, or of equal quality to, the materials used for
the primary building and landscaping.
      7.   Loading Area Location: To the maximum extent feasible, loading areas
shall be located to the rear of a site and/or away from adjacent residential
areas.
      8.   Signs: The owners of the property shall provide, locate, and
maintain loading signs as specified by the City Administrator. Such signs shall
not be counted against allowed advertising sign area.
   J.   Prohibited Occupation Of Parking Spaces:
      1.   Except for infrequent, special, temporary events approved under
section
10-3-4, "Temporary Uses And Structures", of this title, required parking spaces
shall be available for the parking of operable passenger vehicles of residents,
customers, patrons, and employees only, and shall not be used for the storage
of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks used in conducting the
business or use, or for the purpose of advertising.
      2.   Parking for which a fee or other payment is paid or received shall
be a principal use, not an accessory use unless approved as part of a specific
use permit or planned unit development application.
   K.   Parking In Residential And Agricultural Zoned Districts:
      1.   Surface Requirement: All parking spaces or areas where any vehicle
is stored or parked shall be paved with a solid, all- weather surface pavement
of asphalt or concrete.
      2.   Driveways And Parking Spaces:
         a.   Platted Subdivisions:
            (1)   All parking spaces or areas where any vehicle is stored or
parked shall be paved with a solid, all-weather pavement of asphalt or
concrete.
            (2)   Driveway from edge of the street to parking space shall be
paved with a solid all-weather pavement of asphalt or concrete.
            (3)   Driveway ingress (approach) width shall be no greater than
twenty five feet (25') exclusive of curb returns at the street curb or pavement
edge for two-car garages and no more than twenty seven feet (27') for three-car
garages.
         b.   Unplatted Areas: Unplatted properties that contain one acre or
more where a residential use exists.
            (1)   All parking spaces or areas where any vehicle is stored or
parked shall be paved with solid, all-weather pavement of asphalt or concrete
and shall be at least twenty five feet (25') in length.
            (2)   Driveways from the edge of the street shall be paved with a
solid, all-weather pavement of asphalt or concrete from the curb or pavement
edge and extending twenty five feet (25') past the ultimate right-of-way.
            (3)   Driveway ingress (approach) width shall be no greater than
twenty five feet (25') exclusive of curb returns at the curb or pavement edge
for two-car garages and no more than twenty seven feet (27') for three-car
garages except in cases where agricultural use and residential use occur
together, the City Administrator or designee may grant an exception to the
maximum width of the driveway ingress (approach) to accommodate typical
agricultural-related equipment needs.
            (4)   After twenty five feet (25') beyond the ultimate right-of-way
pavement to the parking spaces may be paved with an all-weather type paved
surface, ecologically friendly materials such as concrete pavers, or washed
gravel, if this distance is fifty feet (50') or greater. If this distance is
less than fifty feet (50'), this area shall meet the above requirements of this
subsection K2b.
            (5)   Unplatted residentially zoned and/or used properties that are
less than one acre will comply with the standards of platted subdivisions for
all parking spaces and driveway/ingress surfaces.
      3.   Commercial Vehicle Parking: No more than one commercial vehicle,
which does not exceed one and one-half (11/2) tons rated capacity, per family
living on the premises, shall be permitted; and in no case shall a commercial
vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum products
be permitted.
      4.   Recreational Vehicle (RV) And Boat Parking: No more than one
camping, or travel trailer, or hauling trailer, or recreational vehicle per
household shall be permitted on any residential lot, and no more than one boat
and its associated trailer, per household shall be parked or stored on any
residential lot exclusive of those vehicles entirely stored within a fully
enclosed structure. Provided that no trailer, boat, or recreational vehicle
shall be parked or stored on the premises for more than a single period not to
exceed twenty four (24) hours in length during any week unless such is located
behind the front building line. On corner lots burdened by building lines from
two (2) streets, no such vehicle shall be parked or stored unless such is
located behind both building lines. The City Administrator or a designee may
authorize the parking of recreational vehicles in front of building lines for
periods of up to three (3) days plus extensions not to exceed ten (10) days
cumulative, where temporary special circumstances would justify such a
nonrecurring use for visitors to the household, and all streets, sidewalks, and
sight triangles remain clear. For the purposes of this section, a week shall be
defined as a period of time commencing at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
Sunday morning, and ending at eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. Saturday
evening.
      5.   Unlicensed, Untagged And Inoperable Vehicles: No person shall park,
store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any abandoned,
partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked or junked vehicle in the open,
upon public or private property on a public street, for a period exceeding
forty eight (48) hours, unless such vehicle or the parts thereof are stored
within a fully enclosed building or are stored on property lawfully designated
under this title as a place where such vehicles may be stored.
      6.   Vehicles In Side Or Back Yards: No vehicles, other than recreation
vehicles (as described in subsection K4 of this section), shall be parked,
stored or kept in any side or rear yards. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-5-4: SIGNS:
   A.   Purpose: The intent of this section is to define the types of signs
that are permitted and prohibited in the various zoning districts, the manner
in which sign size will be measured, and to exempt certain types of signs from
regulation.
   B.   Permits And Registration:
      1.   Issuance: Sign permits and registrations shall be issued by the City
Administrator.
      2.   Sign Permit Requirements: No sign, except those that are registered
under subsection B3 of this section and temporary election signs and temporary
real estate signs having six (6) square feet or less of display surface, may be
constructed or erected within the City without first receiving a sign permit
from the City Administrator. The permitted use of a sign by a business, on its
own premises, shall not be altered to any other use without first applying for
and receiving a permit for such sign use. Applications for sign permits must
include:
         a.   Proof of ownership or written permission of the owner of the lot
upon which the proposed sign will be constructed.
         b.   A scaled drawing (site plan) of the property showing with
dimensions the distance of the proposed sign location from property lines,
structures, easements, and driveways.
         c.   The proposed dimensions of the sign and a description of the
method of supporting the sign.
         d.   The measurement of distance from the proposed signs to the
limited access highway, turnpike right-of-way, collector street, arterial
street, property line or other boundary set out within the different zoning
districts, however if the distance is greater than one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500'), then no such measured distance is required to be reported,
except that the applicant shall so state that the distance is greater than one
thousand five hundred feet (1,500').
         e.   The name and business address of the licensed contractor and the
licensed electrical contractor if the sign is electrically powered.
         f.   The name and contact information of the sign owner.
      3.   Sign Permit Requirements (Applicable To Banner, Temporary,
Promotional Business, And Mobile Signs):
         a.   The lot owner shall acquire a permit from the City Administrator
for all banner, temporary, promotional business, or mobile signs at least ten
(10) business days prior to displaying such banner or sign. Permits under this
title are not transferable. See subsection E of this section for further
regulations.
         b.   The lot owner requesting a permit for a banner, temporary,
promotional business, or mobile sign shall be notified in writing by the
Development Services Department when the registration is denied. The written
notification will be given within a reasonable time after the denial.
      4.   Sign Contractors: Any contractor desiring to construct signs for
others within the Marlow City limits shall register their business name,
business owner, address, phone number or other contact information, with the
City Administrator. Contractors who fail to register, or who fail to use
licensed electricians, shall be subject to the penalties as described in
chapter 9 of this title.
   C.   General Sign Standards In All Nonresidential Zoning Districts:
      1.   Setbacks:
         a.   From Public Right-Of-Way: No sign shall be erected, constructed,
placed, or projected into or over any public right- of-way, except that in the
Downtown Overlay (DT) and Broadway Overlay (BW) Zone Districts, projecting
signs may extend into the right-of-way provided there is a vertical clearance
of at least eight feet (8') above the sidewalk and the sign does not extend
past the sidewalk.
         b.   From Residential Districts:
            (1)   Except for directional signs and those signs in the BW Zone
District, no permanent freestanding signs, projecting signs, on- premises
advertising signs, or wall signs shall be located within fifty feet (50') of
any residentially zoned district.
            (2)   Any sign located within fifty feet (50') to one hundred feet
(100') of a residentially zoned district shall be limited to a maximum height
of eight feet (8') and shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet of display
area, regardless of setback.
            (3)   No flashing, twinkling, or animated sign shall be located
within twenty feet (20') of the proposed street right-of-way line as shown in
the Comprehensive Plan, or within two hundred feet (200') of a designated
residential development district.
            (4)   Any sign located within one hundred feet (100') to two
hundred feet (200') of a residential district shall not exceed three hundred
(300) square feet in display surface area.
         c.   From Highway: Freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum
distance of ten feet (10') from any State highway, notwithstanding the setback
requirements as set out in subsection C5a of this section.
         d.   Sight Triangle Clearance: Except for standard public signs, no
signs shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the point of
intersection of the ultimate right-of-way of two (2) or more public streets,
nor within twenty five feet (25') of the intersection of a public street right-
of-way and a private street or driveway, nor within the median of a divided
driveway for a distance of twenty five feet (25') from the entrance to the
public street right-of-way.
         e.   Preexisting Freestanding Signs: In cases where there is a
preexisting freestanding sign, any subsequent sign placement or land use shall
also meet the above setback requirements.
      2.   Sign Illumination: No sign shall exceed an illumination of seventy
(70) footcandles as measured at a two foot (2') distance from the source of the
illumination. Further, electric message centers making use of incandescent
light (as opposed to light emitting diodes) for purposes of illumination, must
be set back an additional twenty feet (20') from the minimum setback otherwise
applicable. Incandescent lamp message centers shall not be programmed to
function as a strobe in an on-and-off display mode. Incandescent lamp message
centers must utilize a dimming feature that will dim the lights during dark
hours to no more than eighty percent (80%) of the normal watts used during
daylight hours.
      3.   Separation Of Signs: All freestanding signs or projecting signs
shall maintain a minimum separation of thirty feet (30') from any other
freestanding sign or projecting sign. However, in cases where there is a
preexisting off-premises advertising sign, except for those allowed in
subsection E of this section, any subsequent placement of a freestanding sign
shall be separated by at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) linear feet
along the street frontage from the preexisting off-premises advertising sign.
Further, wall signs or projecting signs shall not exceed the height of the
parapet of the building to which they are attached. Provided, where
architectural features of the building will not permit a wall sign of at least
three feet (3') in height, a wall sign may be extended above the parapet of the
building wall a distance sufficient to permit a sign of three feet (3') in
height.
      4.   Off-Premises Advertising Signs: Off-premises advertising signs shall
not be permitted, except as provided in subsection E of this section.
      5.   Height:
         a.   The height of freestanding signs shall be measured from the grade
where the sign is located and shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height
except as modified by the following: Additional height may be granted for
additional setbacks, measured from the ultimate right-of-way line on a one foot
(1') vertical to a two foot (2') horizontal basis, to a maximum of thirty feet
(30').
         b.   Any sign that projects over a pedestrian walkway shall have a
minimum of eight feet (8') of clearance.
         c.   Any sign that projects over a vehicular access area shall have a
minimum of fourteen feet (14') of clearance.
      6.   Size:
         a.   Display Surface Area: No sign shall exceed five hundred (500)
square feet of display surface area if being used by multiple users, nor three
hundred (300) square feet if used by a single user. Multiple users shall mean
four (4) or more users on the sign. The identification plaque, decal, or other
device that identifies the owner of the sign shall not be considered in the
calculation of the multiple users.
         b.   All Other Signs: All other signs per lot shall comply with the
following standards except as otherwise provided within this section:
            (1)   Lots with one freestanding sign shall not exceed an aggregate
display area of two (2) square feet per lot frontage.
            (2)   Lots with multiple freestanding signs shall not exceed an
aggregate display area of one square foot per lot frontage.
            (3)   Wall signs and projecting signs may utilize an aggregate
display surface area of three (3) square feet per linear foot of the wall on
which it will be placed.
         c.   Sign Area Measurement: In computing the permitted display surface
area for signs, the linear footage of an abutting secondary residential street
shall not be combined with the linear footage of any collector street, arterial
street, limited access highway or turnpike that is being used to calculate the
permitted display surface area. Only one side of a double-sided sign shall be
included in the computation of display service area. Double-sided signs may be
separated, as long as the separation of the two (2) display surfaces shall not
exceed ten feet (10').
      7.   Forbidden Lights And Representations: No sign containing facsimiles
of traffic control devices of any sort shall be located within one hundred feet
(100') of the point of intersection of two (2) or more public streets. No
revolving red or blue lights shall be allowed. No sign containing light shall
exceed an illumination of seventy (70) footcandles as measured at a two foot
(2') distance from the source of the illumination.
      8.   Public Easements: Signs within public utility easements and the
unused portions of platted alleys shall be prohibited with the exception to
franchise contract holders with the City of Marlow and under the following
conditions:
         a.   Sign structural poles/footings shall not be located immediately
over City-owned utilities, (i.e., waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater
lines, or facilities owned by the City) that are located in public utility
easements or the facilities of franchised utility providers. Freestanding signs
may be placed in public drainage easements upon prior written approval by the
City Engineer.
         b.   The construction of the sign must be lawful.
         c.   Site plans that show a sign placed in a utility easement shall
have the following note placed on the face of the site plan: Sign owner(s)
assume all liability and replacement responsibilities for any damage to signs
placed in utility easements.
         d.   Sign placement within the public utility easement or alley should
be done at the sign owner's own risk, and with the express knowledge that the
needs for the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of the
existing or future publicly owned or franchised utilities are a priority and
dominant over the servient estate of the sign placement.
         e.   The sign placed in a public utility easement must meet the
setback requirements of this chapter. The sign shall be constructed so that no
portion thereof projects over the street right-of-way, or blocks the site
triangle at intersections or blocks the sidewalks to normal pedestrian or
bicycle traffic.
         f.   No sign, nor any portion or support thereof shall be placed
within a drainage easement or drainage area without the written approval of the
City Engineer, regardless of how the drainage easement or drainage area may
have been created, obtained or conveyed and regardless of how the drainage
easement or drainage area is designated, whether it is an easement, right-of-
way, or any other type of designation.
         g.   As a precondition to a permit being issued for a sign constructed
within public easements, the sign owner shall submit a written statement, which
is either made a part of the plat or is recorded in the County land records
that states to the effect that:
            (1)   The sign owner acknowledges the prior rights and status of
the public, its trustees, and franchised utility owners;
            (2)   The sign owner assumes all liability and replacement
responsibilities for any damage to its signs located within utility easements,
as well as for any damage to subsurface or overhead facilities located within
the easement, which may be damaged during the construction, installation,
maintenance or repair of the signs; and
            (3)   Acknowledgement that the sign is subject to removal at the
sign owner's expense in the event that the City or a utility company has a need
to construct, reconstruct, repair or maintain its facilities at that location.
      9.   Certain Signs Not Prohibited: The following types of signs shall be
allowed by this title if located outside the right-of- way, and further, these
types of signs will not be included in the computation of aggregate display
surface area for other permitted signs:
         a.   One nameplate attached to the face of the wall of a building, not
exceeding four (4) square feet in surface area.
         b.   Temporary real estate signs placed upon property that indicates
said property is for sale or rent, not exceeding six (6) square feet of surface
area in residential zoned areas and not exceeding thirty two (32) square feet
of surface area in agricultural, commercial, and industrial zoned areas.
         c.   Temporary construction signs, which are displayed along arterial
street frontages that do not exceed one-half (1/2) of the square foot per each
linear foot of arterial street frontage; however, such temporary construction
signs shall never be restricted to less than thirty two (32) square feet, but
shall not exceed more than two hundred (200) square feet of display surface
area, regardless of the amount of arterial frontage.
         d.   Signs which are not visible from a public street.
         e.   Tablets built into the wall of a building or other structure
utilized for inscriptions, memorials or similar historic or dedicatory
purposes.
         f.   Signs of a warning, directive or instructional in nature erected
by any unit of government or any franchised utility.
         g.   Legal notices required by law to be posted.
         h.   Temporary election signs dealing with political campaigning, if
erected not more than forty five (45) days prior to an election and removed
within seven (7) days following the election and does not exceed sixteen (16)
square feet of display surface area.
         i.   Signs painted or posted on the surface of any window, when the
display surface area of the sign does not cover more than twenty five percent
(25%) of the window.
         j.   Signs located inside a building and either oriented to be
primarily visible from inside the building only, or located more than fifteen
inches (15") from the window. Signs erected by private parties of a warning,
directive or instructional nature and not exceeding three (3) square feet of
display surface area, including entrance, exit and restroom signs.
         k.   Signs attached by the manufacturer and function as labels of
commodities.
         l.   Signs located on accessory equipment or structures, which
identify the manufacturer, make or model, and which are limited to fifteen (15)
square inches or less for each piece of equipment or structure. By way of
example and not by limitation, equipment may include satellite dishes, air
conditioners, fence components and similar items.
         m.   Street address numbers painted on the curb at the property
owner's discretion.
         n.   Directional (i.e., entrance/exit) signs that are less than four
(4) square feet.
      10.   Special Exemptions From Regulations:
         a.   Previously Approved Signs: Except as specified in subsection C9
of this section, certain signs not prohibited, signs that have not been issued
a sign permit shall not be located in any zoning district of the City.
Provided, that signs that were permitted by the City under previous sign
regulations prior to the adoption of this title, or signs that were permitted
by Stephens County Commissioners under previous regulations prior to
annexation, may continue to exist and receive ordinary maintenance unless and
until the use of the sign is discontinued for a period of six (6) months, or
the structure of the sign is damaged or destroyed in excess of fifty percent
(50%) of its value, at which time such sign must be relocated in full
conformity with the requirements of this title.
         b.   First Amendment Rights: Individuals exercising their First
Amendment rights, under the U.S. Constitution or their free speech rights under
the Oklahoma Constitution, shall not be required to obtain permits for any sign
so long as the sign is not an advertisement for any type of commerce and such
sign is physically located on the lot of that individual's actual residence, or
is being physically carried by that individual while exercising their First
Amendment right of free speech. In addition such individual may not, while
exercising their First Amendment rights, block any public way, whether right-
of-way, exclusive easement, general utility easement or the associated sight
triangles required for traffic safety. The sign located on the residential
property must either be attached physically to the wall of the house or placed
in the yard and shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet, nor shall it exceed
six feet (6') in height.
         c.   Exemption For Governmental Public Signs: Standard public signs
are exempt from the regulations of this title when placed by any governmental
entity.
      11.   Sign Owner Identified: Each sign shall have a plaque, decal, be
readable to a person of ordinary height and vision at a distance of two feet
(2') from the base of the sign, and the information must be printed in English
block print. This device must be readily accessible to an inspector employed by
the City, but does not have to be generally observable to the public.
      12.   Installation Of Signs: All signs, which are permitted under this
section or any future amendments thereto, shall be installed by licensed sign
contractors in accordance with the locations and plans submitted at the time of
the application and subsequently approved by the City.
      13.   Additional District-Specific Sign Regulations:
         a.   Wall signs in the DT District shall have an aggregate display
area not to exceed three (3) square feet for each linear foot at the front
building wall of the building. Wall signs in the office and commercial
districts shall have an aggregate display area not to exceed one square foot
for each linear foot of the wall on which it will be placed.
         b.   In commercial and industrial districts, no more than one sign per
one hundred fifty feet (150') of limited access highway frontage, arterial
street frontage, collector street frontage or a fraction thereof. On lots with
multiple street frontages (i.e., corner lots, double frontage lots), the street
frontage is not cumulative.
      14.   Sign Regulations For Planned Unit Developments (PUD): Signs in a
PUD shall be governed by this title, but may be modified by the express terms
of the PUD.
   D.   Agricultural And Residential Zoning Districts:
      1.   No sign in an agricultural or residential zoning district shall
exceed thirty two (32) square feet or eight feet (8') in height, unless further
limited by this section. Signs advertising a home occupation are not allowed in
any residential neighborhood.
      2.   Permanent freestanding signs, which function as on-premises
advertising signs and are located on lots used for institutional uses such as
educational, religious or charitable institutions, may be constructed and
maintained as long as such signs do not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of
display surface area nor eight feet (8') in height. However, for the purposes
of this subsection D2 only, the maximum display surface area and height may be
increased to the standards contained in subsection C of this section, through a
PUD or by the specific use permit process, which shall be based upon the total
linear foot of lot frontage. Illumination may be provided as long as it is made
by constant light, does not exceed seventy (70) footcandles as measured at a
distance of two feet (2') from the source of light.
      3.   Wall signs and freestanding signs shall be allowed on each side of a
subdivision entrance where the subdivision entrance intersects an adjacent
arterial street or another subdivision. Signs shall not exceed thirty two (32)
square feet of display surface nor eight feet (8') in height. Illumination may
be provided as long as it is made by constant light, does not exceed seventy
(70) footcandles as measured at a distance of two feet (2') from the source of
light. Where the entrance of a subdivision is by way of a street with a divided
median, the identification sign may be placed within the traffic island, as
long as the sign is located at least twenty five feet (25') from the point of
intersection of the arterial street right-of-way.
      4.   During the period of construction of a new subdivision, a temporary
construction sign may be erected on each perimeter street leading to the
interior development, as long as the sign does not exceed eight feet (8') in
height and illumination may be provided as long as it is made by constant
light, does not exceed seventy (70) footcandles as measured at a distance of
two feet (2'). Temporary construction signs shall be removed upon completion of
construction on seventy five percent (75%) of the available lots within the
development.
      5.   A temporary construction sign not exceeding six (6) square feet of
display surface area may be erected by the owner or occupier of each residence.
However, the sign may not be placed within the boundaries of any public street,
nor any utility easement, or within the sight triangle of the intersection of
two (2) streets or the intersection of a street and driveway. Such signs may
not be used for commercial purposes within the residential zoning district.
   E.   Banner, Temporary, Mobile, Inflatable, Or Promotional Business Signs:
      1.   Duration, Height And Location:
         a.   A banner, temporary, mobile, inflatable or promotional business
sign shall be permitted only as provided herein, and such permits should be
limited to no more than four (4) per year for any single lot owner. Such
banner, temporary, mobile, inflatable or promotional business sign may be used
for a period of no more than forty five (45) days on any one occasion, provided
that the applicant may at the time of application request that all or any of
the four (4) permitted time periods run consecutively. However, the permitted
time periods may not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days total during a one-
year period from the date of the first application. All banner, temporary,
mobile, inflatable or promotional business signs must have the sign owner's
name, address and phone number affixed to the banner, temporary, mobile,
inflatable or promotional business sign at a location where it can be seen by
inspectors, although it may be concealed from the public while on display in
its ordinary manner.
         b.   The height of a banner, temporary, mobile, inflatable, or
promotional business sign shall not exceed the height specified in subsection
C5 of this section. All banner, temporary, mobile, inflatable or promotional
business signs shall be set back from the property line by a distance of one
foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') vertical of the sign as measured
from the base of the sign.
         c.   No banner, temporary, mobile, inflatable or promotional business
sign shall be placed in a manner, which will interfere with the flow of
vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic, or create traffic visibility hazards such
as being placed in the sight triangles of the intersection of two (2) streets
or the intersection of streets and driveways. Banner, temporary, mobile,
inflatable or promotional business signs must be anchored to the selected
location sufficient to keep them from being moved by wind or storm.
         d.   No banner, temporary, mobile, inflatable or promotional business
sign shall be permitted to be located upon or within any required parking
spaces or loading berths, nor shall it otherwise be located in such a manner to
obstruct vehicular and/or pedestrian access or circulation.
         e.   Except for standard public signs, no banner, temporary, mobile,
inflatable or promotional business signs shall be located within twenty five
feet (25') of the point of intersection of the right-of-way of two (2) or more
public streets, nor within twenty five feet (25') of the intersection of a
public street right-of- way and a private street or driveway, nor within the
median of a divided driveway for a distance of twenty five feet (25') from the
entrance to the public street right-of-way.
         f.   Regardless of any other provisions to the contrary, all banner,
temporary, mobile, inflatable or promotional business signs shall be designed
and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than forty (40) pounds
per square foot of area, or of materials which are unlikely to become dangerous
projectiles when propelled by windstorms.
         g.   Except for standard public signs, banner, temporary, mobile,
inflatable or promotional business signs shall not exceed forty (40) square
feet of display surface area.
      2.   Mobile Sign Anchorage: No mobile sign shall be placed unless such
sign is anchored at each support by a steel rod driven at least eighteen inches
(18") into the ground, or unless said sign is attached by a steel chain having
at least three-fourths inch (3/4") links or by a steel cable of at least one-
half inch (1/2") diameter to a building or to a permanent freestanding sign, or
similar upright supporting structure.
      3.   Zoning: Banner, temporary, mobile, inflatable, or promotional
business signs as set out in this subsection E may be permitted in any
commercial or industrial zoning district.
      4.   Number Of Signs: Banner, temporary, mobile, inflatable, or
promotional business signs as set out in this subsection E shall not exceed
more than one sign at any given time per lot of record.
      5.   Convenience Store, On-Site Perimeter Light Pole Mounted Signs: One
sign, not to exceed fifteen (15) square feet, mounted to one on-site light pole
with permanent type bracket, between the range of three feet (3') and ten feet
(10') from the ground, shall be permitted along each direction of store
frontage along a major street/highway. The light pole shall not be a City-owned
pole.
      6.   Exceptions: Signs, temporary or permanent, mounted to convenience
store fuel island pumps, fuel island canopy columns (mounted with permanent
type mounting bracket and not to exceed 3 square feet), placed on pallets of
displayed products at the base of the fuel island canopy columns or on the
entry sidewalk at the store front shall be permitted, but exempt from fees.
(Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-5-5: DISTRICT-SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
   A.   Manufactured Home Community/Mobile Home Park District (R-MHC):
      1.   Common Recreation Space: There shall be at least three hundred (300)
square feet of common recreation space per mobile home lot; the minimum area of
any common recreation area shall be two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet, and the minimum width of any such area shall be sixty feet (60'). Each
required common recreation area shall be within three hundred feet (300') of
each of the mobile homes it is intended to serve, measured along a route of
pedestrian access. Such recreation area shall be no nearer than twenty five
feet (25') to any property line. Each required common recreation area shall be
graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface waters accumulated within
the recreation area and shall be surfaced with turf or other dustless surface.
      2.   Off-Street Parking Areas: Off-street parking space may be provided
on common areas improved in accordance with provision for common recreation
areas and shall be located within two hundred feet (200') of each lot so
served, measured along a route of pedestrian access. If parking space is
provided with each lot, the minimum lot area shall be increased by three
hundred seventy five (375) square feet.
      3.   Interior Driveways: Interior driveways shall be improved and
maintained in accordance with the specifications in the Marlow subdivision
regulations.
      4.   Accessory Commercial Uses: In a mobile home park containing at least
one hundred (100) improved mobile home spaces, there may be provided accessory
commercial uses for the convenience of the residents of the development,
provided that:
         a.   All such uses are operated within an enclosed structure;
         b.   The gross floor area of such accessory uses shall not exceed
twenty five (25) square feet for each mobile home space in the park; and
         c.   No such structure shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any
property in an agricultural or residential district outside the development.
   B.   Downtown Overlay (DT) District:
      1.   Purpose: These standards are intended to ensure that new development
respects the historic small-town scale, architectural variety, and pedestrian
friendliness of the downtown. The standards contained herein are intended to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Marlow who utilize
the downtown area, which includes a pedestrian place of commerce, and to ensure
the livability of the existing physical environment so that it is not
compromised by incompatible land uses. The Downtown Overlay (DT) District shall
extend along Main Street from Fifth Street to First Street. It shall also
extend north and south two (2) blocks from Main Street in those areas.
      2.   Applicability: This section applies to all new construction and
rehabilitation when the cost of rehabilitation will exceed in aggregate cost
during any ten (10) year period fifty percent (50%) of the then assessed value
of the building located within the Downtown Overlay Zone District. Prior to any
such construction occurring, a site plan shall be submitted to the Downtown
Advisory Board.
      3.   Site Layout:
         a.   Parallel To Lot Lines: New construction shall be built parallel
to lot lines to reflect the historical orientation of nonresidential structures
in the downtown. Structures shall not be oriented at an angle to lot lines.
         b.   Location Of Parking: On-site parking shall be located to the rear
or side of all buildings when possible. Buildings existing at the time of this
title are exempt from this requirement.
         c.   Orientation Of Primary Facade: The primary facade of a structure
shall be oriented to the street, not to a side of the building, the lot, or to
an interior court.
      4.   Building Design:
         a.   General Intent Of Building Design Standards: New buildings in the
Downtown Overlay District should draw upon the common elements of historic
buildings in downtown Marlow, without copying them. Examples of common elements
include similar fenestration, cornice lines, building widths, masonry
construction, shade awnings, and storefront facades open to the sidewalk. This
will allow new structures to be seen as products of their own time, yet
compatible with their historic neighbors. Examples of development that are
encouraged in the Downtown Overlay District are presented in the Downtown
Master Plan.
         b.   Exterior Building Materials:
            (1)   Brick shall be the primary building material, along with
masonry accents as traditionally found in the downtown.
            (2)   Exterior finishing systems (EFS) and metal shall not be used
as a primary exterior building material.
         c.   Ground-Floor Pedestrian Interest:
            (1)   The ground floor of a building shall encourage pedestrian
activity by maintaining a high window-to-wall ratio. On the facade facing the
street, at least forty percent (40%) of the wall area that is between three
feet (3') and ten feet (10') above grade shall consist of glazing.
            (2)   Reflective tinted windows are prohibited on the ground floor.
         d.   Upper-Floor Distinction: The distinction between the street level
and upper levels should be expressed through detailing, changes in materials,
and fenestration.
      5.   Parking: Where surface parking is provided, it shall be screened
with a masonry wall no more than three feet (3') in height and/or a landscape
buffer in order to maintain an attractive pedestrian environment at the street
edge.
   C.   Broadway Overlay (BW) District:
      1.   Purpose: This overlay district is intended to promote high- quality
building design and tree protection along Marlow's southern entry corridor,
provide a transition between higher intensity highway uses and the traditional
downtown, and project a positive image to encourage economic development in the
City. The standards contained herein are intended to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens by preventing or reducing traffic
congestion and reducing distracting visual clutter often associated with
highway development. The standards of the BW strive to achieve the stated
purpose by addressing the physical characteristics of development such as
building design, building entrances, wall articulation, and fencing.
      2.   District Boundaries: The Broadway Overlay District shall include all
properties within five hundred feet (500') of Broadway (U.S. Highway 81) from
Steele Street in the north to Chickasaw Street in the south to not disrupt the
Downtown Overlay (DT) District.
      3.   Exemptions: The following are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter:
         a.   General Maintenance: Activity where no change in design,
material, or color is proposed for any built of planted element of the site;
         b.   Handicapped Modifications: The construction of ramps or other
modifications to serve the handicapped; and
         c.   Federal And State Facilities: All Federal and State facilities.
      4.   Adaptive Use Of Residential Dwelling Units: Adaption of existing
residential dwelling units for office, retail, or light commercial use is
approved and preferred to demolition, provided the adaptation and
rehabilitation meet the design criteria established in this title.
      5.   Building Design:
         a.   Compatibility:
            (1)   Residential Use: The following standard shall apply to
development of a new residential use, or substantial expansion or alteration of
an existing residential use. For purposes of this subsection only, "substantial
expansion or alteration" shall mean construction that is equal to or greater
than twenty five percent (25%) of the principal dwelling structure's original
gross floor area (including attached garages, but not including detached
garages).
            (2)   New Development: New development subject to this section
shall be generally compatible in appearance with other existing structures on
the block that comply with this title. This shall be satisfied by constructing
the proposed building so that at least three (3) of the following features are
substantially similar to the majority of other buildings on the same and facing
block:
                  (A)   Roof material;
                  (B)   Roof overhang;
                  (C)   Exterior building material;
                  (D)   Shape, size, and alignment of windows and doors;
                  (E)   Front porches or porticos; or
                  (F)   Exterior building color.
            (3)   Garages:
                  (A)   Garage doors facing the street shall comprise no more
than fifty percent (50%) of the total length of a dwelling's facade.
                  (B)   Garage doors that face the street and comprise more
than forty percent (40%) of the facade shall be recessed a minimum of four feet
(4') behind either:
                     (i)   The front wall plane of the house; or
                     (ii)   The front wall plane of a porch that extends
horizontally across at least twenty five percent (25%) of the house.
                  (C)   The minimum front building setback may be reduced by
five feet (5') when there is a detached garage located behind the principal
dwelling structure in the rear of the lot, or a rear garage attached to the
principal dwelling if the front wall of the garage is located at least twenty
feet (20') behind the facade of the house.
            (4)   Location Of Parking: Parking is prohibited within the front
yard setback, except on paved permitted driveways. Paved parking in the street
right-of-way may be allowed with site plan review.
      6.   Tree Preservation:
         a.   Specimen trees along Broadway shall be preserved and protected.
         b.   In the event that trees are damaged or diseased, the tree shall
be removed and a replacement tree shall be planted in its place within twelve
(12) months of the death of the tree.
            (1)   The replacement tree shall be the same specimen as the tree
removed from the site.
            (2)   The replacement tree shall be at least six inches (6") in
caliper six feet (6') above the ground. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-5-6: TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS:
   A.   Purpose: The City Council finds that towers and other supporting
structures present land use concerns that should be dealt with by protecting
residential uses, encouraging co- location, minimizing the number of towers in
a manner that does not discourage market access or competition, and preventing
or limiting adverse effects on off-site premises. The intent of these
provisions is to provide for the continued establishment of new wireless
communication providers and the expansion of existing wireless
telecommunication services within the City, while simultaneously protecting
neighborhoods, all through minimizing adverse visual and operational effects of
facilities through careful design, sighting, screening, camouflage, and co-
location requirements encouraging creative design and camouflage measures.
   B.   Towers Fifty Feet Or Greater Are Prohibited Without A Permit: No person
or entity shall hereafter construct, own, or operate any communication tower in
excess of fifty feet (50') in height above the mean elevation of the ground on
which it is built, unless said person has obtained a building permit to
construct from the City of Marlow.
   C.   Towers On Government Land: Towers located on property owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled by the governing authority of any city, county, public
school district, state, or by any agency of the United States of America, will
be exempt from the remaining requirements of this section if in compliance with
subsections E through J of this section, inclusive, and no more than one
hundred twenty feet (120') in height; provided that such exemption will only be
available if a commercial lease or license authorizing such antenna or tower
has been approved by the applicable governing body. The tower owner shall file
a permit application with the City of Marlow for purposes of keeping a complete
record of towers within the City; the permit shall be issued administratively.
The City Council expressly finds that governmental controls through proprietary
devices such as a commercial lease are an adequate substitute for governmental
control through regulatory devices.
   D.   Towers Of Limited Height On Residential Land:
      1.   No tower shall be constructed in excess of fifty feet (50') in
height above mean ground elevation on any property actually used for a single-
family residential purpose, or any vacant land that is intended for residential
use on the Comprehensive Plan (Level 1 and Level 2), or that actually has any R
district classification and use.
      2.   Any tower constructed as an accessory use on residentially zoned
land that is developed and utilized for institutional purposes shall not be
constructed in the front yard or within the minimum side yard requirements for
the applicable zoning district. However, a camouflaged tower that does not
exceed one hundred feet (100') may be placed in the front yard if concealment
of both the tower and the equipment structures are accomplished (e.g., a tower
disguised as steeple or comparable building element at a site for a place of
worship, or a flagpole design at a public school, or an obelisk at other
institutions).
   E.   Application Requirements:
      1.   Each applicant for a permit to build a tower shall provide to the
Development Services Department an inventory of all the existing and approved
towers or permits for other locations that are within one-half (1/2) mile of
the site applied for. The inventory shall include specific information about
the location, height, and design of each tower.
      2.   If the towers within the applicant's inventory have been designed
for co-location, a description of the facilities and heights for the
possibility of co-location shall be included within the inventory. Copies of
the standard co-location lease shall also be provided, with appropriate blanks
for physical dimensions and price, but including all standard terms and
conditions. Said inventories and form contracts may be shared with other
applicants applying for any approvals under this title; provided that the City
does not warrant the accuracy of any such information shared with other
applicants.
      3.   The applicant for a permit shall also provide the description,
identity, and contact for the backhaul network provider who will serve that
site.
      4.   Applicants for permits involving co-location shall specify in the
application the features of the tower that adapt it for co- location, such as
the number and location of portholes for cables, the proposed ground footprint
of multiple equipment sheds and cabinets, and related items.
      5.   The application shall also include elevations of all proposed
shielding, screening and the details of materials and color for the facility.
      6.   A nonrefundable fee shall accompany each application.
   F.   Construction Standards:
      1.   The tower shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish, or be
painted a uniform neutral color (unless color is governed by applicable
standards of Federal Aviation Administration), so as to reduce visual
intrusiveness. Cabling shall be contained interior to the structure of the
tower, or wrapped in a cover with a matching color scheme to the tower. The use
of camouflage technology so that the tower appears to be a part of the primary
building on site is also acceptable. The design and maintenance of the
equipment, buildings, cabinets, or related structures shall use materials,
colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower
facilities to the natural setting or the built environment of the primary use.
      2.   If an antenna or series of antennas are installed on a structure
other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to or closely compatible
with the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment visually unobtrusive.
      3.   Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless such lighting is
required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority.
      4.   All towers, antenna, and related equipment shall meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and
the Federal Communications Commission, together with the regulations of any
other agency of the Federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas.
      5.   Antennas and associated supports, cables, brackets, and related
equipment shall not be mounted on any tower or other supporting structure by
any method of punching, drilling, or other means that may weaken the tower or
supporting structure.
      6.   All tower sites shall be served by a driveway from a public street
and said driveway shall be paved with an all-weather surface. However, sites in
areas of restricted street access may be served by driveways from paved public
or private parking lots. The Engineering Department must approve the size of
"tin horns" or other drainage structures prior to the start of construction.
      7.   All towers and all antenna support structures that are between fifty
one feet (51') and one hundred feet (100') in height (inclusive) shall be
constructed to support a minimum of two (2) antenna arrays with the cabling
interior to or otherwise concealed within the structure. All towers that are in
excess of one hundred feet (100') in height shall be constructed to support a
minimum of four (4) antenna arrays with the cabling interior to or otherwise
concealed within the structure.
      8.   Construction must otherwise comply with the current requirements of
the Marlow Building Code.
      9.   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits
to the City, whether civil, electrical, structural or mechanical, shall be
certified in writing, by an Oklahoma licensed, professional engineer. Such
information shall include (but not be limited to) anticipated tower height,
tower type, construction materials, declared wind speed in mph, ice load in
inches, anticipated antennae loading for the design, and engineered
appurtenance loading.
   G.   Maintenance, Operation, And Removal: The owner of the tower shall
ensure that it is maintained in compliance with the standards contained in the
applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers
established by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to
time, in order to ensure the structural integrity of the tower. The failure to
maintain structural integrity through compliance with these standards is hereby
declared a public nuisance and the towers may be abated, including the removal
of the tower under authority of and in compliance with the City Council's
powers to declare and abate public nuisances. No antenna may be used which, by
design or by actual operation, causes interference on any frequency actually
used by any police, fire, or public ambulance services having authority or
jurisdiction over any portion of the City of Marlow. Each tower owner shall
provide a maintenance bond to assure the maintenance of the equipment building
(s) and the support or tower structure, including the costs of removal in the
event the facility is abandoned for more than one year.
   H.   Site Plan: Each applicant requesting a permit under this section shall
submit a scaled site plan, lighting plan, and scaled elevation view together
with other supporting drawings, calculations, and documentation, all signed and
sealed by appropriate licensed engineers or other appropriate professionals,
showing the location and dimensions of all improvements proposed for the site.
This information shall include existing and proposed topographical and
planimetric drawings and all significant features that support co-location
(e.g., provisions for interior cabling, portholes, the footprint for multiple
equipment sheds and cabinets, etc.).
   I.   Administrative Approval Of Permits: The City Administrator may
administratively approve the installing of antenna on:
      1.   C-2, C-3, And Industrial Districts:
         a.   Towers are lawful uses permitted administratively when located as
accessory uses on any land in industrial zoning districts, or any developed
land in C-2 Zoning Districts or C-3 Zoning Districts that are equal to or
larger than two and one-half (21/2) acres.
         b.   Such towers shall be set back from any existing adjacent
residential lot boundary equal to two hundred percent (200%) of the total
height of the tower or other supporting structure, shall not exceed two hundred
feet (200') in height as to industrial property or one hundred twenty feet
(120') in commercial property, and shall comply with the terms of this title
and any future amendment thereto. Such towers on commercial property must also
use camouflage technology such as flagpoles, obelisks or other approved
"stealth" coverings. Such towers on industrial property must meet the front and
side yard setback requirements for the subdivisions.
      2.   All Commercial And Industrial Districts; Existing Structures Sixty
Feet Or Greater: Antennas may be installed on existing structures other than a
tower (such as commercial or industrial buildings, billboard sign, power
transmission tower, water tower, or other freestanding nonresidential
structure) that is sixty feet (60') in height or greater, if and only if the
additional antennas or supports create a new structure with a cumulative height
not to exceed one hundred twenty feet (120') from the mean ground elevation.
      3.   All Commercial And Industrial Districts; Existing Structures Less
Than Sixty Feet: Antennas may be installed on an existing structure other than
a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other
freestanding, nonresidential structure) that is less than sixty feet (60') in
height so long as such addition does not add more than twenty feet (20') to the
height of the existing structure.
      4.   Existing Towers And Poles: Antennas may be installed on any existing
communication tower or light pole of any height, so long as the addition of
said antennas adds no more than twenty feet (20') cumulative to the height of
the existing tower or light pole. Any associated equipment building must be
located in conformity with the generally applicable setback requirements of the
zoning district and appropriately screened or landscaped. Said installation
adding twenty feet (20') of height may occur no more than one occurrence per
tower or light pole. For equipment compounds that are served by a dirt road or
drive, the new equipment owner shall pave at least the first twenty feet (20')
of the dirt road or drive that is adjacent to the street.
      5.   Noncommercial Or Nonindustrial Land: Antennas may be installed on
existing structures on agricultural, residential, or office land through an
administrative permit under the following conditions:
         a.   On an existing structure other than a communications tower (such
as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding,
nonresidential structure) that is less than sixty feet (60') in height, so long
as such addition does not add more than twenty feet (20') to the height of the
existing structure;
         b.   On an existing tower of any height, and further including the
placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna
cumulatively adds no more than twenty feet (20') to the height of the existing
tower and the tower remains set back from any existing adjacent residential lot
boundary equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the total new height of
the tower;
         c.   On certain developed public properties, including but not limited
to water towers, water treatment plants, sewer treatment facilities, police
stations, fire stations, ambulance stations, equipment maintenance facilities,
and lighted and enclosed sports facilities such as football stadiums, baseball
and softball parks, but not practice facilities at unlighted or unsecured
locations that may be temporarily used for sporting events, nor in any open
parks or greenbelts;
         d.   On the roofs of public high schools, intermediate high schools,
middle schools, elementary schools, and office buildings, so long as such
addition does not add more than thirty feet (30') to the height of the existing
structure; or
      6.   Other Industrial Land: The City Administrator may also approve tower
construction if: the new tower to be constructed is within an industrially
zoned area, the industrial district is at least ten (10) acres in size, the
tower location is no closer than three hundred fifty feet (350') to a
residential structure, and the tower is no greater than one hundred feet (100')
in height; or, on an existing tower or supporting structure as a co- location.
      7.   Temporary Antennas: Temporary antennas shall only be allowed in the
following instances:
         a.   In conjunction with a festival, carnival, or other activity
requiring a special event permit from the City; and the antennas shall only be
allowed commencing from one week prior to the event and be removed one week
after the event; or
         b.   In conjunction with a natural calamity such as a storm or other
emergency as declared by the City's Police or Fire Departments, which calamity
has damaged or destroyed the regular facilities, and the temporary facilities
are needed to restore service until the damage can be repaired or replaced. The
facility owner or the service provider shall notify the City within twenty four
(24) hours of the outage, and must receive an administrative permit if the
temporary facility will be required for more than seven (7) days. Further, any
temporary facilities that remain in place for in excess of six (6) months must
receive a permit from the City Council for the period in excess of six (6)
months.
      8.   Screening And Landscaping: Landscaping and fencing requirements on
existing towers and equipment facilities must be properly maintained prior to
the administrative permit being issued by the City Administrator, but new or
additional requirements shall not be added for purposes of co-location.
   J.   Council Permits For Towers: If the tower or antenna may not be
permitted administratively as described in subsection I of this section, then
no tower may be constructed without securing a permit from the Marlow City
Council.
      1.   Applications for a tower permit from the City Council shall first
obtain a specific use permit from the Planning Commission pursuant to section
10-6-5 of this title.
      2.   The City Council may impose conditions that it, in good faith,
believes is reasonably necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed
tower on adjoining properties, and that foster competition by encouraging
multiple uses on co-location structures. For purposes of evaluation of the
application, the use of a billboard as a basis for a tower shall be considered
co- location, even if only one antenna array is to be placed thereon.
      3.   The City Council may require particular evidence or special
conditions in the event the Council determines the proposal may potentially
contaminate water supplies, contaminate surface waters or soil, interfere with
drainage, or interfere with the primary use of the public property.
      4.   All sized freestanding towers are prohibited in A-1 and R-E Zoning
Districts, including areas that are in fact used as agricultural or residential
estate areas even though zoned at more intense levels. Towers in excess of one
hundred feet (100') are prohibited in R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Zoning Districts.
Applicants in such areas shall be required to establish the necessity of the
tower and all elements of the application by clear and convincing evidence.
      5.   When an applicant for a tower permit works with a developer of
residential land, and designs a subdivision that uses a flagpole and guard
house (or comparable camouflage) as elements within the design of the
subdivision entrance or private park reserve, the approval of the final plat
shall include the permit for the tower at a height not to exceed eighty feet
(80') and used as the flagpole, and an equipment cabinet within the guard
house.
   K.   Factors Considered For City Council Approval: The City Council shall
consider the following factors in determining whether or not to issue a permit
for a tower, although the Council may modify one or more of these criteria if,
in the particular circumstances of the application, the Council concludes that
the goals and intent of this title are better served by such modification.
Factors to be considered are:
      1.   Height of the proposed tower;
      2.   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and adjacent
residential lot boundaries;
      3.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
      4.   Surrounding topography;
      5.   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
      6.   Design of the tower, with particular reference to those design
characteristics, which have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness, or providing camouflage;
      7.   Proposed routes of ingress and egress;
      8.   Whether or not the tower is constructed so as to be available for
co-location in the future; and
      9.   Whether or not there are suitable, existing towers or other
supporting structures capable of meeting the technological needs of the
applicant.
   L.   Evidence Of Capacity: All evidence relating in any manner that in
essence indicates that the application location is needed to improve the
capacity of the system and is to address a specific and local geographic
problem must be submitted in writing, and signed and sealed by an engineer,
licensed in the State of Oklahoma.
   M.   Warning Sirens: All applications for new towers shall include an
examination of the City's emergency warning siren location map. If the new
tower site is in a location where the emergency warning siren location map
indicates that a siren is proposed, then the permit may be conditioned on the
granting of permission for the City of Marlow to place and operate a storm
siren warning system on the completed tower, at a height to be mutually agreed,
but typically between twenty feet (20') and thirty feet (30') above the mean
lot elevation, unless such location would create a technical problem for the
applicant's system. Costs of the installation and operation of the warning
siren shall be solely the responsibility of the City. Applicant shall advise at
the time of the application what costs, rental, or other fees will be required
for the placement of the warning siren.
   N.   Radius Report: If the application is for a tower in excess of two
hundred feet (200') in industrial areas or if in excess of one hundred twenty
feet (120') in any other zoning district, and Council action is required, then
the applicant must provide a list of property owners within a three hundred
foot (300') radius of the perimeter of the lot on which the tower is proposed,
and the City shall notify the persons on the list by mailing notice of the
hearing, all at applicant's expense.
   O.   Co-Location Contracts: Any applicant who claims that a proposed tower
will be used for co-location shall provide a form contract, which will be used
for co-location for at least five (5) years after construction. The contract
shall only have blanks for the name of the lessee, date, location and size of
the equipment shed, height of the antenna array and final price.
   P.   Effect Of Existing Tower Availability: No new towers should be
permitted by the Council unless the applicant demonstrates to the City
Council's reasonable satisfaction that no existing tower or other structure can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence of this unavailability
may consist of any of the following:
      1.   No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area required to meet applicant's engineering, capacity, or technical
requirements;
      2.   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height or
structural strength to meet the applicant's engineering, capacity, or technical
requirements;
      3.   Applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with existing antenna on existing towers or structures, or the
existing antennas on the existing towers or structures would cause
electromagnetic interference with applicant's proposed antenna;
      4.   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner of
the existing tower in order to share said tower structure are unreasonable. (In
this regard, 8-year rental costs exceeding the costs of site acquisition and
tower construction including engineering and design fees, are presumptively
unreasonable); and
      5.   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
   Q.   Setbacks And Security: All towers must be set back a minimum distance
of one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the total height of the tower and
structure from any adjacent residential lot boundaries unless a greater setback
is required by other provisions of this title. The location of towers, guy
wires, and accessory facilities shall meet the minimum zoning district setback
requirements and shall not be in the front yard of the principal use. Towers
shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than eight feet (8') in height
together with such appropriate anti-climbing devices as may be best utilized by
the type of tower involved; provided the Council may waive security fencing
requirement if other features of the site provide adequate substitute security.
Camouflage technology may be used to justify a reduction or elimination of
front yard setbacks as to the tower.
   R.   Screening And Landscaping:
      1.   Landscaping: Existing trees and natural landscape and elevations
around the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
      2.   Fencing: The privacy fencing or similar approved opaque screening
materials shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in height; a greater height of
fencing shall be used as necessary to screen taller equipment sheds within the
compound. Provided that equipment sheds which are adjacent to and camouflaged
to resemble a structural element of the primary building on site do not have to
be fenced.
   S.   Billboards: No billboards may be added to communication towers.
   T.   Written Decision: Any decisions to deny an application for the
placement, construction, modification of towers for cellular or personal
communication service, or specialized radio mobile service shall be conveyed to
the applicant in writing, together with the summary of the evidence which
supports a denial of the application. A copy of the minutes of the meeting,
which contains some of the evidence, may be used in place of or in addition to
other summaries. The decision shall further contain the date at which the
public body denied the application. The applicant has thirty (30) days after
the denial of the application, within which to seek judicial review. Therefore,
the City will attempt to give notice in writing within five (5) business days
of the denial of the application, unless the applicant or applicant's
representative was present in the meeting at which the denial was announced.
   U.   Five-Year Permits, Notice Of Use; Removal Of Abandoned Towers:
      1.   Any tower that is not actually used as an antenna support for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the
permit owner(s) for such antenna(s) or tower shall remove same at their expense
within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the City of Marlow notifying
the permit owner of said abandonment. Antennas that do not have electrical
power shall not be considered in use.
      2.   In the event that such a tower is not removed, notice of the intent
by the City to remove shall be given to the applicant and to the owner of the
real estate on which the tower is located if different from the applicant.
Abandoned antennas and towers are hereby declared a public nuisance, removable
by the City Council in accordance with nuisance abatement procedures or through
the claims on a posted bond.
      3.   Permits shall be renewed at the end of each five-year term, provided
the permit owner delivers to the City, within thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration of the five-year term, a certification which displays that the tower
is in use, the identity of the owners of the antennas located thereon, whether
the tower is suitable for additional co-location, whether the standard lease
contract has been changed (together with a copy of such changes), evidence that
all conditions to the issuance of the permit are being satisfied, and evidence
that all Property Taxes that are due on the tower and related facilities have
been paid. Should the permit owner fail to satisfy these conditions then the
permit shall automatically terminate at the end of the five-year period. Any
permit for such tower and facilities that is terminated may only be reissued by
following and satisfying the standards applicable at the time required for a
new application.
   V.   Driveway For Towers: Any existing tower site that lawfully uses an
unpaved driveway to access a public street, and which driveway allows the
deposit of dirt, gravel or similar material to be deposited on the public
streets during rainy conditions, shall be considered a public nuisance, and may
be abated in accordance with the general ordinances dealing with nuisance
abatement.
   W.   Permits Limited If Not Built: A permit for a tower shall be valid for
no more than one year, unless a valid building permit is issued and
construction proceeds diligently.
   X.   Proprietary Powers Reserved: Nothing in this section concerning the
regulation of what is legally permissible or legally forbidden interferes with
the proprietary right of the City Council to control the property held in the
City's name or in the name of any of its trusts as either a corporate owner or
as public trustee. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 6
REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-6-1: Summary And Organization Of This Chapter
10-6-2: Common Development Review Procedures
10-6-3: Amendments
10-6-4: Planned Unit Developments
10-6-5: Use On Review Permits
10-6-6: Site Plan Review
10-6-7: Temporary Uses
10-6-8: Variances
10-6-9: Appeals
10-6-10: Building Permits
10-6-1: SUMMARY AND ORGANIZATION OF THIS CHAPTER:
   A.   This chapter describes the procedures for review and approval of all
applications for development activity in the City of Marlow. Common procedures,
which are applicable to all or most types of development applications, are in
section
10-6-2 of this chapter. Subsequent sections set forth additional provisions
that are unique to each type of application, including staff and Review Board
assignments and approval criteria.
   B.   Table 6.1-1 of this section summarizes the review and decision-making
responsibilities for the procedures described in this chapter. The table is a
summary tool and does not describe all possible types of decisions made under
this title. Other duties and responsibilities are described in chapter 7,
"Review And Decision-Making Entities", of this title.
   C.   In addition to the reviews summarized in table 6.1-1 of this section,
the City Administrator may also refer applications to other boards,
commissions, government agencies, and nongovernmental agencies not referenced
in this chapter.
TABLE 6.1-1
REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES
 
R = Review (responsible for review and/  H = Hearing (public hearing required)
    or recommendation)
D = Decision (responsible for final      A = Appeal (authority to hear/decide
    decision)                                 appeals)
 
Procedure Section Pre-App    City Council Planning   Board Of   City Staff
                  Conference              Commission Adjustment
Amendments: text          10-6-3B     D-H R-H    R
Amendments: rezonings     10-6-3C Yes1 D-H R-H    R
Planned unit developments 10-6-4  Yes  D-H R-H    R
Use on review permits     10-6-5  Yes  D-H R-H    R
Site plan review          10-6-6  Yes     A   A-H D
Temporary use permit      10-6-7            A-H D
Variance                  10-6-8  Yes        D-H R
Building permit           10-6-10           A-H D
 
Note:
   1.    Pre-application conferences are required only for zonings that are
inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-6-2: COMMON DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES:
The common development review procedures in this section shall apply to all
types of development applications under this chapter, unless an exception to
the common procedures is expressly noted in subsequent sections of this
chapter.
   A.   Step 1: Pre-Application Conference:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of a pre-application conference is to provide
an opportunity for an informal evaluation of the applicant's proposal and to
familiarize the applicant and the City staff with the applicable provisions of
this title, infrastructure requirements, and any other issues that may affect
the applicant's proposal. A pre-application conference is optional prior to
submission of any other application under this title not listed above.
      2.   Pre-Application Conference Content: The City Administrator shall
schedule a pre-application conference after receipt of a proper request. At the
conference, the applicant, the City Administrator, and any other persons the
City Administrator deems appropriate to attend shall discuss the proposed
development. Based upon the information provided by the applicant and the
provisions of this title, the parties should discuss in general the proposed
development and the applicable requirements and standards of this title.
      3.   Informal Evaluation Not Binding: The informal evaluations of the
City Administrator and staff provided at the conference are not binding upon
the applicant or the City, but are intended to serve as a guide to the
applicant in making the application and advising the applicant in advance of
the formal application of issues that may be presented to the appropriate
decision-making body.
      4.   Waiver: The City Administrator may waive the pre-application
conference requirement for applications where he or she finds that the
projected size, complexity, anticipated impacts, or other factors associated
with the proposed development clearly, in his or her opinion, support such
waiver.
      5.   Application Required Within Six Months: After a pre-application
conference has been completed, an application must be completed within six (6)
months or sooner if required by the City Administrator due to changing
conditions. If an application is not filed within such timeframe, a new pre-
application conference shall be required prior to filing an application.
   B.   Step 2: Development Application Submittal:
      1.   Form Of Application: Applications required under this chapter shall
be submitted in a form and in such number as required by the City
Administrator.
      2.   Authority To File Applications:
         a.   Unless otherwise specified in this title, applications for review
and approval may be initiated by:
            (1)   The owner of the property that is the subject of the
application;
            (2)   Any person authorized by the owner; or
            (3)   The Planning Commission or the City Council.
         b.   When an authorized person files an application under this title,
written documentation of the authority shall be submitted with the application.
      3.   Development Review Fees:
         a.   Recovery Of Costs: Development review fees are established to
recover the costs incurred by the City in processing, reviewing, and recording
applications pertaining to development applications or activity within the
City's boundaries. The applicable development review fees shall be paid at the
time of submittal of any development application.
         b.   Development Review Fee Schedule: The amount of the City's
development review fees shall be established by the City Council. The schedule
of fees shall be reviewed annually and shall be adjusted, if necessary, by the
City Administrator on the basis of actual expenses incurred by the City.
      4.   Waivers: The City Administrator may waive certain submittal
requirements in order to reduce the burden on the applicant and to tailor the
requirements to the information necessary to review a particular application.
The City Administrator may waive such requirements where he or she finds that
the projected size, complexity, anticipated impacts, or other factors
associated with the proposed development clearly, in his or her opinion,
support such waiver.
      5.   Additional Information: Additional application-specific information
may be required by the City Administrator, Planning Commission, and/or City
Council, as necessary and appropriate to evaluate fully whether an application
complies with the requirements of this title.
      6.   Inactive Files: If an applicant fails to submit required information
or request a hearing date for a period of more than six (6) months, his or her
file shall become void and the resubmittal of a new application and fees shall
be required. The City Administrator may grant no more than two (2) extensions
of time to this provision, of no more than six (6) months each, upon a written
request by the applicant.
   C.   Step 3: Determination Of Application Completeness: After receipt of the
development application, the City Administrator shall determine whether the
application is complete and ready for review.
      1.   If the application is determined to be complete, the application
shall then be processed according to the procedures set forth in this title. An
application will be considered complete if it is submitted in the required
form, includes all mandatory information and supporting materials, and is
accompanied by the applicable fee. A pre-application conference shall have been
held, if required by this title. The determination of completeness shall not be
based upon the perceived merits of the application.
      2.   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the City
Administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant along with an
explanation of the application's deficiencies. No further processing of an
incomplete application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected in a
future resubmittal.
      3.   If any false or misleading information is submitted or supplied by
an applicant on an application, that application will be deemed incomplete.
      4.   At any time during the review process, the City Administrator
reserves the right to involve State authorities through the Construction
Industries Boards, or other State inspectors or designees to review plans.
   D.   Step 4: Notice:
      1.   Content Of Notices: Notice of all public hearings required under
this chapter shall, unless otherwise specified in this title:
         a.   Identify the date, time, and place of the public hearing;
         b.   If applicable, describe the property involved in the application
by street address and/or by legal description and nearest cross street;
         c.   Describe the nature, scope, and purpose of the proposed action;
         d.   Indicate that interested parties may appear at the hearing and
speak on the matter; and
         e.   Indicate where additional information on the matter may be
obtained.
      2.   Summary Of Notice Requirements: The following table 6.2-1 summarizes
the notice requirements of the procedures in this chapter.
TABLE 6.2-1
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
 
Type Of Application Or Procedure Section Mailed Published Posted
Amendments: text of this title      10-6-3 - X -
Amendments: rezonings               10-6-3 X X X
Planned unit developments           10-6-4 X X X
Use on review permits               10-6-5 X X X
Site plan review                    10-6-6 - - -
Temporary uses                      10-6-7 - - -
Variances                           10-6-8 X X -
Appeals of administrative decisions 10-6-9 X X -
 
      3.   Mailed (Written) Notice: When table 6.2-1 of this section requires
that mailed notice be provided, the applicant shall provide the City
Administrator with a current list of applicable property owners and
organizations as listed below, prepared and certified by a title insurance
company or abstract company licensed by the State of Oklahoma, along with
addressed adhesive envelope labels for each owner. The City Administrator shall
deposit such notice into first class mail at least twenty (20) days prior to
the scheduled date of the hearing. In computing such period, the day of mailing
shall not be counted, but the day of the hearing shall be counted. Written
notice shall be provided to the following persons or groups:
         a.   Property owners: All persons listed on the records of the County
Assessor as owners of land subject to the application or as owners of the
parcels within three hundred feet (300') of the outer boundary of the land
subject to the application.
         b.   Notice to property owners for the following land uses: If the
zoning change requested permits the use of treatment facilities, multiple
family facilities, transitional living facilities, halfway houses and any
housing or facility that may be used for medical or nonmedical detoxification
as these terms are defined pursuant to 43A Oklahoma Statutes section 3-403, as
amended, the applicant proposing the zoning change shall mail a written notice
within thirty (30) days of the hearing to all real property owners within one-
quarter (1/4) of a mile, or one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320'), of
the outer boundary of the land subject to the application. The applicant shall
be responsible for all costs incurred in mailing this notice.
      4.   Published Notice: If a published notice is required by table 6.2-
1 of this section, the City Administrator shall publish notice in a newspaper
of general circulation in the area. The notice shall be published at least
twenty (20) days before and within thirty (30) days of the scheduled hearing
date. In computing such period, the day of posting shall not be counted, but
the day of the hearing shall be counted.
      5.   Posted Notice: Posted notice, if required by table 6.2-1 of this
section, shall be provided in the following manner: There shall be posting of
at least one sign on the lot, parcel, or tract of land, and such sign shall
remain on the property for a period of at least ten (10) days prior to the
public hearing. The sign shall be posted in a prominent place, clearly visible
from a major street if the property abuts such a street, or clearly visible to
the most heavily traveled street or public way if the property does not abut a
major street. In particular, a tract of land abutting a major street and that
also abuts a residential subdivision having stubbed streets that cannot be
served by the same major street serving the tract being rezoned, shall post at
least one additional sign clearly visible from at least one street in the
residential subdivision which is stubbed to the tract for which the rezoning is
being requested.
      6.   Constructive Notice:
         a.   Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or
invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been
made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice
shall be limited to errors in a legal description or typographical or
grammatical errors that do not impede communication of the notice to affected
parties. If questions arise at the hearing regarding the adequacy of notice,
the decision-making body shall make a formal finding as to whether there was
substantial compliance with the notice requirements of this title. Failure of a
party to receive written notice wherein delivery was attempted shall not
invalidate subsequent action.
         b.   When the records of the City document the publication, mailing,
and posting of notices as required by this section, it shall be presumed that
notice of a public hearing was given as required by this section.
   E.   Step 5: Staff Report: Within a reasonable time after determining that a
development application is complete, the City Administrator shall refer the
development application to the appropriate review agencies, review the
development application, and prepare a staff report. The staff report shall be
made available for inspection and copying by the applicant and the public prior
to the scheduled public hearing for the development application. The staff
report shall indicate whether, in the opinion of the staff, the development
application complies with all applicable standards of this title. Conditions
for approval may also be recommended to eliminate any areas of noncompliance or
mitigate any adverse effects of the development proposal.
   F.   Step 6: Public Hearing: A public hearing, if required under this title,
shall be conducted in accordance with the rules adopted by the City of Marlow.
   G.   Step 7: Decision And Findings:
      1.   Decision: After consideration of the development application, the
staff report, comments received from other reviewers (if applicable), and the
evidence from the public hearing (if applicable), the decision-maker shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based on its
compliance with the applicable approval criteria, as described in step 9 of the
common development review procedures. Written notification of the decision
shall be provided by the City Administrator to the applicant within ten (10)
days after the decision.
      2.   Findings: All decisions shall include at the least the following
elements:
         a.   A clear statement of approval, approval with conditions, or
denial, whichever is appropriate; and
         b.   A clear statement of the basis upon which the decision was made,
including specific, written findings of fact with reference to the relevant
standards of this title.
      3.   Effect Of Inaction On Applications: When a review or decision-
making body fails to take action on an application within the time required
(which varies by type of application), such inaction shall be deemed a denial
of the application, unless the decision-making body agrees to an extension of
the time frame in writing.
      4.   Record Of Proceedings:
         a.   Recording Of Public Hearing: The decision-maker conducting the
public hearing shall record the public hearing by any appropriate means. A copy
of the public hearing record may be acquired by any person upon application to
the City Administrator, and payment of a fee to cover the cost of duplication
of the record.
         b.   The Record: The record shall consist of the following:
            (1)   All exhibits including, without limitation, all writings,
drawings, maps, charts, graphs, photographs and other tangible items received
or viewed by the decision maker at the proceedings.
            (2)   All minutes of the proceedings.
            (3)   If appealed, a verbatim transcript of the proceedings before
the decision maker. The cost of the transcript shall be borne by the applicant.
            (4)   If available, a videotape recording of the proceedings before
the decision maker.
      5.   Recording Of Decisions: Once approved, and after the appeal period
has expired, the decision of the decision maker shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
   H.   Step 8: Approval Criteria: To approve a development application, the
decision-maker shall find that the development application has satisfied and
followed the applicable requirements of this chapter and meets all of the
approval criteria required for the applicable development application, which
are set forth in subsequent sections of this chapter under step 9.
   I.   Step 9: Conditions Of Approval: The decision-maker may impose such
conditions on the approval of the application as may be necessary to reduce or
minimize any potential adverse impact upon other property in the area, or to
carry out the general purpose and intent of this title. In such cases, any
conditions attached to approvals shall be directly related to the impacts of
the proposed use or development and shall be roughly proportional in both
nature and extent to the anticipated impacts of the proposed use or
development. No conditions of approval, except for those attached to variance
or minor modification approvals, shall be less restrictive than the
requirements of this title.
   J.   Step 10: Amendments To Permits Or Other Forms Of Approval:
      1.   Minor Amendments: Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, minor
amendments to any permit or other form of approval issued by the City
Administrator or the Planning Commission under this chapter may be approved,
approved with conditions, or denied administratively by the City Administrator
and may be authorized without additional public hearings. Such minor amendments
may be authorized by the City Administrator as long as the development
approval, as so amended, continues to comply with the standards of this title,
at least to the extent of its original compliance (so as to preclude any
greater deviation from the standards of this title by reason of such
amendments). Minor amendments shall only consist of any or all of the
following:
         a.   Any change to any permit or other form of approval that was
originally subject only to administrative review and was approved by the City
Administrator, provided such change would not have disqualified the original
application from administrative review had it been requested at that time; and
provided that the minor amendment does not result in an increase of more than
ten percent (10%) in the amount of square footage of a land use or structure
and does not result in a change in the types of uses in the project.
         b.   Any change to any permit or other form of approval that was
originally subject to final review by the Planning Commission and was approved
by the Planning Commission, provided that:
            (1)   The minor amendment does not result in an increase in the
approved number of dwelling units;
            (2)   The minor amendment does not result in an increase in the
amount of square footage of a nonresidential land use or structure;
            (3)   The minor amendment does not result in a change in the
housing mix or use mix ratio; and
            (4)   The minor amendment does not result in a change in the
character of the development.
         c.   In either subsection J1a or J1b of this section, the City
Administrator may refer the amendment to the Planning Commission and, if so
referred, the decision of the Planning Commission shall constitute a final
decision, subject only to appeal as provided for in section
10-6-9 of this chapter.
      2.   Major Amendments: Amendments to any permit or other form of approval
that are not determined by the City Administrator to be minor amendments under
the criteria in subsection J1 of this section shall be deemed major amendments.
Major amendments shall be reviewed and processed in the same manner as required
for the original application for which amendment is sought. Any major
amendments shall be recorded as amendments in accordance with the procedures
established for the filing and recording of such initially approved permit or
other form of approval.
   K.   Step 11: Lapse: If applicable, the lapse of approval time frames
established by the procedures of this title may be extended only when all of
the following conditions exist:
      1.   The provisions of this title must expressly allow the extension;
      2.   An extension request must be filed prior to the applicable lapse-of-
approval deadline;
      3.   The extension request must be in writing and include justification;
and
      4.   Unless otherwise noted, authority to grant extensions of time shall
rest with the decision-making body that granted the original approval (the one
being extended). (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-6-3: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: This section covers applications to amend the text of
this title, and the zoning map.
   B.   Applications To Amend The Text Of This Title:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of text amendments is not to relieve particular
hardships, nor to confer special privileges or rights on any person, but rather
to make adjustments to the text of this title that are necessary in light of
changed conditions or changes in public policy, or that are necessary to
advance the general welfare of the City.
      2.   Applicability: Any amendments to the text of this title shall be
processed in accordance with this section. Only the City Council may, after
recommendation of the Planning Commission, adopt an ordinance amending the text
of this title in accordance with the requirements of this section.
      3.   Procedure: The common development review procedures of section
10-6-2 of this chapter shall apply, with modifications as noted below.
         a.   Step 1: Pre-Application Conference: Not applicable.
         b.   Step 2: Development Application Submittal: Applicable.
         c.   Step 3: Determination Of Application Completeness: Applicable.
         d.   Step 4: Notice: Applicable. Published notice required.
         e.   Step 5: Staff Report: Applicable.
         f.   Step 6: Public Hearing: Applicable. If desired, text amendments
can be considered at a scheduled joint public hearing of the Planning
Commission and the City Council.
         g.   Step 7: Decision And Findings: Applicable. The following
additional procedures shall apply:
            (1)   Planning Commission Review And Recommendation:
   (A) After conducting the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make
a recommendation to the City Council to approve or deny the text amendment
based on the applicable standards of this section.
   (B) If no recommendation is made within thirty (30) days of the public
hearing, then the Planning Commission may request an extension of time from the
City Council. If no recommendation is made and no extension is granted, then
the City Council may act on the proposed amendment without a recommendation
from the Planning Commission.
 
            (2)   City Council Action: After reviewing the reports and
recommendations of the City Administrator and the Planning Commission, the City
Council shall vote to approve, approve with amendments, or deny the proposed
amendment, based on the applicable standards of this section. The City Council
also may refer the proposed amendment back to the Planning Commission for
further consideration. Amendments to the text of this title shall be approved
in the form of ordinances.
            (3)   Alternative Review Procedure: Notwithstanding the procedure
set forth above, where the City Council determines by a majority vote that the
public health, safety, or welfare necessitates, text amendments may be
considered at any regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. In such
cases, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment, and
shall request a recommendation from the Planning Commission prior to making a
decision on the amendment.
            (4)   Protests: Any owner of property affected by a proposed
amendment may protest the amendment pursuant to the statutory requirements of
11 Oklahoma Statutes section 43-105.
            (5)   Records Of Amendments: A record of amendments to the text of
this title in a form convenient for the use of the public shall be maintained
in the Office of the City Clerk.
            (6)   Subsequent Applications: Following denial of a text amendment
request, the City Council shall not decide on applications for the same or
substantially the same amendment within one year of the date of denial. The
waiting period required by this section may be waived in an individual case,
for good cause shown, by the affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the
members of the City Council.
         h.   Step 8: Approval Criteria: Applicable, as follows:
Recommendations and decisions on text amendments may be approved if the City
Council finds that all of the following approval criteria have been met:
            (1)   The proposed amendment will promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare;
            (2)   The proposed amendment is consistent with the stated purposes
of this title; and
            (3)   The proposed amendment is necessary or desirable because of
changing conditions, new planning concepts, or other social or economic
conditions.
         i.   Step 9: Conditions Of Approval: Not applicable.
         j.   Step 10: Amendments: Not applicable.
         k.   Step 11: Lapse: Not applicable.
   C.   Applications To Amend The Zoning Map (Rezonings):
      1.   Purpose: The boundaries of any zone district may be changed, or the
zone classification of any parcel of land may be changed, pursuant to this
section. Upon approval of a rezoning by the City Council, the zoning map will
be updated to reflect the approval.
      2.   Procedure: The common development review procedures of section
10-6-2 of this chapter shall apply, with modifications as noted below.
         a.   Step 1: Pre-Application Conference: Pre-application conferences
are recommended for rezoning applications.
         b.   Step 2: Development Application Submittal: Applicable. The
Planning Commission or the City Council also may initiate a rezoning. However,
the City Council may not initiate a rezoning without first allowing study and
hearing by the Planning Commission.
         c.   Step 3: Determination Of Application Completeness: Applicable.
         d.   Step 4: Notice: Published, written, and posted notice required.
         e.   Step 5: Staff Report: Applicable.
         f.   Step 6: Public Hearings: Applicable. The first hearing shall be
held by the Planning Commission, and the second hearing shall be held by the
City Council.
         g.   Step 7: Decision And Findings: Applicable. The following
additional procedures shall apply:
            (1)   Review And Recommendation By Planning Commission:
               (A)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed rezoning and, based on the approval criteria in step 9 below, vote to
recommend that the City Council approve, approve with modifications, or deny
the rezoning.
               (B)   The City Administrator shall forward the commission's
recommendation to the City Council. The case shall be heard at the second
Council meeting following the Planning Commission hearing.
               (C)   If the Planning Commission recommends that the City
Council deny a rezoning, that action is final unless, within fifteen (15) days
of the commission's action, the applicant files a written request with the City
Administrator for a hearing by the City Council.
            (2)   Action By City Council: The City Council shall hold a public
hearing on the proposed rezoning and within ninety (90) days after the
conclusion of the hearing, based upon the recommendations of the City
Administrator and Planning Commission, approve or deny the rezoning, or refer
the application back to the Planning Commission or to a committee of the City
Council for further consideration.
            (3)   Protests: Any owner of property affected by a proposed
amendment may protest the amendment pursuant to the statutory requirements of
11 Oklahoma Statutes section 43-105.
            (4)   Form Of Amending Ordinance: If a rezoning application is
approved, an ordinance shall be drafted effectuating the rezoning. An ordinance
amending the zoning map shall contain the following:
               (A)   The name of each use district which the ordinance applies;
and
               (B)   The legal description of the land within each zoning
district applied by the ordinance.
            (5)   Successive Applications: Following denial of an amendment
proposal, no new application for the same or substantially the same action
shall be accepted by the City within one year of the date of City Council
denial, unless denial is made without prejudice.
            (6)   Platting Requirements:
               (A)   All land that has been rezoned shall be platted in
accordance with the requirements of the Marlow subdivision ordinance in order
to provide for the proper arrangement of streets, assure the adequacy of open
space for traffic, provide for utilities, and allow access of emergency
vehicles. No map amendment for a zoning change, nor the ordinance proclaiming
this change, may be approved by the City Council until the property has been
platted in accordance with the subdivision ordinance. However, the City Council
may waive the platting requirement in those instances in which nothing would be
accomplished through enforcement of the platting requirement, such as in those
instances in which the land is included within the existing plat of record that
adequately provides for the necessary public features, or where these public
features have been previously provided by other instruments.
               (B)   A building permit shall not be granted upon any land that
has been rezoned, but which land has not been platted following the rezoning in
accordance with the subdivision ordinance. However, the City Administrator may
authorize the issuance of a building permit in those instances in which the
public needs have already been met, such as lands that have been previously
platted in a manner adequate in providing the necessary public features.
         h.   Step 8: Approval Criteria: Applicable, as follows: The City
Council may approve rezonings, and the Planning Commission may recommend
approval, if the rezoning meets all of the following criteria:
            (1)   The rezoning will promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare;
            (2)   The rezoning is consistent with the purposes of this title;
            (3)   The rezoning is consistent with the stated purpose of the
proposed zoning district;
            (4)   The rezoning is not likely to result in significant adverse
impacts upon other property in the vicinity of the subject tract; and
            (5)   Future uses on the subject tract will be compatible in scale
with uses on other properties in the vicinity of the subject tract.
         i.   Step 9: Conditions Of Approval: Applicable.
         j.   Step 10: Amendments: Not applicable.
         k.   Step 11: Lapse: Not applicable. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-6-4: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: Planned Unit Development (PUD) is established as an overlay
zoning district and is intended as an alternative to conventional development.
Approval of a PUD requires the submission to the Planning Commission and the
City Council of a proposed outline development plan and accompanying
development standards applicable to a particular tract, for discretionary
review. The PUD provisions are established for one or more of the following
purposes:
      1.   To permit and encourage innovative land development while
maintaining appropriate limitation on the character and intensity of use and
assuring compatibility with adjoining and proximate properties.
      2.   To permit greater flexibility within the development to best utilize
the physical features of the particular site in exchange for greater public
benefits than would otherwise be achieved through development under this title.
      3.   To encourage the provision and preservation of meaningful open
space.
      4.   To encourage integrated and unified design and function of the
various uses comprising the planned unit development.
      5.   To encourage a more productive use of land consistent with the
public objectives and standards of accessibility, safety, infrastructure and
land use compatibility.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   A PUD may be submitted for land located within any general zoning
district or combination of general zoning districts. In every instance, the PUD
is to be reviewed as to the proposed location and character of the uses and the
unified treatment of the development of the tract. The regulations of the
general zoning district or districts remain applicable except as specifically
modified pursuant to the provisions of this section.
      2.   Approval of both outline and final outline development plans is
required prior to development in a PUD District. Outline development plans are
subject to recommendation by the Planning Commission and approval by the City
Council.
      3.   An outline development plan may be submitted concurrently with a
petition for annexation or a request for rezoning.
      4.   The planned development ordinances or parts of ordinances approved
prior to the effective date of this title shall be carried forth in full force
and effect and are the conditions, restrictions, regulations, and requirements
that apply to the respective planned development districts shown on the Zoning
Map at the date of adoption.
   C.   Effect Of Approval: Upon approval of a PUD, no modification of use or
bulk and area requirements of the applicable general use district or districts
shall be effectuated by issuance of any building or zoning clearance permit
until a subdivision plat incorporating the provisions and requirements of this
section and subsection
10-3-1E of this title is submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission
and the City Council and duly filed of record in the Office of the County Clerk
of the county in which the PUD is located.
   D.   Procedure: The common development review procedures of section
10-6-2 of this chapter shall apply, with modifications as noted below.
      1.   Step 1: Pre-Application Conference: During the required pre-
application meeting with the City Administrator, a determination will be made
as to whether or not a draft PUD submittal is required. If it is determined
that a draft PUD submittal is needed, it shall be submitted for staff review at
least two (2) weeks prior to the application being submitted.
      2.   Step 2: Development Application Submittal: Applicable as follows:
The application for PUD shall include an outline development plan. The City
Administrator shall require sufficient detail in the outline development plan
to provide an opportunity for the reviewing bodies to make informed decisions
and evaluate compliance with the applicable approval criteria. The plan shall
include, at a minimum, maps drawn to scale and text, which identify:
         a.   The existing topographic character of the land including
floodplains and treed areas.
         b.   Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of
the PUD to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed.
         c.   An explanation of the character and concepts of the proposed
planned unit development.
         d.   A delineation of one or more proposed development areas and the
specification of the size of each development area and the identification of
the land uses proposed therein, and the intensity of land use proposed therein.
The intensity of residential uses shall be expressed in number of dwelling
units. The intensity of nonresidential uses shall be expressed in gross floor
area of buildings.
         e.   The proposed maximum building heights and minimum building
setbacks.
         f.   The approximate location of proposed streets and access points
and delineation of any proposed private streets.
         g.   The proposed number of off-street parking spaces.
         h.   An explanation of proposed open space areas, landscaped areas and
screening features including specification of the size of the open space and
landscaped areas and statistical particulars of perimeter screening,
landscaping and setbacks.
         i.   An explanation of the intended ownership of the common areas and
the entity or entities responsible for the maintenance of the common areas.
         j.   The expected schedule of development including phasing.
         k.   Location of public and private open space.
         l.   Existing or proposed utilities and public services.
         m.   A statement that development on the site will meet applicable
standards of the underlying zoning district and this title, or a statement
specifying the standards of the underlying district and this title to which
modifications are proposed and the justification for such modifications.
         n.   A statement specifying the public benefit(s) to be contained in
or associated with the PUD.
      3.   Step 3: Determination Of Application Completeness: Applicable.
      4.   Step 4: Notice: Applicable. Written, published, and posted notice
required.
      5.   Step 5: Staff Report: Applicable.
      6.   Step 6: Public Hearings: Applicable, as follows: Two (2) public
hearings are required. The first hearing shall be held by the Planning
Commission, and the second hearing shall be held by the City Council.
      7.   Step 7: Decision And Findings: Applicable. The following additional
procedures shall apply:
         a.   Review and recommendation by Planning Commission.
            (1)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
outline development plan. Within sixty (60) days from the filing of a complete
application (unless an applicant has requested and been granted a continuance),
the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing. The commission shall
recommend that the City Council approve the plan as submitted, approve the plan
with modifications, or deny the plan and shall forward the recommendation to
the City Council.
            (2)   An application recommended for denial shall not be considered
further unless the applicant, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the
Planning Commission action, files a written request with the Development
Services Department for a hearing by the City Council.
         b.   Action By City Council: The City Council shall hold a public
hearing on the outline development plan not sooner than ten (10) days
subsequent to the date of the Planning Commission action. At the close of the
hearing, the Council shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny, or
return the application to the Planning Commission for further consideration.
Approval of the outline development plan shall vest no rights to the applicant
other than the right to submit a final outline development plan.
         c.   Submission Of Final Outline Development Plan As Approved: For the
purposes of achieving a reasonably accessible and accurate record of each
approved PUD, a final outline development plan, as approved by the City
Council, shall be filed as follows:
            (1)   Filing After Planning Commission Recommendation: Within ten
(10) days after Planning Commission recommendation of approval of a proposed
PUD, the applicant shall file with the Development Services Department five (5)
paper copies and one electronic copy in a PDF format of a revised outline
development plan that incorporates any modifications to the outline development
plan recommended by the Planning Commission and accepted by the applicant.
            (2)   Filing After City Council Approval: Within ten (10) days
after City Council approval of a proposed PUD, the applicant shall submit to
the Development Services Department five (5) paper copies and one electronic
copy in a PDF format of a revised outline development plan that incorporates
any City Council modifications to the outline development plan, if any, as last
submitted by the applicant.
            (3)   Approved Final Plan: Within ten (10) days after City Council
approval of a proposed PUD and receipt from the applicant of five (5) copies of
an outline development plan that incorporates all modifications made by the
City Council, if any, or if a previously submitted outline development plan
fully is consistent with the approval action of the City Council, the
Development Services Department shall date and endorse five (5) copies as the
approved final outline development plan and shall provide an endorsed copy to
the applicant.
            (4)   Notation On Zoning Map: Upon approval of an application for
PUD, the zoning map shall be amended to set forth the supplemental zoning
district designation "PUD" and a reference file number.
            (5)   Issuance Of Building Permits: Upon the amendment of the
zoning map designating a property as a PUD, no building permit shall issue
except in accordance with the approved outline development plan and the
approved development standards and conditions, including but not limited to the
recording of the required subdivision plat and the approval of required site
plans.
      8.   Step 8: Criteria For Approval: Applicable, as follows: The City
Council may approve outline development plans, and the Planning Commission may
recommend approval, if the rezoning to the PUD Overlay District and the
associated outline development plan meets all of the following criteria:
         a.   The PUD addresses a unique situation, confers a substantial
benefit to the City, or incorporates creative site design such that it achieves
the purposes of this title and represents an improvement in quality over what
could have been accomplished through strict application of the otherwise
applicable district or development standards. Such improvements in quality may
include, but are not limited to: improvements in open space provision and
access; environmental protection; tree/vegetation preservation; efficient
provision of streets, roads, and other utilities and services; or increased
choice of living and housing environments.
         b.   The PUD is consistent with the purposes of this title; and
         c.   The PUD is consistent with the PUD standards in subsection 10-3-
1E of this title.
      9.   Step 9: Conditions Of Approval: The following shall be standard
conditions of the approval of a PUD:
         a.   The development standards set forth within the applicant's
submitted outline development plan shall be deemed to be incorporated within
the action of the City Council in its approval of the application for PUD
except as modified therein.
         b.   The requirements of the general zoning districts in which the
property is located shall remain applicable except as modified within the
approved outline development plan and as may be further modified by the City
Council in its approval of the application for PUD.
         c.   A PUD shall be platted or replatted in accordance with the
requirements of subsection E, "Coordination With Subdivision Approval", of this
section.
         d.   A detailed site plan shall be submitted for proposed buildings
and improvements within the PUD in accordance with the requirements of
subsection F, "Coordination With Site Plan Approval", of this section.
         e.   The development of an approved PUD shall be subject to the
planned unit development provisions of this title, as the provisions existed on
the date of approval of the PUD by the City Council, provided however:
            (1)   The procedural provisions of this title as existing on the
date of the filing of an application for amendment to an approved planned unit
development, including but not limited to required notice, shall be applicable
to such amendment.
            (2)   The substantive provisions of this title pertaining to PUD as
amended subsequent to the date of approval by the City Council of a PUD,
including but not limited to changes in the permitted use or intensity of use
of the underlying general zoning districts, may be incorporated within the
previously approved PUD upon the approval of the City Council of an application
for amendment.
      10.   Step 10: Amendments: Applicable as follows:
         a.   Major Amendments: Amendments to an approved PUD that would
constitute a significant departure from the approved outline development plan
are called "major amendments", and shall require compliance with the notice and
procedural requirements of an original PUD; provided, however, notice by
mailing may be limited to the owners of property within three hundred feet
(300') of the area of the PUD to which the amendment is applicable, and notice
by posting may be limited to the area of the PUD to which the amendment is
applicable.
         b.   Minor Amendments:
            (1)   Amendments to an approved PUD that do not constitute a
significant departure from the approved outline development plan are called
"minor amendments" and shall require notice to be given, by certificate of
mailing, only to the record title owners of the properties that are within the
PUD and are immediately adjacent to the lot(s) or property(ies) that are the
subject of the amendment to the approved PUD. Minor amendments may be approved
by the Planning Commission.
            (2)   In instances where, in the initial consideration of an
application for PUD, the City Council has imposed a condition of approval that
is more restrictive than the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
amendment of that condition shall require City Council approval.
            (3)   Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of
structures, streets, driveways, and open spaces generally may be approved as
minor amendments to approved PUDs. However, nothing in this section shall
preclude the Planning Commission from determining that, in a particular
instance, the requested amendment should be deemed a major amendment.
            (4)   In no case may the minor amendment process be used to cause
any of the following:
               (A)   A change in the use or character of the development;
               (B)   An increase by more than one percent (1%) in the overall
coverage of structures;
               (C)   An increase in the density or intensity of use;
               (D)   An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and
public utilities;
               (E)   A reduction of not more than one percent (1%) in approved
common open space;
               (F)   A reduction in off-street parking and loading spaces;
               (G)   A reduction in required pavement widths.
            (5)   An appeal to the City Council from a decision of the Planning
Commission approving or denying a minor amendment may be taken by any person
aggrieved by the filing of a notice of appeal with the Development Services
Department within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Planning Commission
decision.
      11.   Step 11: Lapse: Applicable, as follows:
         a.   If a plat has not been recorded on any portion of the PUD within
two (2) years after its approval by the City Council, the PUD shall expire. The
property owner may request an extension of the PUD for twelve (12) months by
submitting a written explanation and demonstration that no Code changes are
affected by this extension. Two (2) one-year extensions may be considered and
approved by staff. If a plat has not been recorded on any portion of the PUD
within four (4) years after its initial approval, it shall expire and zoning
shall revert to its pre-PUD status. Once a plat is recorded on any portion of
the PUD, the entire PUD is validated.
         b.   Abandonment of a PUD shall require the approval of the City
Council, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, of an application for
amendment of the zoning map repealing the PUD overlay designation. Upon filing
of an application for abandonment of a PUD, the Planning Commission shall
forthwith advise the City Council of the application and the City Council may
thereupon direct the Planning Commission to initiate an application to amend
the underlying general zoning district or districts within which the PUD is
located. In each instance where an application for amendment to the underlying
general zoning district or districts was approved concurrently with the
approval of a PUD, the City Council may direct that the applicant for
abandonment forthwith file an application to amend the underlying general
zoning district or districts to the district or districts existing prior to the
approval of the PUD. Alternatively, upon the hearing by the City Council of an
application for abandonment of a PUD, the City Council may approve the
abandonment upon condition that the underlying general zoning district or
districts be amended as determined by the City Council to be appropriate.
   E.   Coordination With Subdivision Approval: Following submission of the
final outline development plan, as approved, a planned unit development
subdivision plat shall be filed with the Planning Commission and shall be
processed in accordance with the subdivision regulations, and in addition to
the requirements of the subdivision regulations, shall include within the plat
and/or the deed of dedication:
      1.   The location of permitted uses and the intensity of permitted uses.
      2.   The designation of any private streets, the right-of-way width and
improvement specifications thereof, and the entity responsible for maintenance
of the private streets.
      3.   Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of any common open
space as will reasonably insure its continuity and conservation. Open space may
be conveyed to a property owners association or dedicated to the public,
provided that a dedication to the public shall require the approval of the City
Council.
      4.   Covenants reasonably assuring the continued compliance with the
approved outline development plan, which shall include, but without limitation,
covenants pertaining to such matters as permitted uses, intensity of uses,
location of uses, height of structures, setbacks, screening, access and
applicable conditions of approval. In order that the public interest may be
protected, the City of Marlow shall be made beneficiary of the required
covenants pertaining to the PUD and shall provide that the City of Marlow may
enforce compliance therewith and shall further provide that amendment of the
covenants shall require the approval of the Planning Commission and City
Council and shall be implemented by a written instrument of amendment, duly
recorded and bearing the approval of the Planning Commission and City Council.
   F.   Coordination With Site Plan Approval:
      1.   A detailed site plan of each area within an approved PUD proposed
for construction of improvements shall be submitted to the City Administrator
for approval upon determination that the proposed improvements are in
accordance with the development standards of the final outline development plan
and the conditions of approval imposed. The site plan shall be submitted and
processed pursuant to section
10-6-6 of this chapter.
      2.   As applied to the area of the PUD approved for single-family
detached dwellings or duplex dwellings, the required subdivision plat shall be
deemed to be the required detail site plan, provided, however, the City
Council, as a condition of the approval of an outline development plan, may
require that a detail site plan of any proposed gating of private streets and
related entry features be submitted to the City Administrator for review and
approval. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-6-5: USE ON REVIEW PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose: This section provides a discretionary approval process for use
on review permits, which are required for uses that have unique or widely
varying operating characteristics or unusual site development features. The
uses classified as specific uses tend to more intensely dominate the area in
which they are located than do other permitted uses in the district. Care
should be taken to integrate specific land uses with other uses in the area and
to prevent adverse impacts on the community at large. The procedure encourages
public review and evaluation of a use's operating characteristics and site
development features. This review process is intended to provide assurance to
the community that such uses will be compatible with their locations and
surrounding land uses and will further the purposes of this title.
   B.   Relationship To Site Plan Requirements: A conceptual site plan shall be
submitted with specific use permit application. The formal site plan that is
submitted later shall be in substantial compliance with the conceptual site
plan approved by the City Council.
   C.   Procedure: The common development review procedures of section
10-6-2 of this chapter shall apply, with modifications as noted below.
      1.   Step 1: Preapplication Conference: Applicable.
      2.   Step 2: Development Application Submittal: Applicable.
      3.   Step 3: Determination Of Application Completeness: Applicable.
      4.   Step 4: Notice: Published, written and posted notice applicable.
      5.   Step 5: Staff Report: Applicable.
      6.   Step 6: Public Hearing: Applicable.
      7.   Step 7: Decision And Findings: Applicable. The following additional
procedures shall apply:
         a.   Planning Commission's Review And Recommendation: The Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed application and, within
thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the complete application,
recommend approval, approval with modifications and/or conditions, or denial of
the application based on the applicable approval criteria below. The commission
may continue the hearing on the decision for a maximum of sixty (60) days. The
recommendation shall be referred to the City Council for final action.
         b.   City Council Review And Action: Upon receipt of the Planning
Commission's recommendation, the City Council shall approve, approve with
modifications and/or conditions, or deny the application, or request that the
application be further reviewed by the Planning Commission.
         c.   Indication On Zoning Map Required: A zoning change is not
required for specific use permits; however, the location of each approved
specific use permit shall be indicated on the zoning map as follows: "URP      
     (the number of the request for a use on review permit)".
      8.   Step 8: Approval Criteria: Applicable, as follows: A specific use
permit may be approved only if the City Council finds that all of the following
criteria have been met:
         a.   The proposed use is consistent with all applicable provisions of
this title and applicable State and Federal regulations;
         b.   The proposed use is consistent with the purpose and intent of the
zoning district in which it is located;
         c.   The proposed use is consistent with any applicable specific use
permit standards set forth in section
10-3-2, "Use On Review Permit Standards", of this title;
         d.   The proposed use is compatible with adjacent uses in terms of
scale, site design, and operating characteristics (hours of operation, traffic
generation, lighting, noise, odor, dust, and other external impacts);
         e.   Any significant adverse impacts anticipated to result from the
use will be mitigated or offset to the maximum extent practicable;
         f.   Facilities and services (including sewage and waste disposal,
water, gas, electricity, police and fire protection, and roads and
transportation, as applicable) will be available to serve the subject property
while maintaining adequate levels of service for existing development; and
         g.   Adequate assurances of continuing maintenance have been provided;
      9.   Step 9: Conditions Of Approval: Applicable, with the following
additions:
         a.   Any of the conditions imposed by the permit shall be considered
as conditions precedent to the granting of a building permit for the specific
use allowed.
         b.   Following approval, a site plan meeting the conditions specified
in the specific use permit shall be required of the applicant and shall be
submitted and processed pursuant to section
10-6-6 of this chapter.
      10.   Step 10: Amendments: Applicable, with the following addition: No
approved specific use permit may be modified, physically expanded, hours of
operation extended, or otherwise altered unless amended in accordance with the
procedures applicable to initial approval of a specific use permit as set out
in this title.
      11.   Step 11: Lapse: Applicable, as follows:
         a.   In the event of noncompliance by the applicant with the specific
use permit or any conditions of approval, or if the specific use is not in
operation within one year after the date of its approval, the specific use
permit shall expire. An applicant may file an application to renew the specific
use permit. Such renewal shall occur in the same manner as for original
approval as provided in this section.
         b.   Should the specific use cease operation for a period longer than
one year, then the permit shall be considered void and shall require a new
application. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-6-6: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the site plan review process is to ensure
compliance with the development and design standards and provisions of this
title. Prior to any building being constructed in an R-4, R-MHC, C-1, C-2, C-3,
I-1, or I-2 District, a site plan shall be submitted that shows a unified and
organized arrangement of the building and/or buildings, off-street parking,
points of ingress and egress, internal traffic circulation, property lines,
building setback distances, freestanding signs, service facilities, utility
locations, light poles, solid waste collection facilities, screening fences,
curb lines, neighboring curb cuts, and utility poles (if any). The plan must
contain information showing compliance with requirements of this section and
all other applicable City codes and ordinances.
   B.   Procedure For Site Plan Review: The common development review
procedures of section
10-6-2 of this chapter shall apply, with modifications as noted below.
      1.   Step 1: Pre-Application Conference: Applicable.
      2.   Step 2: Development Application Submittal: Applicable.
      3.   Step 3: Determination Of Application Completeness: Applicable.
      4.   Step 4: Notice: Not applicable.
      5.   Step 5: Staff Report: Not applicable.
      6.   Step 6: Public Hearings: Not applicable.
      7.   Step 7: Decision And Findings: Applicable. The following additional
procedures shall apply:
         a.   Action By City Administrator: The City Administrator shall review
each site plan application and distribute the application to other reviewers.
Based on the results of those reviews, the City Administrator shall take final
action on the application and approve, approve with conditions, deny or defer
decision on the application based on the applicable approval criteria below.
The City Administrator's review and decision, including referral to other
agencies and bodies, shall be completed within thirty (30) days of receipt of a
complete application.
         b.   Referral To Planning Commission: The City Administrator may refer
any application to the Planning Commission that in the City Administrator's
discretion presents issues that require Planning Commission attention.
         c.   Appeals To The Planning Commission: Appeals of decisions made by
the City Administrator under this section shall be made to the Planning
Commission upon written request to the Development Services Department within
ten (10) days subsequent to the decision of the City Administrator.
         d.   Appeal To The Board Of Adjustment: Appeals of decisions made by
the Planning Commission under this section shall be made to the Board of
Adjustment.
      8.   Step 8: Approval Criteria: Applicable, as follows: A site plan may
be approved upon a finding that the application meets all of the following
criteria:
         a.   The site plan is consistent with any previously approved
subdivision plat, planned development, or any other precedent plan or land use
approval as applicable;
         b.   The site plan complies with all applicable development and design
standards set forth in this title, including but not limited to the provisions
in chapters 2, "Zoning Districts", 3, "Use Regulations", 4, "Dimensional
Standards", and 5, "Development Standards", of this title.
      9.   Step 9: Conditions Of Approval: Applicable.
      10.   Step 10: Amendments: Applicable, with the following modification:
The following amendments are offered as examples of amendments to approved site
plans that the City Administrator may reasonably determine to be "minor":
         a.   Changes in street alignment if such changes further the intent of
the plan and this title.
         b.   Changes in building envelope, setback, and similar provisions of
ten percent (10%) or less.
         c.   Changes in landscaping, sign placement, lighting fixtures, etc.,
to further the intent of the plan and this title.
      11.   Step 11: Lapse: Applicable, as follows:
         a.   The site plan shall be effective for a period of three (3) years
from the date of approval, unless stated otherwise in such approval. Building
permits shall not be issued based on site plans that have an approval date more
than three (3) years old. For multiphased plans, building permits shall not be
issued based on an approval date more than three (3) years from the date of
Phase I approval.
         b.   The City Administrator may grant a one-time extension, of not
more than six (6) months, upon a written request by the applicant, prior to the
expiration of the site plan. Failure by the applicant to request a time
extension prior to the expiration of the plan shall render the unbuilt portion
of the plan null and void. The submittal of a revised site plan and fees shall
be required to obtain a building permit for further site improvements. (Ord.
420, 12-18-2017)
10-6-7: TEMPORARY USES:
   A.   Applicability: No use that is classified as a temporary use in the
zoning district in which it is to be located shall be placed or established on
the property without first receiving a temporary use permit, unless exempted
from the permit requirements by subsection
10-3-4C of this title.
   B.   Procedure: The common development review procedures of section
10-6-2 of this chapter shall apply, with modifications as noted below.
      1.   Step 1: Pre-Application Conference: Not applicable.
      2.   Step 2: Development Application Submittal: Applicable, with the
following modification:
         a.   Filing Deadline: All applications for temporary use permits shall
be filed at least four (4) weeks prior to the date the temporary use will
commence, or at least six (6) weeks prior to the date the temporary use will
commence if public safety support is requested from the City. The City
Administrator may waive this filing deadline requirement in an individual case,
for good cause shown.
      3.   Step 3: Determination Of Application Completeness: Applicable.
      4.   Step 4: Notice: Not applicable.
      5.   Step 5: Staff Report: Applicable.
      6.   Step 6: Public Hearings: Not applicable.
      7.   Step 7: Decision And Findings: Applicable. The following additional
procedures shall apply:
         a.   Action By City Administrator: The City Administrator shall review
each application and distribute the application to other reviewers. Based on
the results of those reviews, the City Administrator shall take final action on
the application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application
based on the applicable approval criteria below.
         b.   Duration Of Permit: A temporary use permit shall be valid only
for the time period stated on the permit, unless otherwise authorized in this
title.
      8.   Step 8: Approval Criteria: Applicable, as follows: The City
Administrator shall issue a temporary use permit only upon finding that the
proposed temporary use satisfies the requirements set forth in section
10-3-4, "Temporary Uses And Structures", of this title.
      9.   Step 9: Conditions Of Approval: Applicable.
      10.   Step 10: Amendments: Applicable.
      11.   Step 11: Lapse: Applicable, as follows: The temporary use permit
shall lapse and be null and void upon expiration of the time limit specified in
the permit. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-6-8: VARIANCES:
   A.   Purpose And Scope: The variance process is intended to provide limited
relief from the requirements of this title in those cases where strict
application of a particular requirement will create a practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship prohibiting the use of land in a manner otherwise allowed
under this title. It is not intended that variances be granted to: 1) allow a
use in a zone district where it is not permitted by this title; or 2) merely
remove inconveniences or financial burdens that the requirements of this title
may impose on property owners in general. Rather, it is intended to provide
limited relief where the requirements of this title render the land difficult
or impossible to use because of some unique physical attribute of the property
itself or some other factor unique to the property for which the variance is
requested. State and/or Federal laws or requirements may not be varied by the
City.
   B.   Procedure: The common development review procedures of section
10-6-2 of this chapter shall apply, with modifications as noted below.
      1.   Step 1: Pre-Application Conference: Applicable.
      2.   Step 2: Development Application Submittal: Applicable. An applicant
may file a variance application with the City Administrator.
      3.   Step 3: Determination Of Application Completeness: Applicable, with
the following modification: A request for variance may be initiated only by the
property owner or his authorized representative. The application must state
with particularity the relief sought and must specify the facts or
circumstances that are alleged to show that the application meets the approval
criteria of step 8 below.
      4.   Step 4: Notice: Applicable. Written and published notice required.
      5.   Step 5: Staff Report: Applicable.
      6.   Step 6: Public Hearing: Applicable. One public hearing is required
before the Board of Adjustment.
      7.   Step 7: Decision And Findings: Applicable. The following additional
procedures shall apply:
         a.   Action By The Board Of Adjustment:
            (1)   Upon receiving the application materials from the City
Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed variance.
            (2)   In considering the application, the Board of Adjustment shall
review the application materials, the applicable approval criteria below, and
all testimony and evidence received at the public hearing.
            (3)   After conducting the public hearing, the Board of Adjustment
may: deny the application; continue the hearing on the application; or grant
the requested variance. Any approval or denial of the request shall be by
resolution, accompanied by written findings of fact that the variance meets or
does not meet each of the criteria set forth below, stating the reasons for
such findings. A concurring vote of at least three (3) members of the board
shall be required to grant a variance.
            (4)   In granting any variance, the board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to implement the
purposes of this title.
      8.   Step 8: Approval Criteria: Applicable, as follows:
         a.   The Board of Adjustment may approve a variance only if it finds
that all of the criteria below have been met:
            (1)   There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, such
as irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot, or exceptional topographical
or other physical conditions peculiar to the affected property;
            (2)   The unusual circumstances or conditions do not exist
throughout the neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
            (3)   Such physical circumstances or conditions were not created by
the applicant;
            (4)   Because of such physical circumstances or conditions, the
property cannot reasonably be developed in conformity with the provisions of
this title;
            (5)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of
adjacent property; and
            (6)   The variance, if granted, is the minimum variance that will
afford relief and is the least modification possible of the provisions of this
title that are in question.
         b.   No variance shall be granted that violates the intent of this
title or its amendments.
         c.   No variance shall be granted from any written conditions attached
by another decision-making body to the approval of a specific use permit or
subdivision plat or site plan.
         d.   No variance shall be granted if the conditions or circumstances
affecting the applicant's property are of so general or recurrent a nature as
to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation for such
conditions or situations.
         e.   No variance may authorize a use other than those permitted in the
district for which the variance is sought; also, an application or request for
a variance shall not be heard or granted with regard to any parcel of property
or portion thereof upon which zoning request for any parcel of property or
portion thereof has not been finally acted upon by both the Planning Commission
and by the City Council.
      9.   Step 9: Conditions Of Approval: Applicable.
      10.   Step 10: Amendments: Not applicable.
      11.   Step 11: Lapse: Applicable, as follows: A variance that has not
been utilized within two (2) years from the date of the order granting the
variance shall thereafter be void. No time extensions of an approval can be
granted. However, if a lesser time limit than two (2) years has been placed on
the variance, then the lesser time limit shall apply. For the purposes of this
provision, utilization shall mean actual use or the issuance of a building
permit, when applicable, provided construction is diligently carried to
completion. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-6-9: APPEALS:
   A.   Appeals Of Administrative Decisions:
      1.   Purpose And Scope: The Board of Adjustment is empowered by this
title and Oklahoma law to hear appeals of administrative decisions made in the
interpretation and enforcement of this title. It is intended that all questions
arising in connection with the interpretation and enforcement of this title
shall be presented first to the City Administrator or any agency acting in
administrative capacity; and presented to the Board of Adjustment on appeal
from that administrative decision. It is further intended that the duties of
the City Council in connection with this title shall not include the hearing or
passing upon such appeals.
      2.   Decisions That May Be Appealed: An asserted error in any order,
requirement, permit, decision, determination, refusal, or interpretation made
by the City Administrator or any agency acting in an administrative capacity in
interpreting and/or enforcing the provisions of this title may be appealed to
the Board of Adjustment, unless otherwise provided in this title.
      3.   Filing Of Appeal; Effect Of Filing:
         a.   An appeal to the Board of Adjustment may be brought by any
person, firm, corporation, office, department, board, bureau, or commission
aggrieved by the order, requirement, permit, decision, or determination that is
the subject of the appeal, or by the City Administrator on behalf of the City.
         b.   An application for an appeal shall be filed with the City
Administrator. Once the application is complete, the City Administrator shall
schedule the appeal for consideration at a public hearing before the Board of
Adjustment. The City Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment
all applications and other records pertaining to such appeal. The application
shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the contested
action.
         c.   Written and published notice shall be required for all appeals of
administrative decisions.
         d.   The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the contested action, unless the City Administrator certifies to the Board
of Adjustment that, in his or her opinion by reason of facts stated in the
certification, such a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property. In
such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of law on notice to the
administrative official from whom the appeal is taken, with due cause shown.
      4.   Action By The Board Of Adjustment:
         a.   Upon receiving the application materials from the City
Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall hold a hearing on the appeal.
         b.   Either at the hearing or a subsequent meeting, the Board of
Adjustment shall adopt a resolution reversing, affirming, or modifying the
contested action. In reversing, affirming, or modifying the contested action,
the Board of Adjustment shall have all relevant powers of the administrative
officer from whom the appeal is taken.
         c.   The Board of Adjustment shall not reverse or modify the contested
action unless it finds that the administrative officer erred in the application
or interpretation of the terms of this title or related policies adopted by the
City.
         d.   The Board of Adjustment shall not reverse or modify the contested
action unless there is a concurring vote of at least three (3) members.
      5.   Effect Of Reversal Or Modification: In the event that the Board of
Adjustment reverses or modifies the contested action, all subsequent actions
taken by administrative officers with regard to the subject matter shall be in
accordance with the reversal or modification granted by the Board of
Adjustment.
   B.   Appeals From Planning Commission: Appeals from decisions by the
Planning Commission based upon this title shall be to the City Council, unless
otherwise provided in this title. Written and published notice shall be
required for all appeals of administrative decisions.
   C.   Appeal From Board Of Adjustment Or City Council: Appeals from decisions
made by the Board of Adjustment or the City Council based upon this title shall
be to the District Court. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-6-10: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building or other structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged or
altered in such manner as to prolong the life of the building, nor shall the
use of any land or building or other structure be changed, without a building
permit issued by the Development Services Department of the City of Marlow,
authorizing such construction, alteration or use changes as being in compliance
with provisions of this title.
   A.   An application for building permit shall be made to the Development
Services Department of the City of Marlow by the owner, or proposed occupant of
the building or land to be occupied or used, and said application shall state
the location and legal description of said property and set out in detail the
character and nature of the use to be conducted thereon. The Development
Services Department of the City of Marlow shall grant or deny the building
permit in accordance with the terms of this title.
   B.   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat or
drawing drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the
size and location of the building to be erected, and such other information as
may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of City regulations.
   C.   A building permit fee will be charged in accordance with the schedule
set forth in the Building Code of the City of Marlow, as adopted on the date
the application is made.
   D.   A building permit shall be issued only when a subdivision plat (as
required by the subdivision ordinance) and a site plan, if required, have been
approved. However, with the approval of the City Administrator, an applicant
may submit a building permit application to the building official concurrent
with the site plan application, which permit may be issued upon site plan
approval by the City Administrator. Building permits shall not be issued for
any development that is not in conformance with the approved site plan. (Ord.
420, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 7
REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING ENTITIES
SECTION:
10-7-1: Purpose
10-7-2: Boards And Commissions Generally
10-7-3: Planning Commission
10-7-4: Board Of Adjustment
10-7-5: City Staff
10-7-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter identifies the roles, duties, and responsibilities of various
appointed and elected boards, commissions, referral agencies, consultants
acting in the role of staff, and City staff in the administration of this
title. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-7-2: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY:
   A.   Board And Commission Appointment And Confirmation: Appointments to
boards and commissions within the scope of this title shall be made and
confirmed by the City Council in accordance with the rules adopted by the City
Council.
   B.   Conduct Of Boards And Commissions: This section contains procedures
that are common to all appointed boards and commissions under this chapter,
including the Planning Commission and the Board of Adjustment.
      1.   Absence Of Member: Any member of an appointed board or commission
under this chapter anticipating an absence from a meeting of their board or
commission shall so advise the Chair or Secretary prior to the meeting.
      2.   Agenda: The agenda for each regular meeting of an appointed board or
commission under this chapter shall be prepared by the Secretary and shall be
distributed to each member at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the
meeting.
      3.   Ordinance Of Ethics: The Planning Commission and the Board of
Adjustment members shall, in the performance of their quasi- judicial,
adjudicatory responsibilities in all matters before them, including all matters
that their members should reasonably know or expect to come before them, shall:
         a.   Make their decisions solely on the applicable law and the
evidence in the record presented to the panel through the Clerk or Secretary of
the board or commission or, when permitted, submitted to the panel in an open
hearing on the record;
         b.   Be impartial in fact and in appearance in the performance of
their functions, which means that the panel and its members shall make their
decisions without any actual or seemingly apparent personal or financial bias,
prejudice, prejudgment or partiality with respect to any person, party, or
principle of law; and
         c.   Conduct their proceedings according to the applicable procedures
provided by law.
      4.   Conflict Of Interest:
         a.   No member of an appointed board or commission under this chapter
shall participate in any decision in which the board or commission determines
either that such member has a conflict of interest, as defined in this Code; or
that such member has a personal interest or involvement in the case that would
prevent that member from fairly evaluating the case; or that, based on all
surrounding circumstances, participation by such member would create the
appearance of impropriety in the proceedings.
         b.   The determination shall take into consideration the interest of
the public in boards and commissions that have familiarity with the community
and its past and future development. No member shall be excused from
participation solely on the basis of personal familiarity with the case or the
parties involved.
         c.   Any member who has a possible conflict of interest in a pending
matter shall bring this information to the attention of the Chair before the
staff begins its presentation or as soon thereafter as the member recognizes
his or her possible conflict. It shall be the responsibility of each member to
fully disclose facts showing any known conflict of interest or other personal
interest or involvement. Where appropriate, the conflict may be discussed in
executive session.
         d.   Immediately upon discovering the existence of any conflict of
interest prohibited by this section, the Municipal ordinance, or any State law
applicable to local government officials, the board or commission member shall
fully disclose on the record in open session of the board or commission the
nature of and the facts creating the conflict and shall be disqualified from
any participation in or communications with other members of the board or
commission on the matter with which a conflict exists.
         e.   A member who has a possible conflict of interest in a matter for
decision may participate in that decision only upon the affirmative vote of a
majority of all remaining board or commission members present. Such vote shall
be recorded on the public record.
         f.   Any member found by the board or commission to have a conflict of
interest with regard to a particular matter shall not participate in any manner
in that matter.
      5.   Ex Parte Contacts Prohibited:
         a.   For the purposes of this subsection, ex parte contacts and
communications are defined as the receipt, either directly or indirectly, of
verbal, visual, or written communications outside a duly noticed, open hearing
on the record at which all parties and all board or commission members have an
opportunity to be present.
         b.   Members of adjudicatory or quasi-judicial boards and commissions
shall refrain from permitting ex parte contacts or communications with any
person regarding any matter pending before or which may be reasonably expected
to be pending before them.
         c.   Ex parte contacts shall not influence quasi-judicial proceedings.
If a member of an adjudicatory or quasi-judicial board or commission, as
identified in this section, obtains information outside of the public hearing
process, whether through inadvertent ex parte communications with interested
parties or through specific personal knowledge of a case, they shall fully
disclose the information or knowledge to the board or commission during the
public hearing, along with the source of that information.
         d.   Such ex parte communications or personal knowledge of a case
shall not constitute a conflict of interest or other basis for excuse from
participation in any case. Ex parte contacts shall be also prohibited for
matters under reconsideration by the board.
         e.   The prohibition against ex parte contacts remains in effect as
long as a matter may reasonably be expected to come before the board or
commission until after all appeal and remands for further consideration and
reconsideration have concluded or the time for such proceedings has expired.
      6.   Consent Agenda: Any appointed board or commission under this chapter
may establish a consent agenda. The consent agenda shall consist of all matters
brought before the board or commission for action that do not require a public
hearing. All items on the consent agenda shall be approved by motion without
debate. An item may be removed from the consent agenda prior to the approval at
the request of any member of the board or commission present at the meeting or
by City staff if requested by the applicant. Items removed from the consent
agenda shall be considered on the regular agenda.
      7.   Quorum - Official Action:
         a.   A majority of the full membership of the board or commission
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
         b.   Action by the Planning Commission shall require the favorable
vote of a majority of the members present. Action by the Board of Adjustment
shall require the favorable vote of the majority of members of the fully
constituted board, which shall include all appointed members not excused for
conflict of interest in the board or commission action.
      8.   Meetings Open To Public: All meetings of the appointed boards and
commissions under this chapter shall be open to the public. Except when voice
votes are authorized, the vote shall be conducted in such a manner that the
public may know the vote of each person entitled to vote. This section does not
apply to any votes required to be taken to organize a board or commission.
      9.   Reconsideration Or Rehearing Of Decisions: Reconsideration or
rehearing of decisions of any appointed board or commission are to be
discouraged and shall be held only upon the request of a board or commission
member on the prevailing side of the original vote (prevailing member) for the
following reasons:
         a.   The original decision was based upon a substantial procedural or
jurisdictional error; or
         b.   New relevant information that was not available at the time of
the original hearing has been discovered; or
         c.   The original decision was based upon fraud or misrepresentation.
Any person seeking reconsideration or a rehearing must file a request with the
City Clerk, together with materials supporting one or more of the grounds
stated in this subsection, within five (5) working days of the original
decision. A prevailing member may then consider the request based upon the
above criteria. When a hearing is held upon a reconsideration or rehearing
request, the board or commission, by a majority vote, may schedule a rehearing
only if it finds the allegations to be correct. A rehearing shall be conducted
in the same manner as the original proceedings before the board or commission.
      10.   Removal Of Member: A member of any appointed board or commission
under this chapter may be removed from office in the following circumstances:
         a.   For cause; provided, that any individual whose removal is being
considered by the City Council shall be entitled to notice and an opportunity
to be heard prior to the decision to remove said individual.
         b.   Applicable to all boards, commissions, trust, or other agencies
of the City whose membership is appointed or confirmed by the City Council and
who meet at least monthly, whenever any member is absent from more than one-
half (1/2) of all meetings of the board, commission, trust, or other agency,
held within any period of four (4) consecutive months, the member shall
thereupon cease to hold the appointive office.
         c.   Applicable to all boards, commissions, trust, or other agencies
of the City whose membership is appointed or confirmed by the City Council, and
who meet less often than monthly, whenever any member is absent for more than
one-half (1/2) of any four (4) consecutive meetings, the member shall thereupon
cease to hold the appointive office. Provided that emergency meetings may not
be counted in the calculation, all at the City Council's sole option and the
Council may excuse other absences.
      11.   Representatives: Persons appearing before an appointed board or
commission under this chapter may appear in person or through a representative,
agent, or attorney. The representative shall provide satisfactory proof of his
or her authority upon the request of the board or commission.
      12.   Secretary: The City Administrator shall be the Secretary of each
appointed board and commission in this chapter. In the City Administrator's
absence, another member of the planning staff as determined by the City
Administrator shall act as Secretary. The Secretary shall cause to have a
record kept of all meetings of each board or commission and shall keep such
files as may be required.
      13.   Applicability Of Other Provisions: The provisions of this chapter
shall not be a limitation on more restrictive rules regarding the conduct of
boards and commissions set forth elsewhere in this Code. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-7-3: PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   Review And Decision-Making Responsibilities: There shall be a Planning
Commission, which shall have the powers and duties set forth in section
10-6-1, table 6.1-1 of this title, to be carried out in accordance with the
terms of this title.
   B.   Other Powers And Duties: In addition, the Planning Commission shall
have the following powers and duties, to be carried out in accordance with the
terms of this title:
      1.   Develop, review, and make recommendations to the City Council
regarding policies, plans, and ordinances to implement the Municipal function
of planning for the economic, social, and land use needs of the community; and
      2.   Exercise such other powers, and perform such other duties, as are
provided by law and directed by the City Council.
   C.   Appointments, Membership, And Rules:
      1.   Requirements for appointments to the Planning Commission and
operating rules are in title 2, chapter 1 of this Code. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-7-4: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Review And Decision-Making Responsibilities: The Board of Adjustment
shall have the review and decision-making responsibilities set forth in section
10-6-1, table 6.1-1 of this title.
   B.   Membership And Rules:
      1.   Members And Appointment Of Members: The Board of Adjustment shall
consist of the five (5) sitting City Council members pursuant to title 2,
chapter 2 of this Code.
      2.   Chairman And Secretary:
         a.   The Mayor shall be Chairperson of the Board of Adjustment.
         b.   The Vice Mayor shall act as Chairperson of the Board of
Adjustment in the absence of the Mayor.
         c.   The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Acting Chairperson,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena.
      3.   Quorum: A quorum of the Board of Adjustment shall be three (3)
members.
      4.   Rules Of Conduct: The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the
provisions of this title. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. All
meetings shall be open to the public.
      5.   Records: The board shall keep the minutes of its proceedings,
showing the attendance and vote of each member upon each question, and shall
keep records of its proceedings and the reason for all official actions, all of
which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a
public record.
   C.   Additional Authority And Provisions: Additional authority, powers,
duties, and provisions applicable to the Board of Adjustment are in title 2,
chapter 2 of this Code. Said chapter shall be controlling over any contrary
provisions in this title. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-7-5: CITY STAFF:
   A.   Review And Decision-Making Responsibilities: Municipal staff shall have
the review and decision-making responsibilities set forth in section
 10-6-1, table 6.1-1 of this title, to be carried out in accordance with the
terms of this title. The staff also shall have such additional powers and
duties as may be set forth elsewhere in this title and other ordinances of the
City. The following departments have the general responsibilities set forth
below.
   B.   City Administrator: The City Administrator shall act in an advisory and
support capacity to the City Council and boards and commissions listed in this
chapter or as otherwise directed by the City Council. The City Administrator
shall review or coordinate the review of all applications under this title.
(Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 8
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
10-8-1: General Provisions
10-8-2: Nonconforming Structures
10-8-3: Nonconforming Uses Of Structures And Land
10-8-4: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
10-8-5: Nonconforming Signs
10-8-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and restrict uses,
structures, lots, and signs that were established legally prior to the
effective date of this title, that no longer conform to the requirements of
this title or future title amendments. All such situations are collectively
referred to in this chapter as "nonconformities". While nonconformities may
continue, this chapter is intended to achieve their eventual elimination, in
order to preserve the integrity of this title and the character of the City.
   B.   Authority To Continue:
      1.   Generally: Any nonconformity that lawfully existed as of the
effective date of this title and that remains nonconforming, and any
nonconformity that is created as a result of any subsequent rezoning or
amendment to the text of this title, may be continued or maintained as a
nonconformity only in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
      2.   Exception Due To Variances, Minor Modifications, Or Specific Use
Permit: Notwithstanding subsection B1 of this section, this chapter shall not
apply to any development standard or feature that is the subject of a variance,
specific use permit, or minor modification granted under this title. Where a
variance, specific use permit, or minor modification has been granted that
results in a development standard or feature that does not otherwise conform to
the requirements of this title, that development standard or feature shall be
deemed conforming.
   C.   Determination Of Nonconformity Status: In all cases, the burden of
establishing the existence of a legal nonconformity shall be solely upon the
owner of the nonconformity, not the City.
   D.   Nonconformities Created Through Government Action: If a structure, use
of land, use of structure, or characteristic of use does not comply with the
requirements of this title solely as a result of an acquisition of land or
other action by a government agency for a public purpose, then such structure,
use of land, use of structure, or characteristic of use of land not acquired by
the government shall be deemed conforming.
   E.   Change Of Ownership Or Tenancy: Changes of ownership, tenancy, or
management of property with an existing nonconformity are permitted, but such
nonconformities shall continue to be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   F.   Maintenance And Minor Repair: Minor repairs or maintenance of
nonconformities that are required to keep structures or sites in a safe
condition are permitted, provided that the minor repair or maintenance does not
increase the extent of nonconformity. For purposes of this section,
"maintenance or minor repair" shall mean:
      1.   Repairs that are necessary to maintain and to correct any damage or
deterioration to the structural soundness or interior appearance of a building
or structure without expanding or altering the building or structure;
      2.   Maintenance of land areas to protect against health and
environmental hazards and promote the safety of surrounding land uses; and
      3.   Repairs that are required to remedy unsafe conditions that cause a
threat to public safety.
   G.   Mobile Home Declared Nonconforming Structure; Removal Required: A
mobile home, as defined in section
10-1-17 of this title, manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, or manufactured
after June 15, 1976, without certification of compliance with HUD standards, is
declared a nonconforming structure unsuitable for a dwelling in the City. All
mobile homes shall be removed from the City limits when they become vacant.
Under no circumstances may a mobile home be replaced with another mobile home.
The City Council may grant an extension of not more than three (3) months in an
individual case upon appeal for a variance and findings of fact that the
occupant of the mobile home will suffer an unnecessary hardship by reason of
strict application of this subsection.
   H.   Manufactured Home Not In A Manufactured Home Community Declared
Nonconforming Structure; Removal Required: A manufactured home, as defined in
section
10-1-17 of this title, not located in a manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision, and is not permanently affixed to a concrete or concrete
block foundation, is declared a nonconforming structure unsuitable for a
dwelling in the City. All manufactured homes, other than stipulated hereto,
shall be removed from the City limits when they become vacant. The City Council
may grant an extension of not more than three (3) months in an individual case
upon appeal for a variance and findings of fact that the occupant of the
manufactured home will suffer an unnecessary hardship by reason of strict
application of this subsection. Manufactured homes located outside of a
manufactured home park or subdivision in an A-1 District, on lots of at least
five (5) acres in size, are exempt from this rule. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-8-2: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this title that could not be built under the terms of this title by reason
of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics
of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Enlargement, Alteration, Or Movement:
      1.   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases
its nonconformity.
      2.   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
   B.   Damage Or Destruction:
      1.   If a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed by any means to
an extent greater than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time
of damage or destruction, then such structure shall not be reestablished unless
it is made to conform to the requirements of this title.
      2.   Where a nonconforming building is damaged by less than fifty percent
(50%) of its replacement cost at the time of damage, it may be repaired or
restored, provided any such repair or restoration is started within twelve (12)
months and is completed within eighteen (18) months from the date of partial
destruction.
      3.   Reconstruction costs shall be prepared by the applicant and
submitted to the chief building official for review. The cost of land or any
factors other than the cost of the structure are excluded in the determination
of cost of restoration for any building or activity devoted to a nonconforming
use. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-8-3: NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND LAND:
   A.   Nonconforming Use Of Structure: If a lawful use of a structure, or of
structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this title, the lawful use may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
      1.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this title
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
      2.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout parts of a building
that were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption
or amendment of this title, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any
land outside such building.
      3.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
      4.   When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises in
combination is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months, the
structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be
used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
      5.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises
in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
   B.   Nonconforming Use Of Land: Where, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this title, lawful uses of land exist that are no longer
permissible under the terms of this title as enacted or amended, such uses may
be continued, so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provision:
      1.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this title.
      2.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part of any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this title.
      3.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such land shall
conform to the regulations specified by this title for the district in which
such land is located.
   C.   Specific Uses And Special Exceptions: A specific use or special
exception use existing prior to the effective date of this title that is
permitted in its entirety as a principal use in the district in which it is
located under this title shall remain applicable. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-8-4: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding
limitations imposed by other provisions of this title, a single-family dwelling
and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any lot which is of
official record on the effective date of this title, subject to the following
restrictions:
   A.   There must be provided a minimum lot width of fifty feet (50').
   B.   There must be provided a minimum of fifteen feet (15') in side yards
with ten feet (10') on any one side.
   C.   The front and rear yards must comply with the requirements set forth in
this title for the zoning districts within which the lot of record is located.
Where two (2) or more lots that are nonconforming as to area are under common
ownership on the effective date of this title, such lots shall be deemed merged
for purposes of this title to the extent necessary to create one or more lots
that conform to the area requirements of the applicable district. Variance of
area, width, and yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the
Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-8-5: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Termination: A nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legal
nonconforming status, and therefore shall be brought into conformance with this
title or removed, when any of the following occur:
      1.   The size or shape of the sign is changed; or
      2.   The sign structure is altered. Alteration does not include repairs
and/or maintenance; or
      3.   The nonconforming sign is accessory to a nonconforming use that has
lost its nonconforming status; or
      4.   The primary structure on the property at which the sign is located
is the subject of an application for a building permit for reconstruction,
remodeling, expansion, or other improvements to the primary structure on such
property, and the value of the proposed improvements totals more than twenty
five percent (25%) of its replacement cost of such primary structure.
   B.   Maintenance Of Nonconforming Signs: Nonconforming signs shall continue
to be maintained in safe condition pursuant to the building regulations of the
City.
   C.   Alteration, Relocation, Or Replacement Of Nonconforming Signs: A
nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered, relocated, or replaced
unless it is brought into compliance with the provisions of this section.
   D.   Reconstruction Of Damaged Sign: If a sign and/or its support are
damaged to the extent where the repair costs exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
replacement cost of the sign, the sign shall be removed or brought into
compliance. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 9
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-9-1: General Provisions
10-9-2: Responsibilities For Enforcement
10-9-3: Violations
10-9-4: Remedies And Penalties
10-9-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: This chapter establishes procedures through which the City
seeks to ensure compliance with the provisions of this title and obtain
corrections for violations of this title. This chapter also sets forth the
remedies and penalties that apply to violations of this title.
   B.   Compliance Required: No person shall develop or use any land, building,
or structure within the City in violation of this title, regulations authorized
under this title, or the terms and conditions of permits or other approvals or
entitlements issued under this title.
   C.   Permits And Approvals: No permit or approval may be issued under this
title unless all structures and uses of land and structures permitted under the
permit or approval conform to this title, regulations promulgated under this
title, and the terms and conditions of other applicable permits and approvals
issued under this title. A permit or approval issued in violation of this title
is void.
   D.   Continuation Of Prior Enforcement Actions: Nothing in this title shall
prohibit the continuation of previous enforcement actions undertaken by the
City pursuant to previous regulations.
   E.   Continuing Violations: Each day that a violation occurs or remains
uncorrected shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this title.
(Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-9-2: RESPONSIBILITIES FOR ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this title shall be administered and enforced by the City
Administrator or such other person as may be designated by the City
Administrator. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-9-3: VIOLATIONS:
Each of the following activities shall constitute a violation of this title:
   A.   Activity Inconsistent With Title: Any erection, construction,
reconstruction, remodeling, alteration, maintenance, expansion, movement, or
use of any land, building, structure, or sign, in contravention of any
provision of this title.
   B.   Activity Inconsistent With Permit Or Approval: Any development, use,
construction, remodeling, or other activity inconsistent with the terms or
conditions of any permit or approval required to engage in such activity,
whether issued under or required by this title.
   C.   Illustrative Examples: Examples of activities inconsistent with this
title or with any permit or approval issued under this title include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      1.   Increasing the density or intensity of any use of any land or
structure except in accordance with the requirements of this title;
      2.   Reduction or diminishment of lot area, setbacks, vegetative buffers,
or open space below the minimum requirements set forth in this title;
      3.   Damage to or removal of required vegetation inconsistent with this
title;
      4.   Creation, expansion, replacement, or change of a nonconformity
inconsistent with this title;
      5.   Failure to remove any sign installed, created, erected, or
maintained in violation of this title, or for which the sign permit has lapsed;
      6.   Failure to remove a temporary use once authorization for the
temporary use has lapsed under this title, or for which the temporary use
permit has lapsed; and
      7.   Failure of a property owner to construct, improve, or maintain any
amenity, landscaping, buffers, fencing, or other improvements required by the
terms of any permit or approval. (Ord. 420, 12-18-2017)
10-9-4: REMEDIES AND PENALTIES:
The City Administrator shall have the following remedies and powers to enforce
this title:
   A.   Civil Remedies And Enforcement Powers:
      1.   Deny/Withhold Authorizations: The City Administrator may deny or
withhold any form of authorization, including certificates of occupancy, or
other forms of authorization to use or develop any land, structure, or
improvements, until any violations of this title or other ordinances of the
City of Marlow are corrected. This provision shall apply whether or not the
current owner or applicant for the permit or other approval is responsible for
the violation.
      2.   Revoke Authorizations: Any entitlement or other form of
authorization issued under this title may be revoked when the City
Administrator determines that:
         a.   There is a departure from the approved plans, specifications,
limitations, or conditions as required under the authorization;
         b.   The authorization was procured by false representation;
         c.   The authorization was issued in error; or
         d.   There is a violation of any provision of this title.
Written notice of revocation shall be served upon the property owner, agent,
applicant, or other person to whom the authorization was issued, or such notice
may be posted in a prominent location at the place of violation. No work or
construction shall proceed after service of the revocation notice.
      3.   Stop-Work Orders:
         a.   Whenever any building or structure or site or part thereof is
being demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in a
hazardous manner, in substantial violation of any State law or any ordinance of
the City of Marlow, the City Administrator has the authority to issue a stop-
work order for the specific part of the work that is in violation or presents
the hazard.
         b.   With or without revoking permits, the City Administrator may
issue an order to stop work on any property on which there is an uncorrected
violation of either a provision of this title or a provision of any
authorization issued under this title.
         c.   The stop-work order shall be in writing directed to the person
doing the work, and shall specify the provisions of this title or other law
that has been violated. After any such order has been served, no work shall
proceed on any building, other structure, or tract of land covered by such
order, except to correct such violation or comply with the order.
         d.   Once conditions for resumption of the work have been met, the
City Administrator shall rescind the stop-work order.
   B.   Criminal Remedies And Enforcement Powers:
      1.   Misdemeanor: A person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor (Class B
offense) upon conviction in any case where a violation of this title exists,
where notice of violation, including any stop-work, enforcement, or compliance
order has been properly served, and where such person fails to comply with such
notice, stop-work, enforcement, or compliance order.
      2.   Penalty: Persons found guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to this
section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days, or by both such
fine or imprisonment, for each violation. Each day a violation is allowed to
exist is a separate violation.
   C.   Remedies Cumulative: The remedies provided for violations of this
title, whether civil or criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any
other remedy provided by law, and may be exercised in any order. (Ord. 420, 12-
18-2017)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
(Reserved)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
Flood Damage Prevention   1
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Findings Of Fact
12-1-2: Statement Of Purpose
12-1-3: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
12-1-4: Definitions
12-1-5: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
12-1-6: Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
12-1-7: Establishment Of Development Permit
12-1-8: Compliance
12-1-9: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-1-10: Interpretation
12-1-11: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
12-1-12: Floodplain Administrator
12-1-13: Permit Procedures
12-1-14: Variances
12-1-15: General Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-1-16: Specific Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-1-17: Standards For Subdivisions
12-1-18: Floodways
12-1-19: Penalties For Noncompliance
12-1-1: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city of Marlow are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-3: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. Examples of accessory structures include, but are not
limited to, garages and storage sheds.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within the city of
Marlow subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.
   BFE: Base flood elevation.
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base
flood or one percent (1%) chance flood.
   BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   CFR: Code of federal regulations.
   CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the city of Marlow floodplain
administrator which authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in
accordance with this chapter.
   ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building built, in the case of a building
in zones AE, A, and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones AE, A, and X,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 4, 1972.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA: The federal emergency management agency.
   FIRM: Flood insurance rate map.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: An official map of the city of Marlow on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk
premium zones applicable to the city of Marlow.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by FEMA for city of
Marlow which contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base
flood, as well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocity.
   FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters, or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within city of Marlow subject to a "special flood hazard" and the
extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: A person accredited by the OWRB and designated by
the city council of the city of Marlow to administer and implement laws,
ordinances and regulations relating to the management of floodplains.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose regulations
and ordinances (such as floodplain, grading and erosion control regulations and
ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
   FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. A floodway is located within areas of special flood hazard established
in section
12-1-6 of this chapter. A floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of the interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of the interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior, or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
   LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of title 44 CFR.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on the city of Marlow's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by the city of Marlow city council and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the city of Marlow
floodplain board.
   OWRB: The Oklahoma water resources board.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (public law 97-348),
includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of
construction" of the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions, or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration
would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
   VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the city of Marlow city council to a person
from the terms of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or
development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of title 44 CFR.)
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this city of Marlow flood damage prevention chapter.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American
vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-5: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This flood damage prevention chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood
hazard within the jurisdiction of the city of Marlow, Oklahoma. (Ord. 399, 9-
28-2010)
12-1-6: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and
engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study For Stephens County,
Oklahoma And Incorporated Areas" dated September 29, 2010, with the
accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are hereby adopted on September
29, 2010, by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. However,
until this date the current effective flood maps for Stephens County dated
January 16, 1992, shall be used for this purpose until September 29, 2010.
(Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-7: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this floodplain management chapter. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-8: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-9: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any
other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 399, 9-
28-2010)
12-1-10: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-11: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city of Marlow or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 399, 9-
28-2010)
12-1-12: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Designation: The city council of the city of Marlow designates the city
administrator (or her designee in case of her absence or other reason) as
floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and other appropriate sections of national flood insurance program
regulations in title 44 CFR pertaining to floodplain management.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the
floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with 82 Oklahoma
Statutes sections 1601-1618, as amended.
      2.   Reviews permit applications to determine whether the proposed
building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
      3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by this chapter.
      4.   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval are required.
      5.   Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as
to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions).
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to the FEMA.
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      8.   Shall require the developer/applicant to determine and provide the
base flood elevation on a FEMA elevation certificate as well as other data as
required in order to administer the provisions of sections
12-1-15 through
12-1-18 of this chapter.
      9.   When a floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zone AE as
delineated on the Stephens County FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the
city of Marlow.
      10.   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures
in the city of Marlow, determine if the residential and nonresidential
structures and manufactured homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce
the substantial improvement requirement.
      11.   Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a
decision of the city council.
      12.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-13: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   An application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and
      2.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
   B.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
   C.   The floodplain administrator or city council, as applicable, may
approve certain development in zones A or AE delineated on the Stephens County
FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than
one foot (1'), provided that the applicant for the development permit in that
case first complies with 44 CFR section 65.12. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-14: VARIANCES:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   The city council may grant variances for uses which do not satisfy
the requirements of the Oklahoma floodplain management act or this chapter, if
the applicant for the variance presents adequate proof that: a) compliance with
this chapter will result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property
without sufficient benefit or advantage to the people and b) satisfies the
pertinent provisions of this section. However, no variance shall be granted
where the effect of the variance will be to permit the continuance of a
condition which unreasonably creates flooding hazards.
      2.   Any variance so granted shall not be construed as to relieve any
person who receives it from any liability imposed by the Oklahoma floodplain
management act or by other laws of the state.
      3.   In no case shall variances be effective for a period longer than
twenty (20) years.
      4.   Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the city
council, accompanied by a filing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      5.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection
 12-1-13B of this chapter and provisions of this section have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      6.   Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the base
flood elevation will be issued a notice signed by the chairman of the city
council which states that: a) the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate
with the increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built
lower than the base flood elevation, and b) such construction below the base
flood level increases risks to life and property.
      7.   At such time as the city council deems the petition ready for
notification to the public, the city council shall schedule a hearing and
direct the applicant to publish notice thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation in Stephens County at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing.
      8.   The city council shall conduct the hearing and make determinations
in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. This appeals
group shall exercise wide discretion in weighing the equities involved and the
advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to the public at large when
determining whether the variance shall be granted.
      9.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances; and
         d.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      10.   Upon consideration of the factors stated in this section and the
intent of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives stated in section
12-1-2 of this chapter.
      11.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance; and a copy of any
variance issued by the city council shall be sent by the floodplain
administrator to the OWRB and FEMA within fifteen (15) days after issuance of
the variance.
   B.   Special Provisions:
      1.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      3.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
      4.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that:
         a.   The criteria of subsections A5, A9, B2 and B3 of this section are
met, and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-15: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
   A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   F.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   G.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-16: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at least one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is
satisfied.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one foot
(1') above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer,
architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied.
   C.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
      1.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade; and
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   D.   Manufactured Homes: Require that all manufactured homes to be placed
anywhere within the city of Marlow within zones A and AE on the Stephens County
FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage
and have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at or above the BFE. For the
purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored
to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces. The home shall be installed by a licensed installer according to
Oklahoma state law and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the
floodplain administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the
manufactured home.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A and AE on the Stephens County FIRM either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days,
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
      3.   Meet the permit requirements of section
12-1-13 of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions.
   F.   Accessory Structures: Accessory structures to be placed on sites within
zones A and AE on the Stephens County FIRM shall comply with the following:
      1.   The structure shall be unfinished on the interior;
      2.   The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage;
      3.   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited
activities or uses include, but are not limited to, working, sleeping, living,
cooking, or restroom use;
      4.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be
elevated to or above the BFE;
      5.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      6.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential
and constructed with flood resistance materials;
      7.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement;
      8.   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure;
      9.   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE; and
      10.   The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to
adjacent and nearby structures. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-17: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located in
zones A and AE which is fifty one (51) or more lots or greater than five (5)
acres shall generate the base flood elevation data for that subdivision.
   B.   All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   C.   All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-18: FLOODWAYS:
The following provisions shall apply to floodways:
   A.   Encroachments, including, but not limited to, fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development are prohibited within the
adopted floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the city of Marlow during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of sections
12-1-15 through
12-1-18 of this chapter.
   C.   The city of Marlow may permit encroachments within the adopted floodway
that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the
applicant for the development permit complies with all of 44 CFR section 65.12.
(Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
12-1-19: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate or other certifications required in this chapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of
its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements may be
assessed a fine. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Marlow or its city
attorney from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation. (Ord. 399, 9-28-2010)
 
