CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF MUSTANG, OKLAHOMA 
____________ 
Published in 2000 by Order of the Council 
____________ 
Adopted: November 21, 2000 
Effective: November 21, 2000 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MUSTANG, OKLAHOMA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ross Duckett 
Mayor 
____________ 
Lynda McColl, Ward I 
Sharon Mason, Ward II 
Ben Green, Ward III 
Roger Stickley, Ward IV 
Linda Hagan, Ward V 
Keith Streeter, Ward VI 
City Council 
____________ 
Huey P. Long 
City Manager 
____________ 
Sherry Blankenship 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Trisha Winham 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MUSTANG, OKLAHOMA 
____________ 
Jess Schweinberg 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michael Ray, Ward I 
Keith Teeples, Ward II 
Brian Grider, Ward III 
Terry Jones, Ward IV 
Travis McKenzie, Ward V 
Nathan Sholund, Ward VI 
City Council 
____________ 
Timothy D. Rooney 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jonathan Miller 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lisa Martin 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1977 Code, as supplemented through April 16, 1996, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Code Attorney, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Trisha Winham, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mustang, Oklahoma. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mustang, Oklahoma. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mustang, Oklahoma. 2000. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 760 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MUSTANG, OKLAHOMA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; DECLARING REPEALER; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR EFFECTIVE DATE; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MUSTANG, OKLAHOMA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Mustang Oklahoma," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of chapters 1 through 122, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 16, 2000, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Ordinances passed and approved after May 16, 2000, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code and subject to the terms and conditions thereof so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 5. Ordinances adopted after May 16, 2000, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 6. Repealer. All former ordinances or parts of Ordinances conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance[s] are hereby repealed. 
Section 7. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of Competent jurisdiction said portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
Section 8. Effective Date. Unless this Emergency Clause of this Ordinance is passed and approved, the effective date of this Ordinance shall be Nov. 21, 2000. 
Section 9. Emergency. It being immediately necessary for the preservation of the public health, peace and safety of the City of Mustang and the inhabitants thereof, an emergency is hereby declared to exist by reason whereof, this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval, as provided by law. 
PASSED AND APPROVED and the Emergency Clause voted upon separately and passed and approved this 21st day of November, 2000. 
	/s/ Ross Duckett  
      Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST 
/s/ Trisha Winham  
      City Clerk 	
 	 
APPROVED as to form this 21st day of November, 2000. 
	/s/ Sherry Blankenship  
      City Attorney 
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER OF THE CITY OF MUSTANG, OKLAHOMA[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma. The Charter was ratified by the qualified electors of the Town of Mustang at an election held on July 29, 1969, by a vote of 95 to 17 and went onto effect on October 17, 1969, the date of approval of the Charter by the governor. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
PREAMBLE 
We, the people of the City of Mustang, exercising the powers of home rule granted to us by the Constitution and the Laws of the State of Oklahoma, in order to provide for more efficient, adequate, and economical government, do hereby ordain, ratify, and establish the Charter of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma.  
ARTICLE 1. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS 
 
Section 1-1. - Incorporation. 
(a)  The City of Mustang, Oklahoma, within the corporate limits as now established, or as hereafter may be established, shall be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of "City of Mustang." The City is the legal successor of the Town; and as such, it succeeded to and possesses all the property and rights belonging to the Town, and shall be liable for all debts and other obligations for which the Town was legally bound at the time of the succession in government. 
(b)  The City of Mustang, Oklahoma, may not be annexed by or to, or be consolidated with, any other city or other political subdivision, or merged into a combined county-city government, unless a majority of the qualified electors of the City of Mustang voting on the question approve such annexation, consolidation, or merging; and such questions may be submitted to the qualified electors of the City only by the City Council or by the Mayor on proper initiative petition at special election; provided that nothing herein shall prohibit the City of Mustang from annexing additional territory to the City as provided by law.  
Section 1-2. - Form of Government. 
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as a "Council-Manager Government." All powers of the City shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or, if the manner is not thus prescribed, then in such manner as the Council may prescribe by ordinance.  
Section 1-3. - Powers of the City. 
(a)  The City shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises, and immunities granted to cities by the State Constitution and Law, and all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. Except as prohibited by the State Constitution or Law, the City shall have all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
(b)  The City shall have the power to adopt a corporate seal and to alter it at pleasure, to sue and to be sued, and to make contracts. It shall have power to acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any City purpose, including public utilities, works and ways, in fee simple or any lessor [lesser] interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, condemnation, or other legal means; and to hold, maintain, improve, enlarge, manage, control, operate, lease, sell, convey, or otherwise dispose of, such property as its interests may require, including public utilities, works, and ways. It shall have power to incur indebtedness and to issue bonds within the limitations prescribed by the State Constitution. It shall have power to accept and administer federal and state grants-in-aid and to do everything necessary to accomplish the purpose or purposes for which such grants may be made. It shall have power to ordain and to enforce local legislation for the proper organization and functioning of the city government, for the preservation and enforcement of good government and order, for the protection of health, life, morals, and property, for the prevention, summary abatement, and removal of nuisances, and otherwise for the promotion of the common welfare. It shall have power to grant, extend, and renew franchises in accordance with the State Constitution. 
(c)  The enumeration or mention of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive or limiting; and in addition to the powers enumerated or mentioned herein or implied hereby, the City shall have all powers which, under the State Constitution and Law, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate or mention. 
(d)  Provisions of State Law relating to matters which may be regulated by cities operating under charters, shall be in effect only insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by this Charter or by ordinance.  
ARTICLE 2. - THE COUNCIL 
 
Section 2-1. - Councilmembers: Number, Qualifications. 
There shall be a Council of seven (7) members, which shall consist of the Mayor as Councilmember at large, and one Councilmember from each of the six (6) wards of the City, as the wards are constituted in this Charter, or as they may hereafter be constituted by ordinance. 
(a)  Qualified electors who are candidates for the office of Mayor shall meet a residency requirement of at least one (1) year before the closing of the filing period. 
(b)  Qualified electors who are candidates for the office of Councilmember shall meet a residency requirement of at least one (1) year in the ward they are to represent, before the filing period. 
(c)  The Mayor shall be a resident and a registered voter of the City. If he ceases to be a resident of the City, he shall thereupon cease to be Mayor. 
(d)  A Councilman shall be a resident and registered voter of the ward in which he was elected. If he ceases to be a resident of the ward in which he was elected, he shall cease to be a Councilman; however, a temporary loss of residency in said ward of no more than six (6) months shall not disqualify said Councilman, provided, he shall remain a resident of the City. 
(e)  No Councilmember may hold any office in the City Government by appointment by the City Manager or by any subordinate of the City Manager. 
(f)  If the Mayor or any other Councilmember is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, the office shall become vacant immediately when the case is finally determined. 
(g)  An incumbent Councilmember whose term is not expiring in the current election year shall be required to resign as Councilmember in order to become eligible as a candidate for Mayor.  
Section 2-2. - Mayor and Vice-Mayor. 
(a)  The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council. The Mayor shall be recognized as head of the City Government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor for purposes of military law. The Mayor shall have no regular administrative duties except that the Mayor shall sign written obligations of the City as the Council may require. As a Councilmember, the Mayor shall have all powers, rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of a Councilmember, including the right to vote on questions. 
(b)  At the first meeting after the time prescribed for the beginning of the terms of newly elected Council members, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the Council shall elect from its membership, a Vice-Mayor, who shall serve as such until the next such first meeting. The Vice-Mayor shall act as Mayor during the absence, disability, or suspension of the Mayor, until another Mayor is elected by the Council for the completion of the unexpired term and qualifies. If the office of Vice-Mayor becomes vacant, the Council shall elect from its membership another Vice-Mayor for completion of the unexpired term.  
Section 2-3. - Councilmembers: Compensation. 
Neither the Mayor nor any other Councilmember may receive any compensation as Mayor or Councilmember, nor for any other service rendered the City, but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the discharge of their official duties.  
Section 2-4. - Council: Powers. 
Except as otherwise provided for in this Charter, all powers of the City, including the determination of all matters of policy, shall be vested in the Council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the Council shall have the power, subject to the State Constitution, Law, and this Charter: 
(a)  To appoint and remove the City Manager. 
(b)  By ordinance, to enact municipal legislation. 
(c)  To raise revenue and make appropriations, and to regulate bond elections, the issuance of bonds, sinking funds, and refunding of indebtedness, set salaries and wages, and all other fiscal affairs of the City. 
(d)  To inquire into the conduct of any office, department, or agency of the City Government, and investigate municipal affairs. 
(e)  To appoint or elect and remove the City Attorney, the members of the Personnel Board, the members of the Planning Commission, the members of the Board of Adjustments, and other quasi-legislative, quasi-judicial, or advisory officers and authorities, now or when and if established, or to prescribe the method of appointing or electing and removing them. 
(f)  To grant pardons for violations of the Charter and Ordinances, including the remission of fines and costs, upon application by a person convicted and public hearing thereon. 
(g)  To regulate elections, the initiative and referendum, and recall. 
(h)  To create, change, and abolish all offices, departments, and agencies of the City Government other than the offices, departments, and agencies created by this Charter; and to assign additional powers, duties and functions to offices, departments and agencies created by this Charter.  
Section 2-5. - Council Not to Interfere in Appointments and Removals. 
Neither the Council, the Mayor, nor any of its other members may direct or request the appointment of any person to, or removal from, office or employment by the City Manager or by any other authority, or except as provided in this Charter, participate in any manner in the appointment or removal of officers and employees of the City. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager; and neither the Council nor any member thereof may give orders on administrative matters to any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.  
Section 2-6. - Council: Meetings. 
The Council shall hold at least one regular meeting every month, at such time as it may prescribe by ordinance or otherwise. The Mayor or majority of Councilmembers may call special meetings. The City Clerk shall attempt to notify all Councilmembers by special delivery, certified mail, registered mail, or other verifiable means, at least twenty-four (24) hours before such special meetings. All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, and the journal of its proceedings shall be open to the public inspection, provided the Council may hold executive sessions when authorized by the Oklahoma Open Meeting Law.  
Section 2-7. - Councilmembers: Absences to Terminate Membership. 
If the Mayor or any other Councilmembers shall be absent from more than one-half of all the meetings of the Council, regular and special, held within any period of four consecutive calendar months, the member shall thereupon cease to hold office.  
Section 2-8. - Councilmembers: Removal. 
The Mayor or any other Councilman may be removed from office for any cause specified by applicable State Law for the removal of officers, and by the method or methods prescribed thereby, and by recall as provided in this Charter. 
State Law reference— Grounds for removal of officers and procedures therefor, 22 O.S. § 1181 et seq.  
Section 2-9. - Councilmembers: Vacancies in Office. 
(a)  When a vacancy occurs in the office of a Councilmember, except the Mayor, the governing body shall appoint, by a majority vote of the remaining members, a person who resides in the ward of the vacant office to fill the vacancy until the next general municipal election, and until a successor is elected and qualifies. Any vacancy shall then be filled at the next general municipal election by election of a person to complete the balance of any unexpired term. If the vacancy has not been filled within sixty (60) days after it occurs, the governing body shall call for a special election for the purpose of filling the vacancy for the duration of the unexpired term, unless such vacancy occurs within one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the first day of a filing period for the next general municipal election. 
(b)  When a majority of governing body offices are vacant more than sixty (60) days before the beginning of a regular filing period for general municipal elections, the remaining members of the governing body shall call for a special election to be held in the municipality for the purpose of filling all vacant offices for the remainder of their unexpired terms. 
(c)  When a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, a special election shall be held to fill that vacancy.  
Section 2-10. - Council: Quorum, Rules, Yeas and Nays. 
A majority of all the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number any adjourn from day to day or from time to time. The Council may determine its own rules. On the demand of any member, the vote on any question shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the journal.  
Section 2-11. - Ordinances: Enacting Clause. 
The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the Council shall be, "Be it ordained by the Council of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma," and of all ordinances proposed by the voters under their power of initiative, "Be it ordained by the People of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma."  
Section 2-12. - Ordinances: Passage, When in Effect. 
Every proposed ordinance shall be read, and a vote of the majority of all Councilmembers shall be required for its passage. The vote on final passage of every ordinance shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the journal. The Mayor shall have no power of veto. Within ten (10) days after its passage, every ordinance shall be published in full, or by number and title, in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. Every ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, so published, shall become effective thirty days after its final passage, unless it specifies a later time; provided that an ordinance granting a franchise to a public utility or an ordinance de-annexing territory from the City shall not go into effect until the ordinance has been published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, and has been approved at an election by a vote of a majority of the qualified electors voting on the question.  
Section 2-13. - Ordinances: Emergency. 
An emergency ordinance is an ordinance which, in the judgment of the Council, is necessary for the immediate preservation of peace, health, or safety, and which should become effective prior to the time when an ordinary ordinance would become effective. Every such ordinance shall contain, as a part of its title, the words, "and declare an emergency"; and in a separate section, herein called the emergency section, shall declare the emergency, and state the reasons why it is necessary that the measure become effective immediately. An affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the Councilmembers shall be required for the passage of an emergency ordinance. An emergency ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication.  
Section 2-14. - Ordinances: Adoption by Reference. 
The Council, by ordinance, may adopt by reference codes, ordinances, standards, and regulations relating to building, plumbing, electrical installations, milk and milk products, and other matters which it has power to regulate otherwise. Such code, ordinance, standard, or regulation so adopted need not be enrolled in the Book of Ordinances; but three (3) copies shall be filed and kept in the office of the City Clerk.  
Section 2-15. - Ordinances: Codification. 
The permanent, general ordinances of the City shall be codified and published in book or pamphlet form at least every ten (10) years, unless the Council, by use of looseleaf system, provides for keeping the code up-to-date. The ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the code may be revised, rearranged, and reorganized; and the code may contain new matter, provisions of the State Constitution and Law Applicable to City, and this Charter. Three (3) copies of the published code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk after the Council adopts the code by ordinance, but the code need not be enrolled in the Book of Ordinances. The ordinances shall be made available in book or pamphlet form for distribution or sale to the public, at the costs of copies. 
State Law reference— Ordinance codification, 11 O.S. § 14-108; compilation of penal ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-109 et seq.  
ARTICLE 3. - CITY MANAGER AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 
 
Section 3-1. - City Manager; Appointment, Term, Qualifications, Removal. 
There shall be a City Manager. The Council shall appoint the City Manager for an indefinite term, by a vote of the majority of all its members. The Council shall choose the City Manager solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. Neither the Mayor nor any members of the City Council may be appointed City Manager during the terms for which the Councilmember shall have been elected, nor within two (2) years after the expiration of the Councilmember's term. At the time of the City Manager's appointment, the City Manager need not be a resident of the City or State, but, during the tenure of office, the City Manager shall reside within the City, except, if part-time, the Council may give permission to live outside the City. The Council may suspend or remove the City Manager at any time by a vote of a majority of all its members; provided that the Council shall give written statement of the reason for removal at least twenty (20) days before removal, and on request, shall give the City Manager an opportunity for a public hearing thereon after the expiration of such time before removal.  
Section 3-2. - Designation of Acting City Manager. 
The City Manager, by letter filed with [the] City Clerk, may appoint a qualified administrative officer of the City to be Acting City Manager during the temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. The Council may appoint an Acting City Manager whenever: 
(a)  The City Manager fails to make such designation. 
(b)  The Council suspends the City Manager. 
(c)  There is a vacancy in the office of the City Manager.  
Section 3-3. - City Manager: Powers and Duties. 
The City Manager shall be the Chief Executive Officer and head of the administrative branch of the City Government. The City Manager shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City, and shall be responsible therefor to the Council. The City Manager shall: 
(a)  Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, remove, demote, lay off or suspend all heads of administrative departments and other administrative officers and employees of the City, except as otherwise provided by law. The Manager, or the Council, by ordinance, may authorize the head of a department, office or agency to appoint and remove the subordinates in such departments, office or agency. 
(b)  Supervise and control all administrative departments, officers and agencies. 
(c)  Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the Council and be responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect and recommend to the Council any changes in the budget which the City Manager deems desirable. 
(d)  Submit to the Council a report after the end of the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year. 
(e)  Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City, and make recommendations as he deems desirable. 
(f)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.  
Section 3-4. - City Clerk: Creation and Duties. 
The City Clerk shall be an officer of the City, appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term. The City Clerk shall serve as clerical officer for the Council. Subject to such regulations as the Council may prescribe, the City Clerk shall: 
(a)  Keep the journal of the proceedings of the Council. 
(b)  Enroll in a book or books kept for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council. 
(c)  Have custody of documents, records and archives as may be provided by law or ordinance and have custody of the seal of the City. 
(d)  Attest and affix the seal of the City to documents as required by law or ordinance. 
(e)  Have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.  
Section 3-5. - Administrative Departments, Offices and Agencies. 
There shall be a Department of Finance and such other administrative departments, offices, and agencies as this Charter establishes and as the Council may establish.  
ARTICLE 4. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, FISCAL AFFAIRS 
 
Section 4-1. - Finance Director: Office Created, Duties. 
There shall be a Finance Director, who shall be an officer of the City appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term, and who shall be head of the Department of Finance. Except as the Council, by ordinance, provides otherwise, the Finance Director shall collect or receive revenue and other money for the City and shall deposit the same with the City Treasurer. The Finance Director shall maintain a general accounting system for the City Government. The Finance Director shall have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by the Charter, by applicable law, or by ordinance.  
Section 4-2. - City Treasurer: Office Created, Duties. 
Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a City Treasurer, who shall be an officer of the City, appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term. Subject to such regulations as the Council may prescribe, the City Treasurer shall deposit daily, all funds received for the City in such depositories as the Council shall designate. The City Treasurer shall have such other powers, duties, and functions as may be prescribed by the Charter, by applicable law, or by ordinance.  
Section 4-3. - Purchases and Sales. 
(a)  The City Manager, subject to any regulations which the Council may prescribe, shall contract for and purchase or issue purchase authorizations for, all supplies, materials, and equipment for the offices, departments, and agencies of the City Government or sell surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, and equipment, subject to such regulations as the Council may prescribe. 
(b)  Before the purchase of, or contract for, any supplies, materials, or equipment, or sales of any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment, ample opportunity for competitive bidding, under such regulations and with such general exceptions, as the Council may prescribe, shall be given; but the Council shall not exempt an individual contract, purchase or sale from the requirement of competitive bidding. 
(c)  The Council, by ordinance, may transfer some or all of the powers granted to the City Manager by this section to an administrative officer appointed by, and subordinate to, the City Manager.  
Section 4-4. - Sale of Property Valued at More than $10,000. 
The sales of any property, real or personal, including public utilities, or of any interest therein, the cash value of which is more than $10,000, may be made only by (1) authority of an affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the City who vote on the question of approving or authorizing the sale at an election, or by (2) authority of a special nonemergency ordinance. Such ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within the City within ten (10) days after its passage, and shall include a section reading substantially as follows: "Section _____. This ordinance shall be referred to a vote of the electors of the City if a legal and sufficient referendum petition is properly filed within thirty (30) days after its passage; otherwise, it shall go into effect thirty (30) days after its passage." The sale of an entire public utility may be authorized only as provided in (1) hereinabove.  
Section 4-5. - Public Improvements. 
Public improvements may be made by the City Government itself or by contract. The Council shall award all contracts for such improvements; provided that the Council may authorize the City Manager to award such contracts not exceeding an amount to be determined by the Council and subject to such regulations as the Council may prescribe. A contract for public improvements of more than $25,000.00 may be awarded only to the lowest and best responsible bidder after such notice and opportunity for competitive bidding as the Council may prescribe. All bids may be rejected, and further notice and opportunity for competitive bidding may be given. As used herein, "Public Improvement" means any beneficial or valuable change or addition, betterment, enhancement, or amelioration of or upon any real property or interest thereon. The term does not include the direct purchase of materials, equipment or supplies by a public agency. 
(Election of 4-6-2004)  
Section 4-6. - Fiscal Year. 
The fiscal year for the City Government shall begin on the first day of July, and shall end on the last day of June, of every calendar year.  
Section 4-7. - Independent Annual Audit. 
The Council shall designate a qualified public accountant or accountants who shall make an independent audit of the accounts and evidences of financial transactions of the Department of Finance and of all other departments, offices and agencies keeping separate or subordinate accounts or making financial transactions, as of the end of every fiscal year at least, and who shall report to the Council and to the City Manager.  
Section 4-8. - Publication of City Financial Statements. 
The Council shall cause to be published in October of each year, a condensed statement of the receipts, expenditures and indebtedness of the City for the period ending the last day of June. This condensed statement shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. A full and detailed statement of the receipts, expenditures and indebtedness of the City shall be made available to the public for review.  
ARTICLE 5. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal court, 11 O.S. § 27-101 et seq. 
 
Section 5-1. - Municipal Court. 
Cases arising out of violations of the Charter and ordinances of the City shall continue to be tried by the municipal court created by State Law; provided, that the Council, by ordinance, shall have the power to create a municipal court to hear and determine such cases if and when it deems it necessary or desirable to do so.  
ARTICLE 6. - ELECTIONS 
 
Section 6-1. - Nomination and Election, Terms, Nonpartisan Elections. 
(a)  The Mayor and Councilmembers shall be elected for three (3) year terms. A change in the name, boundaries or number of wards shall not disqualify a Councilmember from completing the term for which the member was elected. 
(b)  Their terms shall begin on the first Monday in May in the year in which they are elected. If a Mayor-Elect or other Councilmember-Elect fails to qualify within one month after the beginning of his term, that member's office shall become vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as other vacancies in the Council are filled. 
(c)  Beginning with the 1985 elections, the candidates for Mayor shall be nominated at large, and the Mayor shall be elected at large by the qualified electors of the entire city; the candidates for Councilmembers from the wards shall be nominated by ward, by the qualified electors of their respective wards, and the Councilmembers from the wards shall be elected by the qualified electors of their respective wards. 
(d)  Both the primary and the general election shall be nonpartisan; and no party designation or emblem shall be placed on the ballots. 
(e)  Nothing in this Charter shall prohibit the use of voting machines.  
Section 6-2. - Primary Election: Filing 
Any qualified person may have their name placed on the ballot of the primary election as a candidate for Mayor or other Councilmember by filing, no earlier than 8:00 a.m. on the first Monday in December and no later than 4:30 p.m. on the next succeeding Wednesday (three full days), with the secretary of the County Election Board, a sworn statement of candidacy, specifying the office for which the individual is a candidate. 
(Election of 4-3-2001, § 1; Election of 7-25-2006, § 1; Election of 2-5-2008, §§ 1, 2)  
Section 6-3. - Primary Election: Time, etc. 
A primary election shall be held on the second Tuesday in February of every year to nominate candidates for Mayor and other Councilmembers to succeed those whose terms are expiring in the respective year, except in any year when a Presidential Preferential Primary Election is held in February, the date for the primary election shall be the same date as the Presidential Preferential Primary Election. In the event that a regular or special election date occurs on an official state holiday, the election shall be scheduled for the next following Tuesday. If only one (1) person is a candidate for an office to be filled, the candidate shall be not only nominated, but also elected ipso facto; and the candidate's name shall not appear on the primary or general election ballot. If only two (2) persons are candidates for Councilmember from the same ward, they shall both be nominated ipso facto; and their names shall not appear on the primary election ballot. Every qualified elector of the City shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for Mayor, and every qualified elector of a ward shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for Councilmember from their respective ward. 
(Election of 4-5-2005, § 1; Election of 2-5-2008, §§ 1, 2)  
Section 6-4. - Primary Election: Who Nominated or Elected. 
In a primary election, the two (2) candidates for each office to be filled receiving the greatest number of votes for that office shall be nominated except as otherwise provided in the next sentence. If one of the candidates for each office to be filled for both Mayor and Council Member received a majority of all votes cast for all candidates for that office to be filled, the candidate shall be not only nominated, but also elected ipso facto; and the candidate's name shall not appear on the ballot for the general election. In case of failure to nominate one or both nominees because of a tie, the nominee or nominees, as the case may be, shall be determined from among those tying, fairly by lot, by the County Election Board in a public meeting. If one of the two candidates for an office nominated in a primary election dies or withdraws before the general election, the remaining candidate shall be elected ipso facto; and the candidate's name need not appear on the ballot for the general election. 
(Election of 4-6-2004)  
Section 6-5. - General Election: Time, Who Elected. 
A general election shall be held in the City on the first Tuesday in April of every year to elect the Mayor and Councilmembers to succeed those whose terms are expiring in the respective year. Every qualified elector of this City shall be entitled to vote for one of the two candidates for the office of Mayor. Every qualified elector of a ward shall be entitled to vote for one of the two candidates for the office of Councilmember from their respective ward.  
Section 6-6. - Elections: When Not Held. 
If there are no candidates and no questions to be voted upon at a primary or general election, the election shall not be held.  
Section 6-7. - Registered Qualified Electors. 
Only electors residing in this City who have the qualifications prescribed for electors by the State Constitution and Law, and who are registered, as may be required by law, may vote in City elections.  
Section 6-8. - Political Activity of Officers and Employees. 
(a)  No officer or employee of the City, except for the Mayor and other Councilmembers and personnel who receive no compensation for their services, may work for or against, or attempt to influence, the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate for Mayor or other Councilmember, or the recall of the Mayor or any other Councilmember, except as may be specifically allowed by State Law, which controls over this Charter, but this shall not prohibit the ordinary exercise of one's right to express individual opinions and to vote. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding Seventy Dollars ($70.00) including costs. Such violation shall constitute cause of removal from office or employment; and if the regular removal authority has not already removed a person who violates this section, he or she shall be automatically removed by conviction of violating this section effective at the time the conviction becomes final. 
State Law reference— Political activities by municipal employees, 11 O.S. § 22-101.1.  
Section 6-9. - Elections Prior to 1985. 
At the elections in 1983, the Mayor and Councilmembers from Wards ONE and THREE shall be elected for two-year terms. At the elections in 1984, the Councilmembers from Wards TWO and FOUR shall be elected for two-year terms. In the 1983 election, the candidates for Mayor shall be nominated, and the Mayor shall be elected, at large, by the qualified electors of the entire City. The candidates for Councilmembers from the four wards shall be nominated by ward, by the qualified electors of their respective wards, but the Councilmembers from the wards shall be elected at large by the qualified electors of the entire City for both the 1983 and 1984 elections.  
Section 6-10. - Initial Elections Under New Wards. 
Beginning with the elections in 1985, the Mayor and Councilmembers from Wards ONE and THREE shall be elected for three-year terms, and Councilmembers from Wards FIVE and SIX shall be elected for two-year terms. In 1986, the Councilmembers from Wards TWO and FOUR shall be elected for three-year terms, and in 1987, Councilmembers from Wards FIVE and SIX shall be elected for three-year terms.  
Section 6-11. - State Constitution and Law to Govern. 
The provisions of the State Constitution and Law applicable to City elections, shall govern such elections in this City insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by this Charter or by ordinance. 
State Law reference— Municipal elections, 11 O.S. § 16-101 et seq.  
ARTICLE 7. - RECALL 
 
Section 7-1. - Recall Authorized. 
The incumbent for any elective City office, including a person appointed to fill a vacancy in any such office, may be recalled from office by the electors qualified to vote for the election of a successor to the incumbent, in the manner provided in this article.  
Section 7-2. - Recall Petition. 
(a)  To initiate recall proceedings, a written statement in duplicate, proposing the recall of the incumbent of an elective office, shall be signed by a number of registered qualified electors of the ward for Councilmember, or City at large for Mayor, equal to at least twenty (20) percent of the qualified electors of the ward for Councilmember, or City at large for Mayor, who voted at the last general state-wide election, and shall be filed with the City Clerk after the incumbent has held office at least six months. The statement shall also contain the reason or reasons for which the recall is sought, in not more than two hundred (200) words. Within five days, the City Clerk shall mail a copy of such statement by registered, certified, or similar special mail to the officer at the incumbent's residential address. Within ten days after the statement is mailed to the officer, the officer may make and file with the City Clerk a written statement in duplicate, justifying the officer's conduct in office, in not more than two hundred (200) words; and the City Clerk, on request, shall deliver one copy to one of the persons filing the statement proposing the recall. 
(b)  The petition for recall shall include a demand that a successor to the incumbent sought to be recalled be elected, and shall also include, before the space where the signatures are to be written, the statement giving the reason or reasons for recall under the heading "STATEMENT FOR RECALL," and if the officer has filed a statement as authorized, the statement justifying his conduct in office under the heading "STATEMENT AGAINST RECALL." The two statements shall be in letters of the same size. A copy of the petition shall be filed with the City Clerk within one month after recall proceedings are initiated by the filing of the first statement, and before the petition is circulated. 
(c)  A number of registered qualified electors of the ward for Councilmember, or City at large for Mayor, equal to at least thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3 ) percent of the qualified electors of the ward for Councilmember, or City at large for Mayor, who voted at the last general state-wide election must sign the petition. Each signer shall write after the signer's name, his or her address within the City, giving street or avenue and number, if any. Not more than one hundred (100) signatures may appear on a single copy of the Petition. Petitions may be circulated only by registered qualified electors of the area; and the person who circulates each copy of the petition shall sign an affidavit on the copy stating that each signer signed the petition in his or her presence, and that each signature on the petition is genuine, and that he or she believes each signer to be a registered qualified elector of the ward or City at large, as the case may be. 
(d)  The circulated petition shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than one month after the filing of a copy as provided in Section 7-2(a). Within one month after the date of filing of the circulated petition, the City Clerk shall examine it and ascertain whether the required number of registered qualified electors of the ward, or City at large, as the case may be, have signed it. The City Clerk shall then attach his or her certificate to the petition. If his or her certificate states that the petition has not been prepared and circulated as required and/or lacks a sufficient number of signatures, the petition shall have no effect. But, if the City Clerk's certificate states that the petition has been prepared and circulated as required and has a sufficient number of signatures, the City Clerk shall submit the petition and certificate to the Council at its next meeting.  
Section 7-3. - Recall Election: Council to Order. 
(a)  The Council, by resolution or ordinance passed at the next regularly scheduled Council Meeting, after receiving the petition and certificate of the City Clerk, shall order and fix the date for a recall election, which shall be held not less than forty (40) days, nor more than fifty (50) days, after passage of the resolution or ordinance. The City Clerk shall cause the resolution or ordinance ordering the election to be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within the City within ten (10) days after its passage; and such publication shall be sufficient notice of the election. 
(b)  The qualified electors of the affected ward or the City at large, as the case may be, may vote in a recall election on the election of successors to more than one officer on the same day.  
Section 7-4. - Recall Election: How Held. 
(a)  The recall election shall be an election to fill the office held by the incumbent sought to be recalled. There shall be no primary. Any qualified person, including the incumbent, may file as a candidate for the office. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in the recall election shall be elected. If a candidate other than the incumbent is elected, the incumbent shall be recalled from office effective as of the time when the result of the election is certified. The successful candidate must qualify within one month thereafter; and if he or she fails to do so, the office shall be vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as other vacancies in the Council are filled. A candidate thus elected and qualifying shall serve for the unexpired term. If the incumbent is a candidate and receives the greatest number of votes, he or she shall continue in office without interruption; and recall proceedings may not again be initiated against him or her within one year after the election. 
(b)  The provisions of this Charter relating to City elections shall also govern recall elections insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by the provisions of this article.  
Section 7-5. - Persons Recalled or Resigning. 
A person who has been recalled from an office or who has resigned from such office while recall proceedings were pending against him or her, may not hold any office or position of employment in the City Government within three years after his or her recall or resignation.  
ARTICLE 8. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY 
 
Section 8-1. - Appointments, Removals, Etc. 
(a)  Appointments and promotions in the service of the City shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness; and layoffs, suspensions, demotions, and removals shall be made solely for the good of the service. 
(b)  The Council, by ordinance, may establish a merit system.  
Section 8-2. - Nepotism. 
Neither the City Manager, the Council, nor any other authority of the City Government, may appoint or elect any person related to the Mayor or any other Councilmember, to the City Manager, or to himself or herself, or, in the case of a plural authority, to one of its members, by affinity or consanguinity within the third degree, to any office or position of profit in the City Government; but this shall not prohibit an officer or employee already in the service of the City from continuing therein.  
Section 8-3. - Holding More Than One Office. 
Except as may be otherwise provided in this Charter or by ordinance, the same person may hold more than one such office, through appointment by himself, by the Council, or by other City authority having power to fill the particular office, subject to any regulations which the Council may make by ordinance; but he or she may not receive compensation for service in such other offices. Also, the Council, by ordinance, may provide that the City Manager shall hold ex officio designated offices subordinate to the City Manager, as well as other designated compatible City offices, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter.  
Section 8-4. - Official Bonds. 
The City Manager, the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, and such other officers and employees as the Council may designate, before entering upon their duties, shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their respective duties, payable to the City, in such form and in such amounts as the Council may prescribe, with a surety company authorized to operate within the state. The City shall pay the premiums on such bonds.  
Section 8-5. - Oath or Affirmation of Office. 
Every officer of the City, before entering upon the duties of office, shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office prescribed by the State Constitution. The oath or affirmation shall be filed in the City Clerk's office.  
Section 8-6. - Who May Administer Oaths and Affirmations. 
All officers authorized by Federal or State Law, the Mayor, the City Manager, the City Clerk, the Municipal Judge, and such other officers as the Council may authorize, may administer oaths and affirmations in any manner pertaining to the affairs and government of the City.  
Section 8-7. - Removal, Etc., of Officers and Employees. 
The power to lay off, suspend, demote and remove accompanies the power to appoint or elect, and the City Manager, the Council, or other appointing or electing authority at any time may lay off, suspend, demote, or remove any officer or employee to whom he or she, the Council, or the other appointing or electing authority respectively may appoint or elect a successor.  
Section 8-8. - Acting Officers and Employees. 
The appointing or electing authority who may appoint or elect the successor of an officer or employee, may appoint or elect a person to act during the temporary absence, leave, disability, or suspension of such officer or employee, or, in case of a vacancy, until a successor is appointed or elected and qualifies, unless the Council provides by general ordinance that a particular superior or subordinate of such officer or employee shall act. The Council, by general ordinance, may provide for a deputy to act in such cases.  
Section 8-9. - Officers to Continue Until Successors are Elected or Appointed and Qualify. 
Every Officer who is elected or appointed for a term ending at a definite time, shall continue to serve thereafter until his or her successor is elected or appointed and qualifies, unless his or her services are sooner terminated by resignation, removal, disqualification, death, abolition of the office, or other legal manner.  
Section 8-10. - Conflict of Interest. 
(a)  Neither the Mayor, any other Councilmember, nor the City Manager shall sell or barter anything to the City or to a contractor to be supplied to the City; or to make any contract with the City; or purchase anything from the City other than those things which the City offers generally to the public (as for example, utility services) and then only on the same terms as are offered to the public. Any such officer violating this section, upon conviction thereof, shall thereby forfeit his or her office. Any violation of this section, with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the City, shall render the contract voidable by the City Manager or the Council. This subsection shall not apply in cases where the City acquires property by condemnation or threat of condemnation. 
(b)  The Council, by ordinance, or the City Manager, by personnel rules, may further regulate conflict of interest and ethics of officers and employees of the City.  
ARTICLE 9. - GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Section 9-1. - Feminine Gender. 
When the masculine gender is used in this Charter, it shall also include the feminine.  
Section 9-2. - Initiative and Referendum. 
The powers of initiative and referendum are reserved to the people of the City. In the exercise of these powers, the requirements of the State Constitution and Law shall be observed. 
State Law reference— Municipal initiative and referendum, 11 O.S. § 15-101 et seq.  
ARTICLE 10. - AMENDMENT AND SEPARABILITY OF CHARTER 
 
Section 10-1. - Amendment: Proposal, Ratification, Approval. 
This Charter may be amended by proposals thereof submitted by the Council or by the Mayor upon initiative petition of the electors as provided by the State Constitution, at a general or special election, ratified by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon, and approved by the Governor as provided by the State Constitution. If more than one amendment is proposed, all of them, except those which are so interrelated that they should be ratified or rejected together, shall be submitted in such a manner that the electors may vote on them separately. A proposition to amend this Charter may be either in the form of a proposed amendment to a part or parts of the Charter or of a proposed new Charter.  
Section 10-2. - Separability. 
(a)  If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any section or part of the Charter invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter, nor the context in which such section or part so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with that section or part. 
(b)  If a court of competent jurisdiction holds a part of this Charter invalid, or if a change in the State Constitution or Law renders a part of this Charter invalid or inapplicable, the Council, by ordinance, may take such appropriate action as will enable the City Government to function properly.  
ARTICLE 11. - SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT 
 
Section 11-1. - When Charter Goes into Effect. 
This Charter shall go into effect immediately upon its ratification by a vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the City voting upon the question at an election and its approval by the Governor as provided by the State Constitution; and the government created by this Charter shall supersede the heretofore existing City Government as of that time.  
Section 11-2. - Wards. 
Beginning with 1985, there shall be six wards in the City of Mustang which shall be created and/or adjusted based on compactness and contiguity of territory and distribution of population. The six wards shall be created and defined by the City Council by ordinance by January, 1985, and the additional wards shall be filled as provided in this Charter. Until 1985, the City of Mustang will continue with the present four wards.  
Section 11-3. - Reapportionment. 
As soon as practicable, following each federal census, and again ten years later, the municipal governing body shall review the wards and ward boundaries of the municipality. Any change in the boundaries of wards shall be made by ordinance with due regard to the convenience and contiguity of the wards. The effective date of a change in the names or boundaries of wards shall be the effective date of the governing body ordinance making such change, unless the governing body provides otherwise. Election of Councilmembers for wards which have no representation due to such change shall take place at the next regular municipal elections and their terms of office shall be as provided by the Charter or ordinances adopted hereunder.  
Section 11-4. - Ordinances Continued. 
All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this Charter, shall continue in effect until they are repealed or until they expire by their own limitations.  
Section 11-5. - Pending Actions and Proceedings. 
The adoption of this Charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending when it takes effect, brought by or against the municipality or any office, department, agency, or officer thereof.  
Section 11-6. - Review of Charter. 
This City Charter shall be reviewed at least every ten years by a committee of freeholders, appointed by the City Council, commencing with the year, 1982. 
Certified by: 
Richard L. Weathers, Mayor 
March 7, 1983 
Attest: 
Linda R. Hazell, City Clerk  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Mustang, Oklahoma" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Mustang Code." 
Charter reference— Ordinance codification, § 2-15. 
State Law reference— Codification of municipal ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-108.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases, and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. All ordinances of the city and proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma, as amended. 
City council, council. The terms "city council" and "council" mean the city council of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Mustang Code, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Sunday or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference— Legal holidays, 25 O.S. § 82.1 et seq. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either…or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Canadian County, Oklahoma. 
Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Health department. The term "health department" means the county health department. 
Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority to a majority of the number of members, as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
State Law reference— Similar rule of statutory construction, 25 O.S. § 31. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" are the equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference— Similar rule of statutory construction, 25 O.S. § 26. 
Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, board, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
O.S. The abbreviation "O.S." refers to the latest edition of the Oklahoma Statutes, as amended. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. 
Person. The term "person" means any corporation, organization, government, governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, and any other legal entity. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Oklahoma. 
Street. The term "street" includes any street, highway, avenue, lane, alley, court, place, square or other public way dedicated and open to public use. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," when applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1.04.010—1.04.040, 1.04.060, 1.04.070)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after a section in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Charter references, cross references, editor's notes and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code.  
Sec. 1-4. - Applicability of Code and ordinances to real property owned by city. 
The provisions of this Code and all ordinances of the city apply to all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city. 
(Code 1977, § 10.04.040) 
State Law reference— Municipal jurisdiction over property owned by it, 11 O.S. § 22-116.  
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed or impair the effect of any savings provision in it. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
(Code 1977, § 1.04.080)  
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Mustang Code is hereby amended to read as follows: …." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to this Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Mustang Code is hereby created to read as follows: …." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. Although a general repealer may be used to resolve conflicts in other provisions.  
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in this Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in this Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to this Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in this Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in this Code.  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided or required by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00 plus costs for traffic-related offenses relating to speeding or parking, not to exceed $800.00 for alcohol-related or drug-related offenses, and not to exceed $750.00 plus costs for all other violations, imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or both the fine and imprisonment. No penalty, including fine and costs, shall be greater than that established by statute for the same offense. A person convicted of a violation of this Code pertaining to the pretreatment of wastewater or regulating stormwater discharges shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 plus costs, or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. As to other violations, each violation constitutes as separate offense. 
(d)  Any person fined for a violation of this Code who is financially able but refuses or neglects to pay the fine or costs may be compelled to satisfy the amount owed by working on the streets, alleys, avenues, areas and public grounds of the city, subject to the direction of the city manager, at a rate of $25.00 per day for useful labor, until the fine and costs are satisfied. 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1.12.010, 1.16.010; Ord. No. 781, § 1, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 936, § 1, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 1172, § 4, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, 11 O.S. § 14-111.  
Sec. 1-9. - Permitting, allowing or concealing offense. 
Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Code 1977, § 1.04.050)  
Sec. 1-10. - Attempt to commit offense. 
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the city, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense, but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the offense itself. 
(Code 1977, § 1.16.020)  
Sec. 1-11. - Aiding or abetting offense. 
When no punishment for counseling, aiding or abetting in the commission of a particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who counsels, aids or abets another in the commission of such offense is guilty of an offense and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender. 
(Code 1977, § 1.16.030)  
Sec. 1-12. - Severability. 
If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid or unconstitutional, the invalidity or unconstitutionality does not affect any other provisions or application of this Code that can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Code are severable.  
Sec. 1-13. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as reinstatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-14. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-15. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance: 
(1)  Establishing or amending the Charter. 
(2)  Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits. 
(3)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(4)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(5)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Providing for salaries of employees or other employee benefits or job descriptions for employee positions. 
(8)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(9)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(12)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(14)  Levying or imposing or otherwise related to taxes. 
(15)  Amending the zoning map or zoning atlas, or rezoning specific property. 
(16)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(17)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(18)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  The ordinances designated in subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration and enforcement of animal regulations, § 14-31 et seq.; administration and enforcement of electrical code, § 18-81 et seq.; administration and enforcement of plumbing code, § 18-241 et seq.; courts, ch. 26; elections, ch. 30; administration and enforcement of flood damage prevention regulations, § 50-61 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 62; library, ch. 66; administration and enforcement of oil and gas regulations, § 74-51 et seq.; offenses involving public authority, § 78-31 et seq.; personnel, ch. 86; planning, ch. 90; administration and enforcement of sign regulations, § 94-31 et seq.; administration and enforcement of subdivision regulations, § 106-31 et seq.; taxation, ch. 110; administration and enforcement of traffic regulations, § 114-31 et seq.; utilities, ch. 118; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, § 122-31 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Emergencies. 
In the event of an enemy-caused emergency, or emergency resulting from natural causes, the city manager, after due authorization from the mayor or the city council, shall have the power and authority to enforce all rules and regulations relating to civil defense for the purpose of protecting the civilian population. Acting as the city's official representative, the mayor shall cooperate and coordinate with the activities of other governmental agencies. 
(Code 1977, § 2.16.140) 
Cross reference— Civil defense division, § 46-39.  
Sec. 2-2. - Proclamation of state of emergency—Notice—Termination. 
(a)  The mayor, after finding that a public disorder, disaster or riot exists within the city or any part thereof which affects life, health, property or the public peace, may proclaim a state of emergency in the area affected. The city council will be convened within 24 hours of any declaration of a state of emergency to ratify or abolish the action of the mayor. 
(b)  The proclamation of a state of emergency and other proclamations issued pursuant to this section shall be in writing and shall be signed by the mayor. They shall then be filed with the city clerk. 
(c)  The mayor shall give as much public notice as practical through the news media of the issuance of proclamations pursuant to this act. 
(d)  The state of emergency shall cease to exist upon the issuance of a proclamation of the mayor declaring its termination; provided that the mayor must terminate said proclamation when order has been restored in the area affected. 
(Ord. No. 954, § 1, 1, 2-7-2006) 
State Law reference— Proclamation of State of Emergency-Notice-Termination, 21 O.S. § 1321.3  
Secs. 2-3—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Council, § 2-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 30. 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
(a)  The council of the city shall hold regular meetings at 7:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday of every month; provided that, if such a Tuesday falls on a holiday, the regular meeting shall be held at that time on the next day which is not a holiday. 
(b)  Every meeting of the council shall be held in the council chamber in the municipal building, unless, in case of an emergency or special meeting, the mayor or the councilmembers calling a special meeting designate another place in the city for the holding of the special meeting; provided that any adjourned meeting may be held at any other place within the city designated by the council. 
(Code 1977, §§ 2.04.010, 2.04.020; Ord. No. 648, § 1, 7-2-1996; Ord. No. 1151, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Charter reference— Council meetings, § 2-6. 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Open Meeting Act, 25 O.S. § 301 et seq.  
Secs. 2-32—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENTS, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Officers and employees generally, § 8-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for salaries of employees or other employee benefits or job descriptions for employee positions saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(7); municipal judge, § 26-61 et seq.; fire department, § 46-31 et seq.; police department, § 62-31 et seq.; personnel, ch. 86; director of community development, § 114-66 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal officers generally, 11 O.S. § 8-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-61. - City manager. 
The city manager is the chief administrative officer of the city. He has all the powers and duties prescribed for him by Charter section 3-3 and other sections, or by ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 2.08.010)  
Sec. 2-62. - Assistant city manager. 
(a)  Office established; appointment. There is hereby established the office of assistant city manager, which shall be filled at the discretionary authority of the city manager pursuant to the powers and duties set forth in section 3-3 of the Charter. The assistant city manager may, but need not be, the same person designated by the city manager to be acting city manager pursuant to section 3-2 of the Charter. 
(b)  Duties. The assistant city manager shall assist the city manager in all work of the city manager's office in whatever manner and respect as he shall be directed by the city manager. 
(Code 1977, §§ 2.09.010, 2.09.020) 
Charter reference— Acting city manager, § 3-2.  
Sec. 2-63. - Department of law and city attorney. 
(a)  There shall be a department of law, the head of which is the city attorney, who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city attorney shall work under the supervision and control of the city council and in accordance with the terms of his employment contract. 
(b)  The city attorney shall be the chief legal advisor for the municipal corporation and all of its officers, departments and agencies in the performance of their lawful functions. He may be designated to represent the city in any proceedings before the court, or to perform any such other duties as may be deemed necessary and desirable by the city council. 
(c)  The city attorney may administer oaths and affirmations in any manner pertaining to the affairs and government of the city. 
(Code 1977, §§ 2.24.010, 2.24.020; Ord. No. 1162, § 1, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 2-64. - Department of finance and treasurer. 
(a)  There shall be a department of finance, the head of which is the finance director, appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the city manager. The finance director is an officer of the city, and has supervision and control of the department of finance. 
(b)  Within the department of finance, there shall be a city treasurer, who is an officer of the city appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the manager. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall deposit daily all funds received for the city in such depositories as the council may designate; and shall disburse such funds in the manner provided by applicable laws or ordinance. He shall have such other powers, duties, and functions as may be prescribed by the Charter, by applicable law, or by ordinance. 
(Code 1977, §§ 2.12.010—2.12.030)  
Sec. 2-65. - Department of public works and director of public works. 
(a)  If deemed necessary by the city manager, there shall be a department of public works, the head of which is the director of public works appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the city manager; provided, that during the absence, disability, or suspension of the director of public works, the city manager shall act as such or appoint an acting director; and provided, that during a vacancy in the office of director, the city manager shall be director of public works until and unless he appoints a director. The public works director is an officer of the city, and has supervision and control of the department of public works. 
(b)  The public works department shall have the following duties insofar as the city performs these functions by its own forces (and not by contract): 
(1)  To construct, improve, maintain, and clean streets (including alleys and other public ways), bridges, and sidewalks; to install and maintain streetlights, traffic-control signs, markings, signals, and devices; to erect and maintain street name signs; and to supervise the use of streets by privately owned utilities; 
(2)  To maintain and operate the city water system; 
(3)  To construct, improve, maintain, and operate storm sewers; 
(4)  To maintain all buildings and grounds used by the city; 
(5)  To maintain and operate all parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, and other recreational facilities and programs operated by the city; 
(6)  To maintain and operate any cemeteries administered by the city; 
(7)  To collect and dispose of garbage and other refuse whenever the city provides this service by its own forces (rather than by contract); 
(8)  To maintain city owned motor equipment; 
(9)  To inspect buildings, plumbing, and electrical installations (the building official and other such inspectors are to be in the public works department); 
(10)  To perform such other functions relating to the maintenance, repair, improvement, and the operation of the physical facilities owned or used by the city government as the city manager may prescribe consistent with law and ordinance. 
(c)  There shall be such divisions within the public works department as the city manager or the council may create, with such appropriate titles as street division, water division, park division, and/or others, and with such powers and duties of the department as may be assigned to the respective divisions. The head of a division may have an appropriate title such as chief, superintendent, sexton, etc. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, if the city council or the trustees for the Mustang Improvement Authority execute an agreement with an independent contractor for any or all of the services within the public works department or any other department or division of the city, then those positions related to those services and as designated by the city manager are deemed abolished for the term of the agreement without further action of the council or the trustees, and the city manager or his designee is the authorized representative and contract manager for the city and the Mustang Improvement Authority during the term of the agreement. 
(Code 1977, §§ 2.36.010—2.36.030)  
Sec. 2-66. - Authority of code enforcement officer and inspection officer to issue citations for certain violations. 
The community development director or such other person who shall be designated by the city manager as the code enforcement officer, and/or the city inspection officer, are hereby authorized and empowered to issue citations for violations of the following provisions of this Code: 
(1)  Chapter 10, article II, pertaining to coin-operated music or amusement devices. 
(2)  Chapter 10, article III, pertaining to circuses, carnivals, amusement rides and parades. 
(3)  Chapter 18, pertaining to buildings and construction. 
(4)  Chapter 38, article II, pertaining to nuisances. 
(5)  Chapter 38, article III, pertaining to weeds and trash. 
(6)  Chapter 82, article II, pertaining to solicitors. 
(7)  Chapter 94, pertaining to signs. 
(8)  Chapter 98, article II, pertaining to littering. 
(9)  Chapter 110, article II, pertaining to business license taxes. 
(10)  Chapter 122, pertaining to zoning. 
It is expressly provided that this authority is in addition to and not in lieu of any authority of any law enforcement officer to issue such citations. 
(Code 1977, § 2.36.040) 
State Law reference— Citations, 22 O.S. § 209.  
Sec. 2-67. - Department of parks and recreation. 
The department of parks and recreation is hereby established under the supervision of a director of parks and recreation. The director of parks and recreation shall be appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term and removable by the city manager. The parks and recreation director is an officer of the city, and has supervision and control of the department of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 6-21-2011) 
Cross reference— Department of parks and recreation, § 2-301 et seq.  
Secs. 2-68—2-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-91—2-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OLD-AGE AND SURVIVORS INSURANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Old-age and survivors insurance, 51 O.S. § 121 et seq.; local government coverage, 51 O.S. § 125. 
 
Sec. 2-111. - Extension of benefits to city employees and officials. 
It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, at the earliest time, to the employees and officials thereof not excluded by law or ordinance, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of federal old-age and survivors insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734, 81st Congress. In pursuance of the policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 2.60.010)  
Sec. 2-112. - Authority of mayor to execute agreements. 
The mayor of the city is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state public welfare commission, as agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in section 2-111. 
(Code 1977, § 2.60.020)  
Sec. 2-113. - Withholdings from employee salaries. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 2-111 are authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by the laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 2.60.030)  
Sec. 2-114. - Appropriations for employer's contributions. 
There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions under this division, which shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by the laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 2.60.040)  
Sec. 2-115. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports under this division as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 2.60.050)  
Sec. 2-116. - Exclusion of employees covered by other retirement systems. 
There is excluded from this division any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2.60.060)  
Sec. 2-117. - Exclusion of employees paid on fee basis or excluded by state or federal laws. 
There is excluded from this division any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official whose compensation is on a fee basis, or any position or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 2.60.070)  
Secs. 2-118—2-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—4 of Ord. No. 1054, adopted Nov. 2, 2010, has been treated as superseding the provisions of former Div. 3, §§ 2-141—2-146, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 2.64.010—2.64.060. 
State Law reference— Retirement systems, 11 O.S. § 48-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-141. - [Plan adopted.] 
That pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the State of Oklahoma, and for the purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the part of city employees and thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby authorized created, established, and approved and adopted, effective as of November 1, 2010, the amended and restated plan designated "Employee Retirement System of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma, Defined Benefit Plan," (hereinafter called "system"), an executed counterpart of which is marked Exhibit "A" (Joinder Agreement) and Exhibit "B" (amended and restated plan) and attached hereto as part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 1, 11-2-2010) 
Editor's note— Exhibits "A" and "B" are not set out, but are kept on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 2-142. - Fund. 
A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the persons entitled to benefits under the system. All contributions to such fund shall be paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the city. Such fund shall be pooled for purposes of management and investment with similar funds of other incorporated cities, towns, and municipal trusts in the State of Oklahoma as a part of the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund in accordance with the trust agreement of the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund, a public trust. The city shall hold such contributions in the form received, and from time to time pay over and transfer the same to the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund, as duly authorized and directed by the board of trustees. The fund shall be nonfiscal and shall not be considered in computing any levy when the annual estimate is made to the county excise board. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 11-2-2010)  
Sec. 2-143. - Appropriations. 
The City of Mustang, Oklahoma, is hereby authorized to incur the necessary expenses for the establishment, operation, and administration of the system, and to appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the City of Mustang, Oklahoma, is hereby authorized to appropriate annually such amounts as are required in addition to employee contributions to maintain the system and the fund in accordance with the provisions of the defined benefit plan. Any appropriation so made to maintain the system and fund shall be for deferred wages or salaries, and for the payment of necessary expenses of operation and administration to be transferred to the trustees of the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund for such purposes and shall be paid into the fund when available, to be duly transferred to the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 3, 11-2-2010)  
Sec. 2-144. - Execution. 
The mayor and city clerk be and they are each hereby authorized and directed to execute (in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original) the system instrument, and to do all other acts and things necessary, advisable, and proper to put said system and related trust into full force and effect, and to make such changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same under Sections 401(a) and 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States. The counterpart attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and Exhibit "B", which has been duly executed as aforesaid simultaneously with the passage of this ordinance [codified in this division] and made a part hereof, is hereby ratified and confirmed in all respects. 
This committee is hereby authorized and directed to proceed immediately on behalf of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma, to pool and combine the fund into the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund as a part thereof, with similar funds of such other cities and towns, for purposes of pooled management and investment. 
(Ord. No. 1054, § 4, 11-2-2010) 
Editor's note— Exhibits "A" and "B" are not set out, but are kept on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Secs. 2-145—2-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Finance, § 4-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(4); any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(5); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(6); any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessments saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(10); any ordinance levying or imposing or otherwise related to taxes saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(14); fees, ch. 42; taxation, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance, 11 O.S. § 17-101 et seq.; local government finance, 62 O.S. §§ 281 et seq., 504 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-171. - Payment of claims related to workers' compensation and health benefits. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee is authorized to approve payment of claims and invoices related to workers' compensation and health benefits from the accounts and/or funds established for those purposes, pursuant to the provisions of 62 O.S. § 310.1 and other appropriate law. 
(b)  Prior to the city manager or his designee approving such claims or invoices, he will examine all claims or invoices to determine that they are appropriate for payment and will require certification from the employee charged with keeping the appropriation and expenditure records of the city clerk that the encumbrance has been entered against the designated appropriation accounts and that the encumbrance is within the authorized available balance of the appropriation. 
(c)  Warrants, checks or other instruments for payments for claims or invoices described in this section shall be signed by the city manager or his designee, or in his absence by the finance director or his designee. 
(d)  The designee(s) of the city manager and the finance director for the purposes of this section shall be identified in writing and filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 3.06.010; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 2-172. - Payments for police investigative purposes. 
(a)  In situations specified in this section, invoices may be paid by the alternate procedure as provided in this section, at the discretion of the city manager, pursuant to the authority granted municipalities by 11 O.S. § 17-102, as it may be amended. 
(b)  Situations in which this alternate procedure may be used are restricted to the following: monies provided for use by the city police department for investigative purposes, to include, without limitation, payment to informants when approved by the chief of police and the city manager, provided: 
(1)  The amount does not exceed $1,000.00 in any single transaction; 
(2)  Sufficient monies are available and unencumbered to pay such amounts; and 
(3)  The purpose of the expenditure is disclosed to the city manager and the director of finance, which purpose shall remain confidential as a part of the police investigative file. 
(c)  Monies paid through this alternative procedure will be approved by signatures of the encumbrance officer and the purchasing officer on the purchase order upon submission of the purchase order by the chief of police, which purpose shall be designated as "investigation expenses". Checks or warrants will be signed by both the director of finance or his designee and the city manager or his designee and may be made out to "Cash" ifrequested by the chief of police for good cause shown. The designees shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1(3.30.10—3.30.30), 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 929, § 1, 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 2-173. - Petty cash fund. 
(a)  The city may establish and maintain a petty cash fund for use in making payments incurred in operating the city, pursuant to 11 O.S. § 17-102(D) and other appropriate law, under such conditions and restrictions as may be determined by the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee is authorized to approve expenditures from the petty cash fund in an amount not to exceed $500.00. The identification of such designees shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk. 
(c)  Prior to obtaining petty cash, vouchers must be submitted to the finance department which contain the date, amount, description of items, and approval of the city manager or his designee. The finance department will assign a number to the voucher and the employee will sign a receipt for funds. All receipts will be submitted to the finance department. 
(d)  The city manager is authorized to approve reimbursement to the account to maintain the level of the account in an amount not to exceed $500.00 at any time, upon submission of a claim or invoice to the encumbrance officer or city clerk and certification by the employee charged with keeping the appropriation and expenditure records or city clerk that the encumbrance has been entered against the designated appropriation accounts and that the encumbrance is within the authorized available balance of the appropriation. 
(Code 1977, § 3.06.020)  
Sec. 2-174. - Fee for worthless checks tendered to city. 
There is hereby imposed on the maker of any check or draft payable to the city that proves to be worthless a fee as provided in section 42-2 to cover the costs of processing the check or draft, plus any charges levied on the city by a bank or other financial institution on account of such check.  
Sec. 2-175. - Payment of claims related to refunds, interfund transfers, debt service and certain utility and telephone services. 
(a)  In situations specified in this section, invoices may be paid by the alternate procedure as provided in this section, at the discretion of the city manager or his designee, pursuant to the authority granted municipalities by 11 O.S. § 17-102, as it may be amended. 
(b)  Situations in which this alternative procedure may be used are restricted to: 
(1)  Refunds to customers for deposits on the use of city facilities; 
(2)  Refunds to customers for utility deposits; 
(3)  Refunds to customers for fees paid on city sponsored programs that have been cancelled; 
(4)  Debt service principal and interest payments as appropriated by the governing body; 
(5)  Interfund transfers as appropriated by the governing body in the original or amended budget; and 
(6)  Utility and telephone charges governed by the corporation commission. 
(c)  For all purchases mention in subsection (b) above, requisitions forms shall be completed by the department head and forwarded to the city manager and finance director for approval. Once approved the requisition shall be forwarded to an employee charged with keeping the appropriation and expenditure records (encumbering clerk) who shall determine that there exists available unencumbered appropriation in the accounts to be charged. Upon such determination, the encumbering clerk shall attest to that fact in writing. If appropriation is not available for the proposed purchase or commitment, the purchase or commitment shall not proceed until budget amendments are authorized to provide sufficient appropriation. 
Upon approval of the purchasing officer and encumbering clerk, an encumbrance shall be recorded in the appropriation and expenditure records in the amount or estimated amount of the commitment and a purchase order issued. 
(d)  Upon issuance of the purchase order, a claims list along with supporting documentation shall be prepared and forwarded to the city manager or finance director or their designee(s) for approval. 
(e)  Upon approval of the claims for payment, checks or other payment documents as authorized by the state law (11 O.S. § 17-102) shall be prepared and submitted to the finance director. The finance director shall compare the checks or other payment documents to the invoice or claims listing and verify accuracy. Upon verification, the city manager or his designee and the finance director or his designee shall sign the check or other documents and prepare them for distribution. In addition, a check register shall be prepared. 
(f)  A copy of the approved check register shall be provided to the governing board for informational purposes at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting; however, governing body approval is not required prior to the payment of the invoices or claims if incurred and paid in accordance with the provisions above. In addition, the above noted procedures can be used on weeks in which city council does not meet for a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. No. 930, § 1, 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 2-176. - Fee for referral of debt to collection agency. 
Where any unpaid debt, account receivable, penalty, cost, fine, fee or other monetary obligation is referred for collection pursuant to a contract between the city and a collection agency, there is hereby imposed on the person owing such referred item a collection fee on each item so referred in the amount charged by such collection agency for its services, not to exceed 35 percent of each referred item. A collection agency is hereby authorized to collect the fee imposed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
State Law reference— 11 O.S. § 22-138.  
Sec. 2-177. - Convenience fee. 
(a)  Where a customer makes payment to the city by credit or debit card for the goods or services set forth herein, a convenience fee in the amount set forth in section 42-2 shall be added to and collected at the time the customer makes such payment. The amount of the convenience fee shall be $2.50. For purposes of this section, the term "convenience fee" shall mean the additional costs to the city or a city-beneficiary public trust associated with providing for payments via credit or debit card, including but not limited to bank processing fees and financial transaction fees, the cost of providing for secure transactions, portal fees, and fees necessary to compensate for increased bandwidth incurred as a result of providing for an online transaction. 
(b)  The convenience fee will apply to the following: 
(1)  All transactions with the city, including but not limited to utility payments, payment of community development fees, and payment of municipal court fines and costs. 
(2)  Transactions at all parks and recreation facilities where the charge exceeds $10.00, with the exception that the convenience fee will not apply to transactions at remote sites. For purposes of this subsection, remotes sites shall mean entry gates and concession stands. 
(Ord. No. 1171, § 1, 8-7-2018)  
Secs. 2-178—2-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASES AND SALES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Purchases and sales, §§ 4-3, 4-4. 
State Law reference— Municipal purchases generally, 11 O.S. §§ 17-102, 17-114; purchases from certain municipal employees prohibited, 11 O.S. § 8-113; purchases from members of governing body prohibited, 21 O.S. § 355 et seq.; municipal purchasing procedures, 62 O.S. § 310.1 et seq.; the Oklahoma Central Purchasing Act, 74 O.S. § 85.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-191. - Definitions. 
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City. The term "city" refers to the City of Mustang, Oklahoma, and means the city government in all its forms, including not only all city departments but also any commission or board of the city acting for or on behalf of the City of Mustang; provided, however, that any public trust created pursuant to 60 O.S. § 176, et seq., shall not be included in this definition thereby exempting such trusts from the provisions of this division. 
Contractual services. The term "contractual services" means services which are predominantly physical or manual in nature, and involve the furnishing of labor, any materials or supplies necessary to perform the service, time, and effort by a supplier to perform an identifiable task, not typically involving delivery of a specific end product, and may include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in connection with such services under express or implied contract. Contractual services includes but is not limited to: travel, freight, express, parcel post, postage, landscaping, printing and binding, mowing, cleaning, sweeping, hauling, pest control, security, wrecker services, and repairs and maintenance of equipment, machinery, and other city owned property or facilities; and communication services including but not limited to telephone, long distance, cell phone, internet, and video services. The term shall not include: Professional services; insurance; employee benefit plans; financial services; and, services involved in public construction, repair or maintenance contracts. 
Cooperative purchasing plan. The term "cooperative purchasing plan" shall mean an arrangement entered into between two or more entities of government for acquisitions pursuant to a cooperative agreement obtained through competition. 
Performance-based efficiency contracts. The term "performance-based efficiency contracts" shall have the meaning as set forth in 62 O.S. § 318, as amended from time to time. 
Professional services. The term "professional services" means services which are predominantly mental or intellectual in nature, rather than physical or manual, and which do not typically involve the supply of products. Professional services include, but are not limited to: consulting; computer programming and consulting; services to support decision making, policy development, management, administration, or the operation of management systems; and, services identified in 18 O.S. § 803, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 3.04.101; Ord. No. 1178, § 1, 11-6-2018) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-192. - Purchases generally. 
All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services for the offices, departments and agencies of the city government shall be made by the city manager or by other city personnel in accordance with purchase authorizations issued by the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 3.04.020)  
Sec. 2-193. - Council approval required for certain purchases and contracts. 
Every contract for or purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for more than $50,000.00 shall require the prior approval of the city council, and under no circumstances may such contract or purchase be made without first obtaining the approval of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 3.04.030; Ord. No. 906, § 1, 6-18-2004; Ord. No. 1153, § 1, 10-3-2017)  
Sec. 2-194. - Competitive bidding generally; authority of city manager regarding surplus materials and equipment. 
(a)  Authority of city manager regarding surplus materials and equipment. The city manager may transfer to or between offices, departments and agencies, or sell, surplus or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment. 
(b)  Competitive bidding required for certain purchases and sales; procedure. Before any purchase of or contract for supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services is made involving the expenditure of more than $50,000.00, or any sale made of property the value of which is more than $1,000.00, it shall: 
(1)  Be approved by the council. 
(2)  Be submitted for competitive bidding, except in the case of an emergency, and except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(3)  Have written notice given by the city manager for sealed bids for the furnishing or sale of such supplies, materials or equipment, such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 20 days prior to the date bids are to be opened. The city manager may provide such additional notice as may be deemed necessary to provide prospective bidders with an opportunity to bid. 
(c)  Bid notice; opening of bids. The notice required in this section shall state the time and place for filing the bids, and shall contain an ample description of the supplies, materials and equipment to be purchased or sold and the time and place the bids will be opened, and state that all bids may be rejected. The bids shall be in writing and sealed, and filed with the city clerk prior to the time they are to be opened. The bids may be rejected or the city manager may readvertise for bids, or, after due consideration thereof, may award a contract to, purchase from or sell such supplies, material or equipment to the lowest and best responsible bidder. However, the city manager may at his option purchase any such materials, supplies and equipment through central purchasing of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 3.04.040; Ord. No. 906, § 1, 6-18-2004; Ord. No. 1127, § 1, 7-21-2015) 
State Law reference— The Oklahoma Central Purchasing Act, 74 O.S. § 85.1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-195. - Exemption of certain purchases from competitive bidding requirement. 
(a)  The following may be purchased without giving an opportunity for competitive bidding: 
(1)  Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services whose cost does not exceed $50,000.00 in a single transaction. 
(2)  Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can be furnished only by a single dealer, or which have a uniform price wherever bought. 
(3)  Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased from another unit of government at a price deemed below that obtainable from private dealers, including government surplus and central purchasing of the state. 
(4)  Equipment to replace existing equipment which has become inoperable when the council declares the purchase an emergency as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(5)  Contractual services (natural gas, telephone service, etc.) purchased from a public utility at a price or rate determined by the state corporation commission or other government authority. 
(6)  Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when purchased at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the state purchasing agency or any other state agency authorized to regulate prices for things purchased by the state (whether such price is determined by a contract negotiated with a vendor or otherwise). 
(7)  Contracts for professional services. 
(8)  Purchases made through a cooperative purchasing plan, as provided in section 2-199. 
(9)  Performance-based efficiency contracts entered into pursuant to 62 O.S. § 318. 
(b)  The council can suspend the competitive bidding requirements by declaring an emergency. Such declaration shall require the approval of two-thirds of the councilmembers. 
(Code 1977, § 3.04.050; Ord. No. 906, § 1, 6-18-2004; Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 7-21-2015; Ord. No. 1178, § 2, 11-6-2018) 
State Law reference— The Oklahoma Central Purchasing Act, 74 O.S. § 85.1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-196. - Sale of surplus materials or equipment valued at more than $1,000.00. 
Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment of a value of more than $1,000.00 shall be disposed of following the same procedures as set forth in sections 2-194 and 2-195 pertaining to purchases. 
(Code 1977, § 3.04.060)  
Sec. 2-197. - Sale of materials or equipment without competitive bidding. 
The city manager may sell the following without giving an opportunity for competitive bidding: 
(1)  Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment whose total value does not exceed $1,000.00 in a single transaction. 
(2)  Supplies, materials or equipment when sold at a price at least as great as that paid by the city for the supplies, materials or equipment. 
(Code 1977, § 3.04.070)  
Sec. 2-198. - Participation in contracts of other municipalities and counties. 
The city manager may avail the city of the provisions of the contracts of any municipality or county in the state, provided that the contract in such other municipality or county in the state is competitively bid in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of such municipality or county and in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 3.04.080)  
Sec. 2-199. - Cooperative purchasing. 
Competitive bidding shall not be required and the city shall have the authority, instead, to make purchases from a cooperative purchasing plan where such cooperative purchasing plan's contracts were obtained through prior competitive bidding when the best interests of the city would be served. 
(Ord. No. 1178, § 3, 11-6-2018)  
Secs. 2-200—2-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical board, § 18-111 et seq.; mechanical board, § 18-191 et seq.; library board, § 66-31 et seq.; personnel board, § 86-51 et seq.; planning commission, § 90-31 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 122-121 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-221. - Termination of membership for absence from meetings. 
(a)  Members of all boards and commissions created or to be created by the city council shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Absences will terminate membership if any member should miss more than one-half of the regular or special called meetings of the board within a consecutive four-month period, without further action of the city council. The chairperson, or any remaining member of the board, shall notify the city manager of the vacancy within 15 days of the meeting at which the member's absence terminated membership. The city manager will notify the city council of the vacancy at the next meeting of the city council following notification. 
(2)  Upon the motion of any member of the city council, the council may, by a majority vote, waive the termination if, in the sole discretionary authority of the council, the absences are based upon good cause, and continuation of membership is for the good of the service. 
(3)  If the termination of membership is not waived as provided in this section, the city council shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term in accordance with terms and conditions provided for other vacancies for the respective boards. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to any other provisions for vacancies, removal or appointments presently existing and not in conflict with this section. 
(Ord. No. 701, § 1, 12-15-1998)  
Secs. 2-222—2-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPROVEMENT AUTHORITY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Public trusts, 60 O.S. § 176 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-241. - Acceptance of trust. 
The trust created by Howard A. Silver, an individual, by indenture dated June 4, 1963, made, executed and delivered by him to Ira E. Coles, Arthur Gayman, Robert E. Hill, Herman Powell and Howard A. Silver, trustees of the Mustang Improvement Authority, in accordance with the laws of the state, for the use and benefit of the city under the terms and conditions set out in this division, is accepted by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13.16.010)  
Sec. 2-242. - Trust indenture. 
The city, the beneficiary, is familiar with the terms and provisions of the trust indenture executed and dated as provided in section 2-241, entered into by and between the parties, which instrument by reference is made a part of this division, and the city agrees, ratifies and confirms that the trust is created, operated and maintained subject to the limitations and provisions of the trust and, by filing the trust in the offices of the county clerk, the trust is determined as irrevocable and is accepted by the beneficiary for the uses and purposes therein contained. 
(Code 1977, § 13.16.020)  
Sec. 2-243. - Grant of rights to authority for use of streets and other public property. 
In order to complete and fulfill the purpose of the trust indenture and to consummate the uses and purposes of the trust accepted under this division, it is determined to be in the best interests of the city and its inhabitants that all necessary easements and rights-of-way be granted the Mustang Improvement Authority for the use of any and all public streets, ways, alleys, thoroughfares and any other public property, and such rights-of-way for the use thereof are granted to the Mustang Improvement Authority, the trustees thereof, and their successors and assigns. 
(Code 1977, § 13.16.030)  
Sec. 2-244. - Duties regarding activities on public property. 
In the use, maintenance, operation and control of the rights-of-way, easements and powers granted under this division, the Mustang Improvement Authority shall, in the enjoyment thereof, hold the city, its agents and employees harmless, whether for negligence or otherwise, in the operation and performance thereof; and such grants and easements are granted upon the express stipulation that the grantee thereof shall promptly restore all paving cuts, contours, surfaces, streets, alleyways, sewers and water lines and all other surfaces and facilities to the condition they were in prior to the use or interruption thereof by the Mustang Improvement Authority and shall, in the enjoyment and operation thereof, at all times, maintain all reasonable warning signs, flares or other devices reasonably protecting the inhabitants of the city and the public generally from the obstruction, opening, use or other activity so being conducted by the Mustang Improvement Authority pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 13.16.040)  
Secs. 2-245—2-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Established; membership. 
There is a capital improvements board which shall consist of seven members. Such members shall be recommended for appointment by the council member who represents the ward and appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council. The governing body may remove a member for the good of the service. Absence will terminate membership as set out in section 2-221. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. Members shall serve without compensation. The city manager shall be an ex officio member of the board, but shall have no vote. 
(Code 1977, § 2.28.010; Ord. No. 914, § 1, 7-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-262. - Meetings. 
Every year, at the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of new members or as soon thereafter as practicable, the capital improvements board shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary. The secretary need not be a member of the board. It shall determine the time and place of its regular meetings. The chairperson or any three members may call special meetings of the board. A quorum shall be constituted by the presence of four members of the capital improvements board. It shall take a majority of the board members to enact the powers and duties of the capital improvements board. 
(Code 1977, § 2.28.020)  
Sec. 2-263. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The capital improvements board shall act as an advisory board to the city council with reference to capital improvements projects and programs as designated by the council or as initiated by the board. The categories of improvements may include parks and open space, streets and traffic, water, sewer, storm drainage and sanitation, utilities, public buildings and other projects. The board shall provide the means to collect citizen input and other information with regard to capital projects as referenced in this section, and provide such information to the council for final decision. The board shall also establish and annually update a five-year prioritized capital improvement program. Such program shall be submitted to the council by March 1 of each year. 
(b)  The board shall review all capital needs under subsection (a) of this section with reference to the long range and future planning aspects of community development. 
(c)  The capital improvements board shall coordinate its efforts with the planning commission and various city staff members. The city manager shall ensure that reasonable information is made available to the board and shall provide clerical and administrative support necessary for reports to the council. 
(d)  The capital improvements board shall adopt rules of procedure for transaction of its business. 
(Code 1977, § 2.28.030)  
Secs. 2-264—2-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - LEISURE SERVICES BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-281. - Created—Membership; representation and vacancies. 
(a)  (1)  Created—Membership. There shall be a leisure services board which shall consist of seven members, residents of the city, who shall be recommended for appointment by the council member who represents the ward and appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council for overlapping terms of three years, beginning July 18, 2002, except as provided herein for initial terms: the representative "at large" shall be nominated and appointed by the mayor and shall serve an initial term through June 30, 2003; representatives from wards one, three, and six shall be appointed to serve initial terms through June 30, 2004; and representatives from wards two, four, and five shall be appointed to serve initial terms through June 30, 2005. A member of the youth advisory committee shall also be appointed to serve as a member for a one-year term beginning each September 30, but shall not have the power to vote, except as provided herein. The city manager or his designee shall also serve as an ex officio member of the board, but shall have no vote. 
(2)  Representation. To the extent practicable and feasible, the members of the board shall be appointed so as to provide for representation of each of the six wards in the city, with one member appointed at large. The "at large" appointment may include a member of the youth advisory committee (in which case and for which duration, there will not also be a non-voting member from the youth advisory committee), a resident representative of any of the recognized sports associations which routinely use the park facilities, or any other resident of the city whose membership would serve the betterment of the community. 
(b)  Vacancies, termination of membership and the filling of vacancies. Absence will terminate membership as with other boards established by the city, pursuant to section 2-221; and further provided that the governing body may remove a member at any time for the good of the service. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms by the procedure established for full terms. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 709, § 1(2.30.010), 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 811, § 1, 7-16-2002; Ord. No. 911, § 1, 7-20-2004; Ord. No. 912, § 1, 7-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-282. - Meetings and quorum. 
In July of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the board shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, and a secretary; and the secretary need not be a member of the board. It shall determine the time and place of its regular meetings which shall be at least quarterly; and the chairperson or any four members may call special meeting of the board. A quorum shall be constituted by the presence of a majority of the voting members. It shall take a majority vote of the voting members to enact the powers and duties of the board. 
(Ord. No. 709, § 1(2.30.020), 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 811, § 1, 7-16-2002)  
Sec. 2-283. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The leisure services board will act as an advisory board to the city council on matters concerning the parks and recreation department. The director of parks and recreation will serve as liaison between the city council and the board as appropriate. 
(b)  The leisure services board will meet and submit recommendations and reports as requested on special events and endeavors that occur within or are related to the parks and recreation department. 
(c)  The leisure services board will review those matters referred to it by the city council. 
(d)  The leisure services board will assume those duties and responsibilities previously assumed by the park land review committee, including, but not limited to, those set forth in chapter 106, article VI, section 106-331. 
(e)  The leisure services board will afford all recognized sports associations (including, but not limited to, baseball, softball, and soccer) routinely using city park facilities the opportunity to meet with the board at least quarterly. 
(Ord. No. 709, § 1(2.30.030), 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 811, § 1, 7-16-2002)  
Sec. 2-284. - Cross-reference. 
All other references in the Code to the park land review committee, including, but not limited to, those set forth in chapter 106, article VI, shall hereafter refer to the leisure services board. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1, 7-16-2002)  
Secs. 2-285—2-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Department of parks and recreation, § 2-67. 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Duties of parks and recreation department. 
The parks and recreation department shall maintain, improve and operate the parks and other recreational facilities of the city, shall administer any recreational programs now or hereafter carried on by the city, and shall have such other duties as may be provided by the city manager and by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 2-302. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Athletic field means an area designated by the director of parks and recreation for exercises, sports, or games. 
Director means the director of parks and recreation department or designee. 
Concession means supplying goods, commodities, things, services or facilities on park property. 
Park means any public park, recreational area, grounds, or facility owned by The City of Mustang and operated by the parks and recreation department, in any location used for public park purposes or public recreational activities. 
Policy or policies mean the administrative regulation or regulations established by the director and approved by the city manager, and any amendment thereto, as authorized, required, or provided in this article which shall be on file at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 2-303. - Rules and regulations governing use of parks. 
(a)  The city council shall by ordinance or resolution from time to time adopt rules and regulations governing the city parks and recreation facilities. 
(b)  In the absence of rules and regulations adopted by the city council, the director of parks and recreation may from time to time adopt rules and regulations governing the city parks and recreation facilities, subject to approval of the city manager. 
(c)  The city council hereby ratifies the rules and regulations governing the city parks and recreation facilities that are in effect as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 4, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 2-304. - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  The director of parks and recreation is authorized to issue permits under rules and regulations adopted by the city council or as approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued on a form approved by the city manager for that purpose, and may include a provision requiring the applicant in consideration of the issuance of the permit to agree in writing to release the city, and any other individual acting for or on behalf of the city, from all liability from any accident that may occur on any park or recreational facilities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 5, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 2-305. - Display of permits. 
When requested by a city official or other public officer in the discharge of his official duties, a permittee or his representative shall exhibit any permit. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 6, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 2-306. - Revocation of permits. 
The director of parks and recreation shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article upon a violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance governing the use of parks and recreation facilities. The permittee shall be informed of the appeal process at the time of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 7, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 2-307. - Fees. 
(a)  An individual or entity to whom a permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall pay to the city the fee established by the city. 
(b)  There is hereby established a schedule of fees for the use or privilege of using property, equipment and services of the parks and recreation department. Such fees shall be as established by the city, provided, however, the director is hereby authorized to establish a policy for the issuance of refunds, which shall be approved by the city council. 
(c)  The director is authorized to establish fees for participation in special events, activities and programs, conducted and administered by the parks and recreation department. The established fees and activities under this subsection shall be delivered to the council within ten days after adoption. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 8, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 2-308. - Penalty for violation of park rules and regulations. 
(a)  It is unlawful of any person to use any parks and recreational facilities owned or operated by the city without having complied with the rules and regulations promulgated by the city in connection therewith. Any violation of the rules and regulations, or failure to comply with such, shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in section 1-8 of the Municipal Code. 
(b)  The director of parks and recreation, police and peace officers, and other persons as designated by the city council shall enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 9, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 2-309. - Motorized vehicles prohibited. 
No individual, except as specifically authorized by the director, shall operate, ride or drive any vehicle, off-road recreational vehicle, motor bicycle, motor scooter, motorcycle, bicycle, tricycle or velocipede on park property, except: 
(1)  Vehicles operated by the city or under contract to the city; 
(2)  When entering, exiting, or being parked or stored, on specifically designated areas provided for entrance, exiting, parking or storage on and through the parks; 
(3)  As authorized by state law; 
(4)  Motorized mobility aide devices used by individuals with disabilities as defined in 42 U.S.C. § 12131, et seq., of "The American with Disabilities Act." 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 10, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 2-310. - Use of athletic fields. 
(a)  No person shall use a designated park athletic field for purposes other than posted except as authorized by the director. 
(b)  Persons 18 years of age and over are prohibited from using park athletic fields designated as youth athletic fields except as authorized by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 11, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 2-311. - Park hours; extensions; permits; violations. 
(a)  Park hours. No person shall enter into or remain upon nor shall any vehicle be left unattended in any park or recreational facility other than during the hours the park is open, as set forth below, unless they have a valid permit that allows such use or an extension of hours has been previously approved by the director. 
(1)  Wild Horse Park shall open at 4:00 a.m. and shall close at 11:00 p.m. 
(2)  All other city parks shall open at 4:00 a.m. And shall close at 10:00 p.m. 
(b)  Violation. Any violation of this section shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in section 1-8 of the Municipal Code. 
(c)  Extension of hours; permits. The director may extend hours of operation of any park or portion thereof for any park purpose for a period not to exceed seven days. The Director may also extend hours of operation for any park purpose pursuant to a permit for such purpose granted as provided in section 2-304 of this chapter. Any other change of hours must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 12, 6-21-2011; Ord. No. 1109, § 1, 10-21-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1109, adopted Oct. 21, 2014, changed the title of § 2-311 from "Hours of use" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 2-312. - Restrictions on selling and advertising. 
(a)  No individual shall sell or advertise in any park or recreational facility except as authorized by the director. 
(b)  The director may adopt policies providing for the issuance of permits for granting of concessions for up to seven consecutive days, upon approval of the city manager. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to negotiate and enter into contracts granting concessions in parks and recreational facilities for more than seven consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 13, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 2-313. - Emergency closing. 
When an emergency exists that affects the health, safety and welfare of the public in any park or recreational facility, or portion thereof, any section or part of any park or recreational facility may be closed by the city manager for such time as the city manager shall find reasonably necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 14, 6-21-2011)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1172, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 2018, repealed chapter 6 in its entirety, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. The former chapter 6, §§ 6-31—6-37, 6-61—6-65, 6-91—6-93, 6-111—6-117, 6-141—6-146, 6-171—6-181, and 6-201—6-212 pertained to alcoholic beverages and low-point beer. See the Code Comparative Table for full derivation. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
When used in this Code, words and phrases shall have the meaning as defined pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37A O.S. § 1-101 et seq., as enacted and as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 6-2. - Restriction on location of retail package store, mixed beverage establishment or bottle club and beer and wine establishment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment, or bottle club which has been licensed by the ABLE Commission and which has as its main purpose the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, or retail package store, to be located within 300 feet of any public or private school or church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious activities. The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest property line of such public or private school or church to the nearest perimeter wall of the premises of any such mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment, bottle club, or retail package store which has been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to mixed beverage establishments, beer and wine establishments, or bottle clubs, which have been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption or retail package stores prior to the effective date of this section; provided, if at the time of application for license renewal the licensed location has not been in actual operation for a continuous period of more than 60 days, the provisions of subsection (a) shall apply. 
(c)  If any school or church shall be established within 300 feet of any retail package store, mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment, or bottle club subject to the provisions of this section after such retail package store, mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment or bottle club has been licensed, the provisions of subsection (a) shall not be a deterrent to the renewal of such license if there has not been a lapse of more than 60 days. When any mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment, or bottle club subject to the provisions of this section which has a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption or retail package store changes ownership or the operator thereof is changed and such change of ownership results in the same type of business being conducted on the premises, the provision of this section shall not be a deterrent to the issuance of a license to the new owner or operator if he or she is otherwise qualified. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Location of licensed mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment, or bottle club - protest of application for or granting of license drinking in public, 37A O.S. § 2-139.  
Sec. 6-3. - Certificates of zoning and compliance. 
(a)  The community development director is hereby delegated the authority to issue conditional certifications, certificates of zoning, certificates of compliance and non-compliance notices required by title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes. 
(b)  An applicant for a license provided for in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act shall request that a certificate of zoning be issued by the city certifying that the applicant's proposed location and use thereof comply with all municipal zoning ordinances. 
(c)  An applicant for a license provided for in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act shall request that a certificate be issued by the city certifying that the applicant's existing or proposed operations under the license comply with all city fire, building and all other codes relating to health and safety, as applicable. 
(d)  Applications for such certificates shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the community development director and shall contain information in such detail as the community development director may reasonably require describing the location and nature of operations to be conducted at the premises. 
(e)  The community development director shall act on all applications for such certificates within 20 days of receipt of the completed written application. 
(f)  A conditional certificate for premises proposed for licensed operations for which construction, modification or alteration is not completed may be issued by the community development director. Conditional certificates shall indicate that the proposed premises will comply with the city zoning, fire, building and all other codes relating to health and safety, as applicable. The granting of conditional certificates shall not relieve the applicant of the duty of obtaining the certificates required by subparagraphs (b) and (c) of this section after completion of the construction, modification, or alteration. If a conditional certificate is issued, the certificates required by paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section shall be issued within ten days after all final inspections are completed. 
(g)  An applicant's proposed location and use thereof shall be in conformance with the laws of the State of Oklahoma and with the ordinances of the City of Mustang and shall pass all necessary fire, building and all other code inspections or no certificate of compliance shall issue. If a licensee fails to maintain compliance with city ordinances and codes, the community development director shall forthwith notify the ABLE commission in writing setting forth details of the noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Application for original brewer, distiller, winemaker, rectifier, wine and spirits wholesaler, beer distributor, mixed beverage, beer and wine, bottle club, caterer, retail spirits, retail wine, or retail beer licenses - notice of intention - conditional approval - final notice of approval, 37A O.S. § 2-141; applications for licenses - required documents - city and county conditional certificates - failure to timely renew, 37A O.S. § 2-142.  
Sec. 6-4. - Display of license. 
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at all times on the licensed premises. No licensee may consent to or allow the use or display of the license by a person other than the person to whom the license was issued. No person may use a license or exercise any privileges granted by the license except at the place, address, premises or location for which the license is issued, except as otherwise provided by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
State Law reference— Display of license required - suspension or revocation of mixed beverage, caterer, public event, or bottle club license revokes all other licenses for same premises, 37A O.S. § 2-154. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 6-5. - Reports to state. 
The city clerk shall furnish any information or reports required or requested by the ABLE commission in the form, manner and time as may be determined by the commission, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 6-6. - Duty to enforce. 
City of Mustang police officers and municipal attorneys shall diligently enforce all provisions of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. In addition to penalties provided under state law, failure or refusal to perform any duty required by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act may result in the removal of said personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Duty and authority to diligently enforce the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37A O.S. § 4-106.  
Sec. 6-7. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter 6 for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be guilty of an offense and be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Violation of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act - penalties, 37A O.S. § 6-125.  
Secs. 6-8—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Levied. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual occupation tax for the privilege of operating as a retailer, mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event or special event license, bottle club, manufacturer, wine and spirits wholesaler or beer distributor within the City of Mustang. The annual occupation tax shall be in the amount set forth in section 42-6 of this Code. 
(b)  In the event a single individual or business entity makes application for or is a holder of two or more licenses for the same address, and the requirements of section 6-3 may be met without duplicate inspections or effort on the part of the city, that individual or business entity shall be liable for only the greater of the occupational taxes imposed on the holder of such licenses by section 42-6. 
(c)  Except for the sale of wine or beer to the public, an applicant may pay an interim occupational tax which will allow all qualified retail wine and retail beer, beer distributors and wine and spirits wholesaler state licensees to perform all activities permissible under a full license including but not limited to purchasing, stocking and storing the wine and/or full-strength beer prior to October 1, 2018. In order to qualify for an interim occupational tax, the state licensee must satisfy all the requirements set forth in article XXVIIIA of the Oklahoma Constitution, state law and chapter 6 of this Code. After October 1, 2018, the interim occupational tax shall convert to a full occupational tax and shall be renewable annually as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Municipalities - occupational tax, 37A O.S. § 4-104.  
Sec. 6-32. - Payment; records; posting of tax receipt. 
All occupation taxes provided for in this division shall be paid in advance to the city clerk, who shall issue a receipt therefor. The city clerk shall record the name of such licensee and the address where he engages in his occupation. Such records shall be duly filed and kept in the permanent files of the city for at least five years. Thereafter, upon resolution by the council, such records may be destroyed. Every person receiving such a receipt from the city clerk shall post the tax receipt in a conspicuous place in the premises wherein he carries on his occupation. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 6-33. - Expiration; proration. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied under the provisions of this division expire on June 30 of each year. 
(b)  The amount of any occupation tax levied shall be computed pro rata upon the months remaining in the year ending June 30 following. Such taxes paid on or before the 15th day of any month shall be on the basis of the first day of the month, and such taxes paid after the 15th day of any month shall be on the basis of the first day of the next succeeding month. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 6-34. - Tax to be paid prior to engaging in business. 
No business or occupation relating to alcoholic beverages as specifically enumerated in section 42-6 shall do business, or offer to do business, in this city until the occupation tax levied by this division has been paid in full to the city clerk, and a receipt issued therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 6-35. - Occupational tax not refundable or transferable. 
The occupational tax imposed herein shall cover only the person or entity paying the tax and shall not be refundable or transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 6-36. - Violation; penalty. 
Failure to timely pay to the city any initial or renewal occupational tax as required hereunder shall constitute an offense. Each day in which such tax remains due and unpaid shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 6-37. - Reports to state alcoholic beverage control board. 
The city clerk shall make and transmit an annual report to the ABLE commission, covering the fiscal year, showing the number and class of licensees subject to the tax authorized by chapter 6, and the amount of money received therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Municipalities - occupational tax, 37A O.S. § 4-104.  
Secs. 6-38—6-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 6-61. - Licensee responsible for violations. 
Each retailer, mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event or special event license, bottle club, manufacturer, wine and spirits wholesaler or beer distributor shall be held responsible for any act or omission of his or her servant, agent, employee or representative in violation of any law, city ordinance or administrative rule affecting his or her license privileges. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 6-62. - Prohibited acts; penalties for violation. 
(a)  Minors. 
(1)  Any minor who shall be in the possession of any alcoholic beverage while such minor is upon any public street, road, or highway or in any public building or place shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $100.00 plus costs and fees. 
(2)  Any person who shall knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic beverages to any person under 21 years of age shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.00 plus costs and fees, or imprisoned for a period not exceeding 60 days, or the court may impose both fine and imprisonment. 
(3)  No retail spirits licensee shall permit any person under 21 years of age to enter into or remain within or about the licensed premises. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, no ABLE commission licensee shall permit any person under 21 years of age to enter into, remain within or loiter about the designated lounge or bar area of the licensed premises, except for persons who incidentally pass through the designated area. 
(5)  Any person under 21 years of age who shall misrepresent his or her age in writing or by presenting false documentation of age for the purpose of inducing any person to sell or serve him or her alcoholic beverages or issue him or her a bottle club membership card, or who enters or attempts to enter a package store or a separate or enclosed lounge or bar area, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $50.00 plus costs and fees. The court may also order the department of public safety to cancel or deny the offender's privilege to operate a motor vehicle, subject to the provisions of 37A O.S. § 6-119(B). 
(6)  Except as provided in subparagraphs (a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(5), a person who shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.00 plus costs and fees. 
(b)  Intoxicated, insane or mentally deficient persons. 
(1)  No person shall sell, deliver or knowingly furnish alcoholic beverages to a visibly intoxicated person or to an insane or mentally deficient person. 
(2)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.00 plus costs and fees, or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  Opening or consuming beverages. 
(1)  No person shall open a retail container or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a package store, grocery store, convenience store or drug store, unless otherwise permitted by law. 
(2)  No person shall consume or possess alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises of a bottle club unless such person possesses a valid membership card for that club issued by the club. 
(3)  No person shall consume wine, beer or spirits in public except on the premises of a licensee of the ABLE commission who is authorized to sell or serve spirits by the individual drink. 
(4)  No ABLE commission licensee shall suffer or permit any retail container to be opened or any alcoholic beverage to be consumed on the licensed premises, unless otherwise permitted by law. 
(5)  No ABLE commission licensee shall keep or knowingly permit any alcoholic beverage to be kept, brought or consumed on the licensed premises which is not allowed to be sold or served on such premises. 
(6)  No ABLE commission licensee shall consume or be under the influence of alcoholic beverages during the hours he or she is on duty. 
(7)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.00 plus costs and fees. 
(d)  Hours of operation. 
(1)  No person shall sell or keep a package store open to sell alcoholic beverages during any day or hour not authorized by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
(2)  No person shall sell or permit the sale of alcoholic beverages at a grocery store, convenience store or drug store during any day or hour not authorized by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
(3)  No retail spirits licensee shall sell any alcoholic beverages at any hour other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight Monday through Saturday, excluding Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(4)  No retail wine or retail beer licensee shall sell any beer or wine at any hour other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. the following day, Monday through Sunday. 
(5)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.00 plus costs and fees, or imprisoned for a period not exceeding 60 days, or the court may impose both fine and imprisonment. 
(e)  Illegal conduct. 
(1)  No ABLE commission licensee shall permit any illegal gambling activity, violations of the state narcotic and dangerous drug laws, prostitution activity, or any other criminal conduct to occur on the licensed premises. 
(2)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.00 plus costs and fees. 
(f)  Public intoxication. 
(1)  No person shall be drunk or intoxicated from any substance in any public place. 
(2)  No ABLE commission licensee shall permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated from any substance on the licensee's premises. 
(3)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $100.00 plus costs and fees, or imprisoned for a period not exceeding 60 days, or the court may impose both fine and imprisonment. 
(g)  Transportation of open containers. 
(1)  Except as provided in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, no person shall knowingly transport in any vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley, any alcoholic beverage except in the original contain which shall not have been opened and the seal upon which shall not have been broken and from which the original cap or cork shall not have been removed. 
(2)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $100.00 plus costs and fees. 
(h)  D isturbing the peace. 
(1)  No person shall engage in any of the following and disturb the peace of any person. 
(i)  In any public place, or in or upon any passenger coach, streetcar, or in or upon any other vehicle commonly used for the transportation of passengers, or in or about any depot, platform, waiting station or room, drink or otherwise consume any intoxicating liquor unless authorized by this act, intoxicating substance or intoxicating compound of any kind, or inhale glue, paint or other intoxicating substance. 
(ii)  Be drunk or intoxicated in any public or private road, or in any passenger coach, streetcar or any public place or building, or at any public gathering, from drinking or consuming such intoxicating liquor, intoxicating substance or intoxicating compound or from inhalation of glue, paint or other intoxicating substance. 
(iii)  Be drunk or intoxicated from any cause. 
(2)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00, plus costs and fees, or by imprisonment for not less than five days nor more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Transporting open containers of intoxicating beverages or low point beer, exception - penalty, 21 O.S. § 1220; personal prohibited acts - violations, 37A O.S. § 6-101; licensee prohibited acts, 37A O.S. § 6-102; retail spirits licensee prohibited acts, 37A O.S. § 6-103; mixed beverage, public event, special event or on-premises beer and wine licensee prohibited acts, 37A O.S. § 6-105; bottle club licensees prohibited acts, 37A O.S. § 6-106; retail wine or retail beer licensee prohibited acts, 37A O.S. § 6-108; certain licensee prohibited acts, 37A O.S. § 6-109; separate lounge or bar area - no person under 21 allowed - admissions charges - exceptions, 37A O.S. § 6-114; penalties for false identification, 37A O.S. § 6-119; penalties for selling, furnishing, or giving an alcoholic beverage to a person under 21 years of age, 37A O.S. § 6-120; penalties for knowingly selling, furnishing, or giving an alcoholic beverage to an insane, mentally deficient or intoxicated person, 37A O.S. § 6-121; hours of operation - penalties, 37A O.S. § 6-123; permitting a person to be intoxicated on licensee's premises - penalties, 37A O.S. § 6-124; violation of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act - penalties, 37A O.S. § 6-125; hours for lawful service or consumption - bottle clubs, 37A O.S. § 3-126.  
Sec. 6-63. - Possession, consumption or display of alcoholic beverages in Wildhorse Park during Fourth of July celebration prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of section 6-93, the following definitions shall apply: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Wildhorse Park shall mean the Northeast Quarter (NE/4) of Section 28, Township 11 North, Ranger 5 West, I.M., Canadian County, Oklahoma, being the same land that is owned by the City of Mustang and designated as Wildhorse Park. 
(b)  No person shall possess, consume or display any alcoholic beverage inside Wildhorse Park during the period beginning at 12:01 a.m. on June 27 and ending at 11:59 p.m. on July 4, in every year. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the possession, consumption or display of any alcoholic beverage at any private event held within the Mustang Town Center for which the event holder has applied for and received a permit from the city; provided, any alcoholic beverage is possessed, consumed or displayed within the premises of Mustang Town Center. 
(d)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or by both fine and imprisonment, plus all court costs and statutory penalties. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 6-64. - Solicitation of drinks. 
(a)  Definitions: For purposes of this section 
(1)  The term 'employee' shall mean any agent, manager, employee, entertainer, barkeeper, host, hostess, waiter, waitress or other such person employed on any contractual basis by a licensed establishment, or receiving any remuneration for services in such an establishment; and, 
(2)  The term 'patron' shall mean any customer or visitor who is not employed by a licensed establishment. 
(b)  No retailer, mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event or special event license, bottle club, manufacturer, wine and spirits wholesaler or beer distributor licensed pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, or any owner, manager, employee, proprietor or any agent, associate or representative of such licensee, shall: 
(1)  Permit any employee to beg, solicit, induce, procure or request a patron to purchase any alcoholic, non-intoxicating, or non-alcoholic beverage for himself or herself or for any employee or person not a patron, or 
(2)  Knowingly serve to any employee any alcoholic, non-intoxicating, or non-alcoholic beverage which was purchased by any patron, or 
(3)  Permit upon any licensed premises any employee to loiter on or remain on said premises who begs, solicits, induces, procures or requests a patron to purchase an alcoholic, non-intoxicating or non-alcoholic beverage for any employee, or 
(4)  Solicit, induce or request a patron to purchase any alcoholic, non-intoxicating or non-alcoholic beverage for himself or herself or for any person not a patron. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to enact ordinances, 37A O.S. § 4-101.  
Sec. 6-65. - Nudity banned. 
No retailer, mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event or special event license, bottle club, manufacturer, wine and spirits wholesaler or beer distributor licensed pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, or any owner, manager, employee, proprietor or any agent, associate or representative of such licensee, shall employ or permit any employee or other person to appear within such licensed or other establishment in the nude. The term 'nude' shall be defined with reference to 21 O.S. § 1040.52(A)(2). 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to enact ordinances, 37A O.S. § 4-101.  
Secs. 6-66—6-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SOCIAL HOST 
 
Sec. 6-91. - Prohibiting gatherings where minors are present. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of section 6-91, the following definitions shall apply: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Controlled dangerous substance shall have the meaning as defined in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act. 
Gathering is a party, gathering, or event, where a group of three or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social or commercial occasion or social activity. 
Legal guardian means (1) a person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
Minor means any person under 21 years of age. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or stepparent of another person. 
Person shall mean any human being the age of 16 years or older, and any bodies politic and corporate. 
Premises means any residence, building, structure or room owned, leased or otherwise procured by the person and or on any land owned, occupied, leased or otherwise procured by the person. 
Response costs are the costs associated with response(s) by law enforcement, fire, and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including but not limited to: (1) salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s); and (2) the cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering. 
(b)  Consumption of alcohol by minor in public place, place open to public, or place not open to public. Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to: 
(1)  Consume at any public place or any place open to the public alcoholic beverage; or 
(2)  Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(c)  Hosting, permitting, or allowing a party, gathering, or event where minors consuming alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(1)  Prohibitions. 
a.  It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting drivers' licenses or other government-issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering. 
b.  It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person having control of the premises knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage. 
c.  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully permit any minor who is an invitee to the person's premises to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage, any controlled dangerous substance as defined in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, or any combination thereof, in such place. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(3)  Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any family activity held in the confines of the family home from providing the use of alcohol to immediate family members within the supervision of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering intoxicated and is found in public then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as a non-family gathering. 
(4)  Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any religious practice which includes the use of alcohol. However, if a minor leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated and is found to be in public then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as a non-religious gathering. 
(5)  This section shall not apply to any premises licensed by the State of Oklahoma to dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs and statutory penalties for a first offense, and a fine of not more than $750.00 plus costs and statutory penalties for a second offense within ten years after previous conviction for a violation of this section. 
(7)  Reservation of legal options. Violations of subsections (d)(1)(i) and (d)(1)(ii) may be prosecuted by the City of Mustang criminally, civilly, and/or administratively as provided by the Municipal Code. The city may seek administrative fees and response costs associated with enforcement of this section through all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance, or law. This section shall not limit the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this section, nor shall they limit the city's ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this section. 
(8)  Local authority. This section shall not apply where prohibited or preempted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Personal prohibited acts - violations, 37A O.S. § 6-101.  
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— General power relative to amusements, 11 O.S. § 22-110. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 10-31—10-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, AMUSEMENT RIDES AND PARADES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Amusement ride safety, 40 O.S. § 460 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement ride means any mechanical or electrical device or structure by which persons are conveyed or moved about for diversion or amusement. The term "amusement ride" shall include but shall not be limited to the following: Ferris wheel, merry-go-round, whips, bumper cars, spin-out, whirling, airplane rides, roller coasters, so-called kiddie rides, or other rides or conveyances of like kind or character, whether fixed or mobile. The operation or maintenance of more than three amusement rides shall be deemed a carnival. 
Carnival means an amusement show, operated on an infrequent basis at a temporary location, which offers public entertainment by featuring carnival games or more than three rides, or both such games and rides. 
Carnival games means any form of play, contest or amusement, usually necessitating the exercise of skill or physical dexterity by the participants, which generally requires the payment of money or its equivalent in order to participate and often offers a reward or prize for the attainment of a goal or the successful completion of an assigned task. The term "carnival game" shall include but is not limited to the following: ring toss, bottle throw, coin toss, dart boards, air rifles, target shoots, basketball shooting, softball throws, shooting galleries, strength of skill machines, water pistol shoots, wheels of fortune, weight guessing, throwing or propelling any object at any target, or anything of a similar nature. 
Circus means a traveling company or troupe that presents public entertainment which features exhibits or pageantry and performances by acrobats, aerialists, clowns and trained animals. In addition, the term "circus" shall include the exhibition of menageries, curiosities and monstrosities. 
Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street or other public place. 
(Code 1977, § 5.30.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-82. - Sponsorship. 
The only carnivals, circuses or parades which will be allowed to operate in the city must be sponsored and underwritten by a nonprofit organization, institution or church of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5.30.020)  
Sec. 10-83. - Required information and documents for carnivals, amusement rides and circuses. 
The sponsoring organization of carnivals, amusement rides or circuses must notify the proper authorities, i.e., the police department, fire department and city staff, one month prior to the date scheduled. The sponsor must furnish a copy of the liability insurance held by the carnival, amusement rides or circus and copies of the inspection certificate from the state department of labor. The city shall also be provided a list of contact persons of the (on location) carnival, amusement rides or circus. 
(Code 1977, § 5.30.030)  
Sec. 10-84. - Required information for parades; approval of parades. 
In the case of parades, the sponsoring organization must furnish the proper authorities with the date, time and type of parade and the parade route. The parade must have the approval of the police and fire departments. 
(Code 1977, § 5.30.050)  
Sec. 10-85. - Operation and conduct. 
(a)  Carnivals, circuses and amusement rides. In the case of carnivals, circuses and amusement rides: 
(1)  Hours. Hours of operation shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. (midnight). 
(2)  Safety standards. The organization will instruct the carnival, circus or amusement ride owners and operators that they must comply with all state and city life, safety and fire codes. 
(3)  Living quarters. All living quarters associated with all circuses or carnivals shall be located adjacent to or the nearest location possible to the circus or carnival. The living area, upon removal of trailers, campers and tents, shall be cleaned up to the satisfaction of the city. 
(4)  Trash disposal. Adequate trash containers shall be provided at the expense of the owner or operator for the disposal of trash, litter, paper and other debris. 
(5)  Toilets. Adequate toilets shall be provided for patrons and employees. The owner or operator of any carnival or circus shall provide, at his sole expense, adequate toilets or portable toilet facilities for his employees and the general public. Such toilets shall not be less than 100 feet from the place where food is prepared or offered for sale and shall be constructed to prevent surface draining of body fluids. Toilets shall be flyproofed or treated with disinfectants and fly repellents. Toilets shall be sterilized. 
(b)  Parades. For the safety and welfare of the spectators and participants, no one shall be allowed to throw from a float or moving vehicle any candy or other items along a parade route. 
(Code 1977, § 5.30.040; Ord. No. 1093, § 1, 9-3-2013)  
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 54; agricultural districts, § 122-191 et seq.; supplementary zoning regulations for animals, § 122-847. 
State Law reference— Animals generally, 4 O.S.; authority to regulate animals, 11 O.S. § 22-115. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, except Homo sapiens. 
Animal control officer means any person designated by the state, the city or a humane society as a law enforcement officer qualified to perform such duties under this chapter or the laws of this state. 
Animal bite means any penetration of the skin by the teeth or claws of an animal, but shall exclude scratches by the claws of dogs. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by a humane society or a municipal agency or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
At large means not within a fenced area, whether on or off the premises of the owner, and not otherwise under restraint. 
Attack means the act by any animal of approaching a domestic animal or a person in such a manner that hostile contact with the other animal or the person occurs or an act of aggression against a person or a domestic animal that requires the person or the other animal to take evasive action to prevent injury. 
Commercial animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibit, kennel or like establishment. 
Direct control means immediate continuous physical control of an animal at all times by means of a leash, cord, rope or chain of such strength to restrain the animal, and controlled by a person capable of restraining the animal, or safe and secure restraint within a vehicle. If the controlling person is at all times fully and clearly within unobstructed sight and hearing of the animal, voice control shall be considered direct control when the animal is actually participating in training or official showing, obedience, or field events. Direct control shall not be required of dogs actually participating in a legal sport in an authorized area or K-9 dogs. 
K-9 dog means a dog specifically trained for and being used by a public law enforcement agency, or specifically trained as a search and rescue dog and being used at the request of a public law enforcement agency. 
Kennel means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of either boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats; however, for purposes of article V of this chapter, the term "kennel" means any place where more than three dogs or three cats are kept or harbored. 
Licensing authority means the city clerk or a veterinarian or veterinary hospital designated by the city. 
Owner means any person, firm, business, organization, or corporation owning, possessing, harboring, or keeping any animal, or having an interest in or control of an animal, or in the case of a person under 18 years of age, that person's parent or legal guardian. This definition shall not apply to any licensed animal shelter, veterinary clinic or kennel that is boarding animals belonging to another. 
Pet means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility or profit. 
Pet shop means any person, except for a licensed kennel, which as part of its business buys, sells or boards animals. 
Public nuisance means any animal which: 
(1)  Molests passersby or passing vehicles. 
(2)  Attacks persons or other animals. 
(3)  Is repeatedly at large. 
(4)  Trespasses on school grounds. 
(5)  Damages private or public property. 
(6)  Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, or emits any loud or offensive noise, which disturbs the tranquility of the neighborhood or adjoining residents. 
(7)  Overturns any garbage can or other vessel for waste products or scatters the contents of the same. 
Residential districts means those areas of the city included within the residential use districts as fixed and established by the zoning ordinance of the city (chapter 122). 
Restraint means any animal that is under direct control as defined herein or is secured by a fence or within a residence or other building, or within the confines of a vehicle. 
Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery or other diagnosis and treatment of injury or disease of animals. 
Vicious or dangerous animal means any animal: 
(1)  That inflicts an injury upon a human as a result of an unprovoked attack either on public or private property; or attempts to bite or attacks a human requiring that person to take evasive action regardless of the location; 
(2)  That, when unprovoked, either kills, bites or attacks another animal on public or private property; 
(3)  That is owned, trained, used, or harbored, primarily or in part, for the purpose of animal fighting; 
(4)  Which another governmental entity has determined to be vicious or dangerous; 
(5)  Having poisonous bites; 
(6)  That has been bitten by an animal or known to have been inflicted by rabies; or 
(7)  Any warm-blooded, carnivorous or omnivorous wild or exotic animal, dangerous or undomesticated animal which is not of a species customarily used as an ordinary household pet, but one which would ordinarily be confined in a zoo, or one which would ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this or any other country, or one which causes a reasonable person to be fearful of bodily harm, or property damage (including but not limited to nonhuman primates, raccoons, skunks, foxes and wild and exotic cats, but excluding fowl, ferrets and small rodents of varieties used for laboratory purposes). 
Unprovoked means an act of aggression towards an animal or human that occurs without apparent cause, reason, prompting or motivation. 
Wild animal means any animal other than dogs, cats or farm animals normally found in a wild or undomesticated state. 
Zoological park means any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, exhibiting one or more species of wild animals. 
(Code 1977, §§ 6.04.010, 6.12.160; Ord. No. 1027, § 1, 10-6-2009) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-2. - Conflicts with zoning regulations. 
In case of conflict between this chapter and the present or any future zoning ordinance, the provisions of the zoning ordinance shall prevail and supersede the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 6.04.020) 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 122.  
Sec. 14-3. - Running at large generally. 
(a)  No owner, keeper or possessor or other person in control of any animal, except homing pigeons kept for racing and message-carrying purposes or domestic household cats, shall permit the animal to run or fly at large in the city, or to trespass upon the premises of any other person. 
(b)  No owner, keeper or possessor or other person in control of any domestic household cat shall permit such cat to be at large. For purposes of this provision, a domestic household cat shall not be considered to be at large while on the premises of their owner even though the cat is not confined within a fenced area or otherwise under restraint. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.060; Ord. No. 1027, § 2, 10-6-2009)  
Sec. 14-4. - Control and restraint of dogs. 
(a)  Dogs trespassing on public or private property. No person shall permit any dog owned, possessed or harbored by him to: 
(1)  Trespass upon any private property which he does not own or control; provided that this section shall not apply to any person who takes a dog upon private property not owned by him or under his control if he does it with the consent of the person who owns or controls such property, and if the dog is either confined in a vehicle or under such person's direct control. 
(2)  Trespass upon any street or public place unless the dog is under the direct control of the owner or is confined within a locked, parked vehicle with or without the owner being present. 
(b)  Exceptions. K-9 dogs, while on duty, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section as long as they are under the control of their commanding officer. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.020; Ord. No. 1027, § 3, 10-6-2009)  
Sec. 14-5. - Keeping vicious or dangerous, nuisance or diseased animals. 
(a)  Keeping vicious or dangerous animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, possess, or maintain within the city limits any animal that is vicious or dangerous as defined in this chapter, unless the municipal court orders the animal returned to the person owning, harboring, possessing or maintaining the animal under restrictions designated by the municipal court. 
(b)  Keeping nuisance animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, possess or maintain an animal which is a public nuisance. 
(c)  Keeping diseased animal. No person shall keep any animal which is known or believed by him to be infected with a dangerous or communicable disease. 
(d)  Defenses. 
(1)  Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the biting, attacking or death was sustained by a person who: 
a.  At the time was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the property occupied by the owner of the animal; 
b.  Was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal; 
c.  Was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(2)  A K-9 dog which approaches a person in an apparent attitude of attack or which attacks or bites a human upon command of the person in charge of the animal at the time of the incident shall not, by reason of such incident, be deemed to be in violation of this section. 
(3)  Subsections a., b. and c. of this section shall not apply to any licensed veterinary hospital, kennel, or zoo where such animals are adequately cared for with due regard for public health and safety. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.070; Ord. No. 1027, § 4, 10-6-2009)  
Sec. 14-6. - Keeping domestic livestock and small animals. 
(a)  Domestic livestock, including but not limited to cattle, swine, fowl or horses, shall not be maintained, kept or raised within the city except within a district zoned for agriculture or rural estates. Less than five fowl maintained by one or more owners shall be exempted from this provision. 
(b)  In any district zoned for agricultural, residential or rural estates, rabbits, ducks, geese, chickens, hamsters, chinchillas, guineas, pigeons and other similar size small animals or fowl may be kept. In residential and rural estates districts, no more than four adults and 14 young under the age of 12 weeks, may be kept and must be in pens located at least ten feet from any adjoining property line of a residence, church, school or business. Such animals shall be kept within an enclosure sufficient to prevent them from escaping there from, and all cages, hutches or houses shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and disinfected in such a manner and to the extent necessary to prevent odors or unsanitary conditions. No person shall keep rabbits, ducks, geese, chickens, hamsters, chinchillas, guineas, pigeons and other similar size small animals or fowl that create a nuisance. This subsection shall not authorize the keeping of any animal that is considered wild and non-domesticated. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.100; Ord. No. 942, § 1, 8-2-2005)  
Sec. 14-7. - Noisy animals. 
No person shall own, possess, keep or harbor any animal which barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, or emits any loud or offensive noise, which disturbs the tranquility of the neighborhood or adjoining residents. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.050; Ord. No. 1027, § 5, 10-6-2009)  
Sec. 14-8. - Vicious animal hearing and determination. 
(a)  The animal control officer, upon the filing of a verified complaint of a vicious or dangerous animal, shall forward to the municipal prosecutor the official report. The municipal prosecutor shall make a determination on the case and if applicable set the case for a hearing before the municipal judge to determine if the animal is vicious or dangerous as defined by this Code. 
(b)  This hearing shall be in addition to any hearings, which may be required on criminal charges. Said hearing may be held in conjunction with the criminal proceedings. 
(c)  At the hearing the municipal judge shall be empowered to make one of the following determinations as a result of said hearing: 
(1)  That the animal is in fact not vicious or dangerous, in which event the animal control officer shall cause the animal to be surrendered to the owner. The owner shall be responsible for all charges in relation to the sheltering of the animal, unless otherwise ordered by the court. 
(2)  That the animal is in fact vicious or dangerous and should be destroyed. 
(3)  That the animal is in fact vicious or dangerous but that for good cause shown, the animal should not be destroyed in which event the judge shall order one of the following: 
a.  That the animal be immediately removed from the corporate limits of the city and not to ever be again allowed within the corporate limits of the city, or 
b.  That the owner be allowed to maintain the vicious or dangerous animal within the corporate limits of the city under the conditions outlined in section 14-9. 
(d)  Dogs shall not be declared vicious or dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(e)  All owners, whose animal is adjudged to be vicious or dangerous at the hearing, and sentence imposed by the municipal judge pursuant to this section, upon written demand, may appeal the judge's decision with ten days to the district court of the county. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to K-9 dogs. 
(g)  Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this section by allowing a vicious or dangerous animal to remain in the city shall be deemed to be in violation of section 14-5 of this Code for "Keeping vicious, dangerous, nuisance or diseased animals." Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 1027, § 6, 10-6-2009)  
Sec. 14-9. - Requirements for owners of vicious animals. 
The municipal judge may order such conditions as appropriate, but which shall be no less restrictive than the following: 
(1)  Pursuant to the provisions of subsection 14-8(c)(3) no animal covered by this section shall be permitted to go outside its kennel or pen unless such animal is under the direct control of a person over the age of 17. In addition, all animals outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such animal from biting persons or other animals. No person shall permit said animal to be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. when outside of the kennel or pen. 
(2)  All animals covered by this section shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled as above provided. Such pen, kennel or structure must have at least 150 square feet of space for each animal therein that is six months of age or older. The pen or kennel must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine said animals must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures erected to house said animals must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such structures must provide protection from the elements for the animal and be adequately lighted, ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  No animal covered by this section may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the animal to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure. 
(4)  All owners, keepers or harborers of animals covered by this section within the city shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Vicious Animal." In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal. The owner shall also display a sign with a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a vicious or dangerous animal. 
(5)  All owners, keepers or harborers of animals covered by this section must provide proof to the city animal control officer of public liability insurance in a single incident amount of $50,000.00 for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property owned by any persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal. Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy will be made unless ten days' written notice is first given to the city animal control division. 
(6)  All owners of animals covered by this section shall pay an annual fee of $20.00, in addition to regular licensing fees, to register the vicious animal. 
(7)  The animal control officer, or any peace officer, shall have the authority to immediately confiscate any vicious or dangerous animal that is kept in violation of this section. 
(8)  Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-8. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 1, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 1027, § 7, 10-6-2009)  
Sec. 14-10. - Menacing behavior by dogs prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dog owned, harbored, possessed or maintained by him within the city to exhibit menacing behavior. 
(b)  Menacing behavior as used in this section means that a dog, while not under direct control or under restraint as defined in section 14-1, causes a reasonable person to believe that an unprovoked attack on a person or on a domestic animal is imminent. 
(c)  No dog shall be determined to be exhibiting menacing behavior toward a person who at the time such behavior was exhibited: 
(1)  Was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon property occupied by the person who owns, harbors, possesses or maintains the animal; 
(2)  Was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or who had, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog; or 
(3)  Was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
A K-9 dog which attacks a human upon command of the person in charge of the dog at the time of the incident shall not, by reason of such incident, be deemed to be exhibiting menacing behavior. 
(Ord. No. 1027, § 8, 10-6-2009)  
Sec. 14-11. - K-9 dogs exempt from certain provisions. 
K-9 dogs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter, other than those provisions dealing with humane care and treatment, cruelty and with rabies and diseases, as long as such animals are under the direct control of their handler. 
(Ord. No. 1027, § 9, 10-6-2009)  
Secs. 14-12—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Authority of animal control officers; citations. 
(a)  Authority of animal control officers. Animal control officers, as designated by the chief of police, are authorized to enforce the provisions of ordinances dealing with animals. In carrying out such duties, animal control officers may arrest any person violating such provisions and, without a warrant, may issue a citation to such person to appear in court. 
(b)  Issuance of citations. In issuing a citation, the animal control officer shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  He shall prepare a written citation to appear in court containing the name and address of the cited person and the offense charged, and stating when the person shall appear in court. Unless the person requests an earlier date, the time specified in the citation to appear shall be at least five days after the issuance of the citation. 
(2)  One copy of the citation to appear shall be delivered to the person cited, and such person shall sign a duplicate written citation which shall be retained by the officer. 
(3)  The officer shall thereupon release the cited person from any custody. 
(4)  As soon as practicable, the officer shall cause to be filed one copy of the citation with the court specified therein. 
(c)  Failure to appear in response to citation. If a person fails to appear in response to a citation, a warrant for his arrest shall issue, and any person who willfully fails to appear in response to a citation is guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.010)  
Sec. 14-32. - Payment of fine in lieu of court appearance. 
The presiding municipal judge may designate specified offenses dealing with animals in respect to which payment of fines may be accepted by the municipal court. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the presiding judge may specify what number of such offenses shall require appearance before the magistrate, and may specify, by suitable schedules, the amount of fines which may be accepted in satisfaction of each specified offense for first, second and subsequent offenses. The fines shall be within the limits declared by this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.140)  
Secs. 14-33—14-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 14-51. - Generally. 
(a)  Impoundment authorized. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any animal, either licensed or unlicensed, which is not confined shall be taken by the animal control officer or his duly appointed representative, or by any police officer. If such animal is so vicious that it cannot be safely taken up, it may be killed by the officer seeking to apprehend it. 
(b)  Place of confinement. Any animal so taken up shall be confined in the city animal shelter or, for exigent reasons, may be confined in an alternate approved facility. 
(c)  Notification of owner. If, by a city license tag, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall immediately upon impoundment attempt to notify the owner. 
(d)  Payment of fees. An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay the required fee. 
(e)  Disposition of animals not reclaimed by owner. Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within five working days after impoundment may be disposed of in the manner provided by section 14-54. 
(f)  Issuance of citation. In addition to or in lieu of impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer or other designated officer may issue to the owner, if known, a citation for violation of this chapter. This citation will require the owner or caretaker of the animal to appear in municipal court at a prescribed time and answer the charges made against him. 
(g)  Proof of ownership of animal. Prior to reclamation of any animal, the owner shall present a bill of sale or other evidence acceptable to the animal control office showing proof of ownership. Home-raised animals without a bill of sale or identifiable marking (tattoo, brand, etc.) shall be released only after the animal control officer or his designee is satisfied that the person is the rightful owner of the animal. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.030; Ord. No. 1099, § 1, 2-4-2014)  
Sec. 14-52. - Obstruction of impoundment. 
No person shall hinder, delay or obstruct any person duly authorized to take animals into custody or to the city animal shelter during the performance of his official duties. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.120)  
Sec. 14-53. - Breaking into animal shelter. 
No person shall break open or in any manner directly or indirectly aid or assist in or counsel or advise the breaking open of any city animal shelter. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.130)  
Sec. 14-54. - Disposition of animals. 
Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within the time required by subsection 14-51(e) may be disposed of only in the following manner: 
(1)  Humanely euthanized; 
(2)  Donated to a licensed educational or research institution in accordance with the provisions of 4 O.S. §§ 391 through 402; or 
(3)  Placed for adoption as a pet in a suitable home. 
Animals that may be appropriate for adoption may be delivered to a licensed animal dealer or a licensed animal rescue group to be placed for adoption in a suitable home, at no cost to the city. If a suitable home is found, the dealer or group completing the adoption shall provide a record of such adoption to the city. In the event a suitable home is not found, the animal shall be returned to the animal control officer for further disposition. Animals may be held for possible adoption for a minimum period of at least 60 days, provided, animals need not be held for possible adoption if doing so would cause the animal shelter to exceed its occupancy limit. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 2, 2-4-2014) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 4 O.S. § 501.  
Sec. 14-55. - Ill, injured or mistreated animals. 
In the event an impounded animal suffers from sickness, injury or mistreatment, the impounded animal may be released to the care of a licensed veterinarian or to a licensed facility that provides care to injured animals; provided, such veterinarian or licensed care facility shall return the animal to the owner at the request of the city and at no cost to the owner during the reclamation period set forth in subsection 14-51(e). If the animal remains unclaimed for the period provided in subsection 14-51(e), the animal shall be disposed of in the manner provided in section 14-54. An impounded animal may be euthanized at any time as determined necessary by a veterinarian licensed by the State of Oklahoma. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 3, 2-4-2014)  
Secs. 14-56—14-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS AND RELATED OFFENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals and related offenses, 21 O.S. § 1680 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-81. - Cruelty to animals generally; disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  No person shall beat, maim, poison, kill or otherwise mistreat any animal; nor shall any animal be overworked or overloaded, or worked while in an injured condition, or left underfed or exposed to unsanitary, diseased conditions or other inhumane care. No person shall instigate or allow combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(b)  No person shall expose any poisonous substance in a residential area where the substance may constitute a hazard to humans or domestic animals in the neighborhood. 
(c)  The owner or keeper of any animal which has died shall be responsible for disposal of its body. Any person who knows the location of the dead animal within the city limits shall give immediate notice to the animal control officer. The proper authority shall cause the dead animal to be removed within 12 hours after receipt of such notice. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the proper authority from killing an animal where authorized by this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.080)  
Sec. 14-82. - Duty to report injury or death of animal struck by automobile. 
Every person who willfully or negligently strikes any animal with an automobile and injures or kills such animal shall notify the police department immediately after the occurrence, giving the time and place of the injury or death, together with a description of the animal, and the name and address of the person making the report. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.090)  
Sec. 14-83. - Treatment of animals in performing exhibitions. 
(a)  No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical or electrical devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering. 
(b)  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.110)  
Sec. 14-84. - Sanitary requirements for commercial animal establishments. 
The following sanitary conditions are required for commercial animal establishments: 
(1)  Any building, fence or pen or other enclosure in which the dogs or cats are confined shall be located 50 feet from any building used for human habitation, and no human habitation shall be allowed within the animal establishment. 
(2)  The owner shall keep all buildings, pens and fences or other enclosures in which the dogs or cats are confined in a sanitary condition. 
(3)  Facility premises are subject to inspection at any time by the animal control officer, police officers or state or county health officers. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.140) 
State Law reference— Animal Facilities Protection Act, 21 O.S. § 1680 et seq.  
Sec. 14-85. - Animal food and water requirements. 
(a)  Food shall be free from contamination and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain animals in good health. Animals shall be fed at least once a day except as dictated by hibernation, veterinary treatment, normal fasts or other professionally accepted practices. 
(b)  Potable water shall be provided as often as necessary for the health and comfort of each animal. Frequency of watering shall consider age, species, condition, size and type of animal. 
(c)  Persons violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 14-86. - Leaving animal in vehicle. 
(a)  No dogs, cats or other small animals shall be confined within a motor vehicle under such conditions as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal, including, but not limited to dangerous temperatures, lack of food or water. 
(b)  Persons violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 964, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 14-87. - Abandonment of animals. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person owning, harboring, or having care, custody or control over any animal to abandon any animal within the City of Mustang. 
(b)  Persons violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Secs. 14-88—14-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 54. 
 
Sec. 14-111. - Vaccination of animals in kennels. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of any holder of a kennel license under this chapter to provide for the rabies vaccination of all dogs or cats six months or older under his control. 
(b)  The burden of proving that all dogs or cats under his control have had the required rabies vaccination shall lie with the kennel license holder. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.230)  
Sec. 14-112. - Disposition of rabid animals and animals exposed to rabies. 
(a)  Any animal exposed or believed to have been exposed to rabies shall be confined by a veterinarian, at the owner's expense, for a period of ten days, as may be directed by the animal control officer. The veterinarian shall be in Canadian County or Oklahoma County. The cost of such confinement shall be paid in advance by the owner or caretaker of the animal. 
(b)  No person knowing or believing an animal is rabid or has been exposed to rabies shall remove or allow to be removed such animal from its place of observation. 
(c)  Any person knowing an animal to be rabid or believing it to have been exposed to rabies shall inform the animal control officer of that fact. Upon ascertaining an animal to be rabid, the animal control officer or a police officer shall remove the animal to a veterinary hospital or summarily destroy it. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.040(E)—(G))  
Sec. 14-113. - Confinement of animals biting or scratching human. 
Any dog or cat which bites, scratches or otherwise causes an abrasion of the skin on a human shall be confined by a veterinarian in either Oklahoma County or Canadian County for a period of ten days or longer, as required by the state health department. The cost of the confinement shall be paid in advance by the owner or caretaker of the animal. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.040(H))  
Sec. 14-114. - Destruction of animals not given up for confinement. 
If the owner of an animal refuses to allow the animal to be placed in the care of a veterinarian as set forth in this article, the animal shall be ordered destroyed by the animal control officer or the chief of police. The animal shall be killed in a humane manner by some competent person, and the head shall be furnished to the state department of health for rabies examination. 
(Code 1977, § 6.08.040(I))  
Secs. 14-115—14-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LICENSES AND PERMITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-141. - Fees. 
All fees and charges for licenses, permits and registrations pertaining to animals, and all other fees specifically required by this chapter, shall be as set by resolution of the city council upon the recommendation of the city manager. Fees and charges recommended by the city manager shall be consistent with the total costs of providing the services but still be reasonable and not overburdensome to the average citizen using the services. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.290)  
Secs. 14-142—14-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DOG AND CAT LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-161. - Required; exceptions. 
Except with regard to cats kept permanently under restraint, any person owning or keeping any dog or cat over six months of age within the city must obtain a license as provided in this division. This provision shall not apply to Seeing Eye dogs or governmental police dogs. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.010)  
Sec. 14-162. - Date of application. 
Application for a license under this division must be made within 30 days after obtaining a dog or cat, except that this requirement does not apply to a nonresident keeping an animal within the city for no longer than 60 days. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.020)  
Sec. 14-163. - Register of licenses. 
The animal control officer of the city shall keep a register of all animal licenses issued, in which he shall enter the following information: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the persons to whom issued; 
(2)  A description of the animal licensed; 
(3)  The amount paid therefor; 
(4)  The date of issuance and expiration of the license; and 
(5)  The number of the license and metal license check issued. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.030)  
Sec. 14-164. - Term; renewal. 
The licensing period under this division shall begin January 1 and the license shall run for the remainder of the year. Application for the license may be made 30 days prior to and up to 60 days after the start of the year. Persons applying for a license during the year will pay a prorated fee according to a quarterly schedule. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.040)  
Sec. 14-165. - Issuance; rabies vaccination requirements. 
(a)  A license shall be issued under this division after payment of a fee and after proof of a rabies vaccination for any dog or cat at least six months of age which is capable of transmitting rabies is received. 
(b)  Dogs under three months of age and dogs that have previously manifested an allergic reaction to modified live attenuated virus vaccines may be vaccinated with another attenuated virus vaccine. If a modified live attenuated vaccine or its equivalent is used, the dog may be immunized within the 120-day period immediately preceding the expiration date of the current license. 
(c)  If the phenolized vaccine is used, the dog shall be immunized within the 60-day period immediately preceding the expiration date of the current license. The vaccination required by this section shall be performed by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice in this state. 
(d)  The type of vaccine used shall be designated on all copies of the receipt for the dog license. 
(Code 1977, §§ 6.08.040, 6.12.050)  
Sec. 14-166. - Issuance of tag. 
Upon acceptance of the application and fee for a license under this division, the licensing authority shall issue a durable tag or identification collar stamped with an identifying number and the year of issuance. Tags should be so designed that they may be conveniently fastened or riveted to the animal's collar or harness. The licensing authority shall maintain a public record of the identifying numbers of all tags issued. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.060)  
Sec. 14-167. - Duplicate license. 
A duplicate dog or cat license may be obtained upon payment of a replacement fee. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.070)  
Sec. 14-168. - Wearing of tag. 
Dogs and cats shall wear their identification tags or collars at all times, and no person shall use any license for any animal other than the one for which it was issued, nor shall any person remove an animal's license tag without the owner's consent. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.080)  
Secs. 14-169—14-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT AND ANIMAL SHELTER PERMITS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 14-191. - Required. 
No person shall operate a commercial animal establishment or animal shelter without first obtaining a permit in compliance with this division. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.090)  
Sec. 14-192. - Authority to prescribe additional regulations. 
The animal control officer shall promulgate regulations for the issuance of permits under this division, and shall include requirements for humane care of all animals and for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws. The animal control officer may amend such regulations from time to time as deemed desirable for public health and welfare and for the protection of animals. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.100)  
Sec. 14-193. - Issuance. 
Upon a showing by an applicant for a permit under this division that he is willing and able to comply with the regulations promulgated by the animal control officer, a permit shall be issued coincidentally with payment of the required fee. No person who has been convicted of an offense related to cruelty to animals shall be issued a permit to operate a commercial animal establishment. 
(Code 1977, §§ 6.12.110, 6.12.270)  
Sec. 14-194. - Making false application. 
If the applicant for a permit under this division has withheld or falsified any information on the application, the animal control officer shall refuse to issue a permit. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.270)  
Sec. 14-195. - Term; renewal. 
The permit period for permits issued under this division shall begin with the calendar year and shall run for one year. Renewal applications for permits shall be made 30 days prior to and up to 60 days after the start of the calendar year. Application for a permit to establish a new commercial animal establishment under the provisions of this division may be made at any time. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.120)  
Sec. 14-196. - Transfer. 
If there is a change in ownership of a commercial animal establishment, the new owner may have the current permit transferred to his name upon compliance with the provisions of this division and payment of a transfer fee. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.130)  
Sec. 14-197. - Temporary permit. 
A temporary permit may be issued in any case and for any category for which an annual permit would be issued under this division. A temporary permit shall be valid for 60 days and is nonrenewable. The cost of a temporary permit shall be 25 percent of the fee for the corresponding annual permit. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.150)  
Secs. 14-198—14-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DOG AND CAT KENNEL LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-221. - Required. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to keep or harbor more than three dogs or three cats more than six months of age within the limits of the city unless such owner or keeper has been issued a kennel license as provided in this division. Each facility regulated by this division shall be considered a separate enterprise and requires an individual license. 
(b)  Persons operating kennels for the breeding of dogs or cats may elect to license such animals individually. 
(Code 1977, §§ 6.12.160—6.12.180)  
Sec. 14-222. - Denial. 
(a)  If the applicant for a license under this division has withheld or falsified any information on the application, the animal control officer shall refuse to issue a kennel license. No person who has been convicted of an offense related to cruelty to animals shall be issued a kennel license. 
(b)  Any person having been denied a kennel license may not reapply for a period of 30 days. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by the required license fee. 
(Code 1977, §§ 6.12.270, 6.12.280)  
Sec. 14-223. - Exemptions from fee. 
No fee is required of any veterinary hospital or government-operated zoological park for the license required by this division. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.190)  
Sec. 14-224. - Adjustment of fee upon change in license category. 
Any person who has a change in the category under which a license was issued under this division shall be subject to reclassification, and appropriate adjustment of the license fee shall be made. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.210)  
Sec. 14-225. - Inspections. 
It shall be a condition of the issuance of any kennel license that the animal control officer shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where animals are kept at any time. The city manager shall, if permission for such inspection is refused, revoke the license of the refusing owner, after affording an opportunity for hearing before the city manager or his designate. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.260)  
Sec. 14-226. - Revocation. 
The city manager may, after opportunity for hearing before the city manager or his designate, revoke any kennel license if the person holding the license refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, the regulations promulgated by the animal control officer, or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals. Any person whose license is revoked shall, within ten days thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept or harbored by such person. No part of the license fee shall be refunded. 
(Code 1977, § 6.12.240)  
Secs. 14-227—14-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DOG AND CAT STERILIZATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Dog and Cat Sterilization Act, 4 O.S. § 499 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-251. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Neuter means to render a male dog or cat unable to reproduce. 
New owner and owner mean a person legally competent to enter a contract acquiring a dog or cat from a releasing agency. 
Releasing agency means any pound, shelter or humane society organization, whether public or private. 
Spay means to remove the ovaries of a female dog or cat in order to render the animal unable to reproduce. 
Sterilization means to spay or neuter a dog or cat. 
(Code 1977, § 6.16.020) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 4 O.S. § 499.1.  
Sec. 14-252. - Sterilization required as condition for adoption; amount of deposit. 
No dog or cat may be released for adoption from a releasing agency unless the animal has been surgically spayed or neutered, or unless the adopting party signs an agreement to have the animal sterilized and deposits funds with the releasing agency to ensure that the adopted animal will be spayed or neutered. The amount of the deposit required shall be determined by each individual releasing agency. In no event shall the required deposit be less than $15.00. The amount of the deposit required by the city animal control shelter shall be as set forth in section 42-14. 
(Code 1977, § 6.16.030) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 4 O.S. § 499.2.  
Sec. 14-253. - Refund of deposit upon proof of sterilization. 
The funds deposited with the releasing agency pursuant to section 14-252 shall be refunded to the adopting party upon the adopting party's presentation of a written statement signed by a licensed veterinarian that the adopted animal has been spayed or neutered. However, no refunds shall be made unless the animal was spayed or neutered within 60 days of adoption in the case of adult animals, or, in the case of infant animals, within 30 days of the date a female animal attained the age of six months or a male animal attained the age of eight months. 
(Code 1977, § 6.16.040) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 4 O.S. § 499.3.  
Sec. 14-254. - Authority of releasing agencies to establish rules for implementation of division; sterilization agreement. 
Releasing agencies may adopt any additional rules to implement this division, provided such rules do not conflict with the provisions or purpose of this article or the Dog and Cat Sterilization Act (4 O.S. § 499 et seq.) to require the spaying and neutering of all dogs and cats adopted from releasing agencies. The sterilization agreement to be used by releasing agencies shall be in substantially the following form: 
STERILIZATION AGREEMENT 
This Agreement is made and entered into this _____ day of _______, ___, by and between: 
(Releasing Agency) 	(New Owner) 
_____
Name 	_____
Name 
_____
Address 	_____
Address 
_____
City       Telephone 	_____
City       Telephone 
 
In consideration of the releasing of said animal, and in further consideration of mutual obligations herein, Releasing Agency releases the following animal to the New Owner: 
_____
(Describe animal) 
1.  Releasing Agency agrees to release the above listed animal into the care of the new owner and refund the new owner's spay/neuter deposit provided that: 
(1)  The animal is sterilized by a graduate licensed veterinarian by   (give date)   . 
(2)  A written statement, signed by the veterinarian performing the sterilization, that the animal has been sterilized by the stated date, is given to the releasing agency. 
2.  New Owner accepts the above listed animal and agrees: 
(1)  To have the animal sterilized by a graduate licensed veterinarian by   (give date)   . 
(2)  To provide written evidence to the releasing agency from the veterinarian performing the sterilization that the animal has been sterilized by the above date listed. 
This Agreement shall be binding upon the assigns, heirs, executors and administrators of the respective parties. 
The parties hereto have hereunto set their hands the day and year first above written. 
	_____
Releasing Agency 
(signature of agent) 
	_____
New Owner (signature) 
 
(Code 1977, § 6.16.050) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 4 O.S. § 499.4.  
Sec. 14-255. - Extension of time for performing sterilization. 
Upon presentation of a written report from a licensed veterinarian stating that the life or health of an adopted animal may be jeopardized by surgery, the releasing agency shall grant a 30-day extension of the period within which the spay or neuter surgery would otherwise be required. Further extensions may be granted upon additional veterinary reports stating their necessity. 
(Code 1977, § 6.16.060) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 4 O.S. § 499.5.  
Sec. 14-256. - Refund of deposit on death of adopted animal. 
If requested to do so, releasing agencies shall refund funds deposited pursuant to this article to the adopting party upon reasonable proof being presented to the releasing agency by the adopting party that the adopted animal died before the expiration of the period during which the spaying or neutering was required to be completed. 
(Code 1977, § 6.16.070) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 4 O.S. § 499.6.  
Sec. 14-257. - Disposition of forfeited funds. 
Funds which have been forfeited by adopting parties under this article shall be placed in a separate account, which shall be an interest-bearing account whenever feasible, and releasing agencies shall allocate funds from the account to programs which directly promote, subsidize or otherwise reduce the cost of spaying or neutering animals of the releasing agency. Allocations by the city releasing agency shall be approved by the city council. The releasing agency shall maintain accurate records of accounts which fund spay/neuter programs. 
(Code 1977, § 6.16.080) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 4 O.S. § 499.7.  
Sec. 14-258. - Authority of releasing agencies to establish adoption standards. 
Subject to the provisions and purposes of this article and laws of the state, releasing agencies may establish adoption standards for pets in their care; provided, however, that in the case of public facilities the standards must be reasonably related to the prevention of cruelty to animals and the responsible management of dogs and cats in the interest of preserving public health and welfare, and shall be applied in a fair and equal manner to all potential adopters. 
(Code 1977, § 6.16.090) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 4 O.S. § 499.8.  
Sec. 14-259. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to require the sterilization of dogs and cats which are being held in releasing agencies which might be claimed by their rightful owners, nor shall it be construed to require the sterilization of dogs and cats held pursuant to the provisions of 4 O.S. §§ 391—402. 
(Code 1977, § 6.16.100) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 4 O.S. § 499.9.  
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 46; floods, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 54; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70; natural resources, ch. 74; planning, ch. 90; signs, ch. 94; solid waste, ch. 98; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102; subdivisions, ch. 106; utilities, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122. 
State Law reference— General authority to regulate buildings, 11 O.S. § 22-113; local building standards, 74 O.S. § 324.8. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Discontinuance of water service to premises in violation of city ordinances. 
(a)  In any case where any building, structure or premises within the city is being built, used or occupied in violation of any provisions of the ordinances of the city, the building official may notify the city manager of such fact and request discontinuance of water service to such building, structure or premises until such violation has been discontinued and remedied to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(b)  Prior to giving such notification or request to the city manager, the building official shall first notify the contractor, owner or occupant of the building, structure or premises that such violation exists. 
(c)  After the building official has given such notice, if the violation has not been corrected and remedied, the city manager shall, without further notice, order water service to the building, structure or premises immediately discontinued, and the water service shall not thereafter be restored until the violation has been corrected or remedied to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(d)  At any time when water service has been so discontinued, it is unlawful for the contractor, owner or occupant of the premises to drill any water well or connect to any other water service intended to service such building, structure or premises. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15.04.010—15.04.040)  
Sec. 18-2. - Payment of fees; disposition of fees. 
All fees required under this chapter shall be paid to the building official or other inspector prior to the issuance of a permit, and the building official or other inspector shall keep a record of permits issued and moneys collected and shall promptly pay to the city clerk all moneys thus collected. 
(Code 1977, § 15.04.050)  
Sec. 18-3. - Suspension of permits. 
If any work is conducted in violation of the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the city, the building, plumbing, electrical or other permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended, and it is unlawful to continue work until the violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(Code 1977, § 15.04.060)  
Sec. 18-4. - Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission fee for issuance or renewal of building or construction permits. 
In addition to the fees provided in articles II through VI of this chapter, each applicant shall pay an Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission fee for the issuance or renewal of any building permit in the amount set forth in section 42-18. Of this fee amount, $0.50 cents shall be deposited into the city's general fund. The remaining fee amount shall be deposited by the city into a separate account created for that purpose, to be held and remitted to the state treasury for deposit in the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission Revolving Fund as required by applicable law. For purposes of this section, the term "building permit" shall have the meaning ascribed by the Oklahoma Building Code Commission, Oklahoma Administrative Code, Title 748, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1036, § 1, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 4-6-2010) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1036, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, added a new provision designated as § 18-38. Subsequently, section 1 of Ord. No. 1041, adopted April 6, 2010, amended and renumbered § 18-38 as § 18-4.  
Sec. 18-5. - Effective date for Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission fee. 
The Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission fee for the issuance or renewal of any building permit as provided in section 18-4 of this article shall take effect upon final establishment of such fee by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1039, § 1, 2-16-2010; Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 4-6-2010) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1039, adopted Feb. 16, 2010, added a new provision designated as § 18-39. Subsequently, section 2 of Ord. No. 1041, adopted April 6, 2010, amended and renumbered § 18-39 as § 18-5.  
Secs. 18-6—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 18-31A. - International Building Code adopted. 
The International Building Code, as sponsored and published by the International Code Council (hereinafter, the "IBC"), in the version as currently and may hereafter be adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, is hereby adopted as the building code of the City of Mustang, State of Oklahoma, as governing law controlling all matters concerning the condition and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except as to such portions as are specifically amended or deleted in this chapter. It is the intention of this section that subsequent editions of the IBC and any amendments thereto adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission shall apply within the City of Mustang and constitute the building code of the City of Mustang effective from and after April 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 1111, §§ 1, 2, 11-4-2014; Ord. No. 1136, § 1, 2-16-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1111, §§ 1—7, adopted Nov. 4, 2014, repealed former §§ 18-31—18-33 and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former §§ 18-31—18-33 pertained to the International Building Code adopted, the International Building Code additions, insertions, changes and fees, and CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code adopted, and derived from the 1977 Code, §§ 15.08.010, 15.08.030, 15.08.070; and Ord. No. 968, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 6, 2006. 
 Subsequently, section 1 of Ord. No. 1136, adopted Feb. 16, 2016, changed the title of § 18-31A from "2009 International Building Code adopted" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 18-31B. - City and state amendments to the 2009 International Building Code. 
The City of Mustang hereby adopts all amendments of the 2009 International Building Code (herein "IBC") as prescribed by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, except as amended herein: 
(1)  IBC § 101.1 Title. Insert "City of Mustang, Oklahoma" for name of jurisdiction. 
(2)  IBC § 102.4 Referenced codes and standards. Add the following language to the end of the paragraph: "Where the City of Mustang has adopted a specific referenced code or standard different than those listed, the adopted code shall apply." 
(3)  IBC § 103 Department of Building Safety is hereby amended in its entirety and shall be titled as follows: "The City of Mustang Community Development Department." 
(4)  IBC § 103.1 Creation of an enforcement agency is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "The Community Development Department is in charge of administering all International Code Council Codes except the International Fire Code. The community development director shall serve as the building official ." 
(5)  IBC § 103.2 Appointment is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "The city manager shall appoint the community development director who shall serve as the chief building official unless this duty is otherwise delegated to a deputy." 
(6)  IBC § 103.3 Deputies is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma, and with the concurrence of the city manager, the community development director shall have the authority to appoint a chief building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official." 
(7)  IBC § 105.2 Work exempt from permit (Building only ) is amended in its entirety to read as follows: 
1.  "One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses are exempt provided it adheres to the following conditions: 
1.  Its floor area does not exceed 100 square feet (9.2903 m 2 ) 
2.  Its height is 10 feet (3048 mm) above grade or less. 
3.  It is not attached to a permanent foundation 
4.  It is not permanently served by any utility service. 
2.  Oil derricks. 
3.  Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1. 
4.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
5.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
6.  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep. 
7.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems. 
8.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings. 
9.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of Groups R-3 and U occupancies. 
10.  Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height." 
(8)  IBC § 107.2.1 Information on construction documents. The following requirements are added to the end of the paragraph: "The seal and signature of an Oklahoma licensed engineer or architect shall be required on plans featuring any of the following elements: 
1.  Where such certification is required by the State of Oklahoma. 
2.  Plans with any clear span greater than 10 feet (3048 mm). An alternative to an engineer's certification is available for spans greater than 10 feet but less than 24 feet (7315 mm). In such instances the Owner may use Glu Lams, LVLs or similar products provided they have been certified by the manufacturer for the proposed live and dead loads and are approved by the Chief Building Inspector. Calculations and written approval shall accompany construction documents and shall be placed in the permit file. 
3.  Structures with habitable space that is below grade. 
4.  Any anchoring system, pier or footing design that is not approved by the Chief Building Inspector." 
(9)  IBC § 108.2 Schedule of permit fees is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "Fees will be set by the Mustang City Council as described in Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma." 
(10)  IBC § 114.4 Violation penalties is hereby amended in its entirety to read as follows: "Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or who fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made there under, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved there under, or any certificate or permit issued there under, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma § 1-8. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained constitutes a separate offense. The application of the penalty in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions." 
(11).  IBC § 1612.3 Insert "City of Mustang, Oklahoma" for the name of the jurisdiction. 
(12)  IBC § 1612.3 Insert "September 26, 2008" for the required date. 
(13)  IBC § 3412.2 Insert "June 6, 2006" for the required date. 
(Ord. No. 1111, §§ 1, 3, 11-4-2014) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 18-31A.  
Sec. 18-32A. - International Existing Building Code adopted. 
The International Existing Building Code, as sponsored and published by the International Code Council (hereinafter, the "IEBC"), in the version as currently and may hereafter be adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the City of Mustang, State of Oklahoma, as governing law controlling all matters relating to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein provided, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except as to such portions as are specifically amended or deleted in this chapter. It is the intention of this section that subsequent editions of the IBC and any amendments thereto adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission shall apply within the City of Mustang and constitute the building code of the City of Mustang effective from and after April 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 1111, §§ 1, 4, 11-4-2014; Ord. No. 1136, § 1, 2-16-2016) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 18-31A. 
 Subsequently, section 1 of Ord. No. 1136, adopted Feb. 16, 2016, changed the title of § 18-32A from "2009 International Existing Building Code adopted" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 18-32B. - City and state amendments to the 2009 International Existing Building Code. 
The City of Mustang hereby adopts all amendments of the 2009 International Existing Building Code (herein "IEBC") as prescribed by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, except as amended herein: 
(1)  IEBC § 101.1 Title. Insert "City of Mustang, Oklahoma" for name of jurisdiction. 
(2)  IEBC § 102.4 Referenced codes and standards. Add the following language to the end of the paragraph: "Where the City of Mustang has adopted a specific referenced code or standard different than those listed, the adopted code shall apply." 
(3)  IEBC § 103 Department of Building Safety is hereby amended in its entirety and shall be titled as follows: "The City of Mustang Community Development Department". 
(4)  IEBC § 103.1 Creation of an enforcement agency is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "The Community Development Department is in charge of administering all International Code Council Codes except the International Fire Code. The community development director shall serve as the building official ." 
(5)  IEBC § 103.2 Appointment is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "The city manager shall appoint the community development director who shall serve as the chief building official unless this duty is otherwise delegated to a deputy." 
(6)  IEBC § 103.3 Deputies is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma, and with the concurrence of the city manager, the community development director shall have the authority to appoint a chief building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official." 
(7)  IEBC § 1301.2 Applicability. Insert "May 6, 2006" for the required date. 
(Ord. No. 1111, §§ 1, 5, 11-4-2014) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 18-31A.  
Sec. 18-33A. - 2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings adopted. 
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, as published and from time to time may be amended by the International Code Council, as amended by the City of Mustang in section 18-33.B herein, and as currently and from time to time may be amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of Mustang, State of Oklahoma, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said 2015 International Residential Code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes so adopted and amended in section 18-33.B herein, are part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1111, §§ 1, 6, 11-4-2014; Ord. No. 1144, § 1, 3-7-2017) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 18-31A. 
 Ord. No. 1144, § 1, adopted March 7, 2017, changed the title of § 18-33A from "2009 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings adopted" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 18-33B. - City and state amendments to the 2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
The City of Mustang hereby adopts all amendments of the 2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (herein "IRC") as prescribed by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23 except as amended herein: 
(1)  IRC § R101.1 Title. Insert "City of Mustang, Oklahoma" for name of jurisdiction. 
(2)  IRC § R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. Add the following language to the end of the paragraph: "Where the City of Mustang has adopted a specific referenced code or standard different than those listed, the adopted code shall apply." 
(3)  IRC § R102.7.1 Additions, alterations and repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs to any structure shall conform to the requirements for a new structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with the requirements of this code, unless otherwise stated. Additions, alterations or repairs and relocations shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building. 
1.  If the structure has 50 percent or more damage as determined by the Chief Building Inspector or a Registered Design Professional the structure shall comply with the construction codes for a new structure. 
(4)  IRC § R103 Department of Building Safety is hereby amended in its entirety and shall be titled as follows: "The City of Mustang Community Development Department". 
(5)  IRC § R103.1 Creation of an enforcement agency is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "The Community Development Department is in charge of administering all International Code Council Codes except the International Fire Code. The community development director shall serve as the building official." 
(6)  IRC § R103.2 Appointment is amended in its entirety as follows: "The city manager shall appoint the community development director who shall serve as the chief building official unless this duty is otherwise delegated to a deputy." 
(7)  IRC § R103.3 Deputies is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma, and with the concurrence of the city manager, the community development director shall have the authority to appoint a chief building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official." 
(8)  IRC § R105.2 Work exempt from permit (Building only ) is amended in its entirety to read as follows: 
1.  "One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses are exempt provided it adheres to the following conditions: 
1.  Its floor area does not exceed 100 square feet (9.2903 m 2 ) 
2.  Its height is 10 feet (3048 mm) above grade or less. 
3.  It is not attached to a permanent foundation 
2.  Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1. 
3.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
4.  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep. 
5.  Swings and other playground equipment. 
6.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
7.  Decks not exceeding 200 square feet (18.58 m 2 ) in area, that are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.4. 
NOTE: Electrical, gas and mechanical exemptions shall remain intact as provided for in the IRC. 
(9)  IRC § R108.2 Schedule of permit fees is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "Fees will be set by the Mustang City Council as described in Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma." 
(10)  IRC § R106.1.1 Information on construction documents. The following requirements are added to the end of the paragraph: "The seal and signatureof an Oklahoma licensed engineer or architect shall be required on plans featuring any of the following designs: 
1.  A Structure with habitable space that is below grade. 
2.  Any anchoring system, pier or footing design that is not approved by the Chief Building Inspector." 
IRC § R106.1.2 Plans with any clear span greater than 10 feet (3048 mm). The following requirements are added to the end of the paragraph: 
1.  Clear spans greater than 10 feet (3048 mm) in length that support any portion of the roof to include all purlins and bracing that is not on a load bearing wall shall be Glu Lams, LVLs or similar products provided they have been certified by the manufacturer for the proposed live and dead loads and are approved by the Chief Building Inspector. Calculations and written approval shall accompany construction documents and shall be placed in the permit file. 
(11)  IRC § 113.4 Violation penalties is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or who fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma § 1-8. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained constitutes a separate offense. The application of the penalty in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions." 
(12)  IRC § Table R301.2(1) is amended to fill the table with the following: "ground snow load - 10 psf; wind speed - 90 mph; seismic design category - C; weathering - moderate; frost line depth - 18 inches; termite - yes; winter design temp. - 13°F; ice barrier underlayment required - yes; flood hazards - See Chapter 50 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma; air freezing index - 332; mean annual temp. - 60°F." 
(13)  IRC § R306.5 is created and shall read as follows: 
" IRC § R306.5 Sanitation Facilities during Construction. Prior to any construction activities on any site, a portable toilet (porta-potty) shall be placed as to provide sanitation facilities for all personal involved in construction. A porta-potty can be used to provide sanitation for up to six lots, which include the lot on or in front of which the porta-potty is located (the "Base Lot"), the lot immediately across the street from the porta-potty location (the "Facing Lot"), and the lots adjoining lying on each side of the Base Lot and the Facing Lot; provided, a portion of each lot must be within 200 feet of the porta-potty. 
(14)  IRC § Figure R602.3(2) Framing Details is amended and shall read as follows: 
Note: Horizontal back-up cleats used to fasten wall partitions and/or intersecting wall lines together shall not be used. 
(15)  IRC § M1308.3 is created and shall read as follows: 
M1308.3 Construction equipment. Construction equipment such as backhoes, other motorized earth moving equipment, etc., shall not travel within or over a stem wall area or foundation perimeter after plumbing, electrical or mechanical ducts, piping, equipment or materials has been installed. 
Exception: Construction equipment shall be permitted within said prohibited areas where such equipment does not travel over or adjacent to any duct, piping, equipment or materials subjecting them to physical damage, provided however that the code official shall be notified prior to the work and provided that the code official shall verify that no damage is done to the installation by such construction equipment. 
(16)  IRC § M1309 is created and shall read as follows: 
" M1309.1 Construction Heat. Temporary construction heat shall be allowed in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  An inspection shall be made for construction heat prior to placing the heating system in operation. 
2.  Filter or filters shall be installed over each return air opening. Filters shall be cleaned or replaced as they become loaded with dust and debris. Air-handling units, appliances, and equipment shall not be placed in operation without air filters that have been installed in accordance with this section or while the air filters are being changed or replaced. 
3.  The construction heat thermostat shall have a fixed, minimum set point of 55 degrees F. 
4.  Mechanical equipment and appliances shall be installed in accordance with all safety requirements and limitations of the appliance and equipment manufacturer's installation instructions, relative to construction heat. 
5.  All conditioned construction areas served by the mechanical system shall be substantially enclosed. Mechanical and furnace rooms shall be separated and isolated from all construction areas. All combustion air shall be per the following listed sections of Chapter 24 of this Code (outdoor combustion air only): 
G2407.6.1 - Outdoor Combustion Air (Two Opening Method) 
G2407.6.2 - Outdoor Combustion Air (One Opening Method) 
6.  When combustible, flammable, explosive or corrosive materials in any state (solid, liquid, or gaseous) are being used in the construction process the mechanical system shall not be in use, except where approved by the Code Official. The construction area shall be thoroughly ventilated before the mechanical appliances, equipment or system is put back into service. 
7.  Failure to provide adequate filtering during construction shall be grounds for requiring ductwork, mechanical equipment, and appliances to be professionally cleaned or replaced before final approval. 
8.  Failure to comply with the above requirements shall also be grounds for ordering the immediate termination of gas service to a structure by the authority having jurisdiction." 
(17)  IRC § P3008.1 Sewage Backflow is amended in its entirety as follows: "Sanitary sewer backflow preventers are required on all new service installations and when repairing existing sewer service lines where practical as determined by the chief code official or his deputy." 
(18)  IRC § Section P3114 Air Admittance Valves is amended in its entirety as follows: "Air admittance valves are not allowed within the City of Mustang unless approved by the Chief Building Inspector. 
(19)  IRC § R403.1.3.5.5 Seismic Design Category C. Standard reinforcement for residential structures shall have 4 bars of #5 ( 5/8 inch) or 6 bars of #4 (½ inch) steel reinforcement. Standard steel reinforcement for detached accessory structures with a brick veneer shall be 2 #5 ( 5/8 inch) or 4 #4 (½ inch) steel reinforcement. Detached accessory structures without a brick veneer shall have 2 #4 (½ inch) steel reinforcement. 
(20)  IRC § R602.2. Exception: Utility grade studs can only be used for detached accessory buildings without attic storage and for non-load bearing walls. 
(21)  IRC § 602.1.10 Fiberboard. Fiberboard sheathing, where used structurally, shall be identified by an approved agency as conforming to ASTM C 208. Fiberboard sheathing less than ½ inch in thickness shall not be used as sheathing. 
(Ord. No. 1111, §§ 1, 7, 11-4-2014; Ord. No. 1144, § 2, 3-7-2017; Ord. No. 1169, § 1, 7-3-2018; Ord. No. 1195, § 1, 9-13-2019) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 18-31A. 
 Ord. No. 1144, § 2, adopted March 7, 2017, changed the title of § 18-33B from "City and state amendments to the 2009 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 18-34. - Building permit required; fee. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter or demolish a building or structure, or to begin to do such work, without securing from the building official a permit therefor. 
(b)  The fee for a building permit shall be as set out in section 42-18. 
(c)  Beginning with the effective date of this subsection and continuing through June 30, 2014, the city declares a moratorium on and shall not charge a building permit fee under subsection 42-18(a)(2)(g) for a permit to construct or install a storm shelter. Other fees applicable under section 42-18 shall continue to be charged for such permit. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "storm shelter" shall mean a building, structure or portions thereof, constructed in accordance with FEMA 320 and/or ICC-500 specifications and designated for temporary use during a severe wind storm event, such as tornado. 
(Code 1977, § 15.08.060; Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 8-20-2013)  
Sec. 18-35. - Dedication of right-of-way required prior to issuance of permit for new construction. 
No building permit shall be issued for new construction, including expansion or addition to an existing structure, unless the owner of the property on which the construction is being proposed first dedicates a street right-of-way to the city in accordance with this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 15.08.061)  
Sec. 18-36. - Appeals. 
Appeals from decisions of the building inspector shall be made to the board of adjustment as provided for in section 122-130. 
(Code 1977, § 15.08.062)  
Sec. 18-37. - Insurance requirement for residential building permit. 
Before issuing a residential building permit, a certificate of insurance from the appropriate insurer shall be provided showing that the contractor has general liability insurance in an amount required by other construction trade contractors licensed by the construction industries board and that the contactor has workers' compensation insurance or a workers' compensation exemption verification document. 
For purposes of this section, the term "residential building permit" means any building permit for a single-family or a duplex residential structure and shall include construction of a new structure, remodel of an existing structure, and the addition to an existing structure. The term "residential building permit" shall not include a single-family or a duplex carport, patio cover, storage building, accessory building, pool or fence. 
This provision shall not apply to a person or persons performing the construction or remodeling to his, her or their own existing single-family or duplex structure on their own property, unless the modifications are being performed by and the permit acquired by a general contractor or subcontractor, in which case the general contractor or subcontractor shall meet the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 9-1-2009)  
Secs. 18-38—18-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of electrical installations, 59 O.S. § 1693. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-61. - National Electrical Code adopted with amendments. 
The International Electrical Code, as sponsored and published by the National Fire Protection Association (hereinafter, the "NEC"), excluding any informative annexes, in the version as currently and may hereafter be adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the City of Mustang, State of Oklahoma, as governing law controlling all matters concerning electrical installations made, maintained and operated in the City of Mustang, as if fully set forth herein, including but not limited to the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except as to such portions as are specifically amended or deleted in this chapter. It is the intention of this section that subsequent editions of the NEC and any amendments thereto adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission shall apply within the City of Mustang and constitute the electrical code of the City of Mustang effective from and after April 1, 2016. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.020; Ord. No. 1112, § 1, 11-4-2014; Ord. No. 1136, § 1, 2-16-2016) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1112, adopted Nov. 4, 2014, changed the title of § 18-61 from "National Electrical Code adopted" to read as herein set out. 
 Subsequently, section 1 of Ord. No. 1136, adopted Feb. 16, 2016, changed the title of § 18-61 from "2011 National Electrical Code adopted with amendments" to read as herein set out. 
Charter reference— Adoption by reference, § 2-14. 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 18-62. - Liability for damages. 
This article shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons, nor shall any officer or employee of the city held as assuming such liability by reason of the inspection or reinspection as provided for in this article or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.080)  
Sec. 18-63. - Temporary poles. 
All temporary electrical service poles shall be constructed to comply with the currently adopted National Electrical Code standards. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.070(1); Ord. No. 879, § 1, 2-3-2004)  
Sec. 18-64. - Temporary poles required. 
Each construction site requiring temporary electrical service shall have a temporary pole erected, inspected and energized prior to work beginning. At no time will power be transferred from another location or job site via extension cords or other electrical conductors without prior approval of the chief inspector. No cords shall extend across streets or roads. The use of generators shall be permitted, however, no power being supplied by the generator shall be used on more than one building site. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 2-3-2004)  
Secs. 18-65—18-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 18-81. - Authority of electrical inspector. 
(a)  The city electrical inspector shall have the right, during reasonable business hours, to enter any building or premises in the discharge of his official duties, including the making of any inspections, reinspections or test of the electrical equipment contained therein or its installation. 
(b)  When the use of any electrical equipment or its installation is found to be dangerous to human life or property, the city electrical inspector is empowered to condemn it and/or cause it to be disconnected from its source of electrical supply. When such equipment or installation has been so condemned and/or disconnected, a notice shall be placed thereon listing the causes for condemnation and/or disconnection, and written notice of such condemnation and/or disconnection and the causes therefor shall be given within 24 hours to the owner and/or occupant of such building, structure or premises. 
(c)  It is unlawful for anyone to remove the notice and/or reconnect the electrical equipment to any source of electrical supply and/or to use or permit to be used electrical power in any such electrical equipment until such causes for the condemnation and/or disconnection have been remedied to the satisfaction of the city electrical inspector. 
(d)  The city electrical inspector shall have the authority to allow the installation and use of special equipment, material, wiring methods and installations if in his judgment they are reasonably safe for the intended use. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15.16.030, 15.16.040)  
Secs. 18-82—18-90. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Permits and Inspections 
 
Sec. 18-91. - Permit required; exceptions. 
(a)  No electrical equipment shall be installed within or on any building, structure or premises, publicly or privately owned, nor shall any alteration or addition be made in any such existing equipment, without first securing a permit therefor from the city electrical inspector, except that no permit is required to execute any of the classes of electrical work described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  No electrical permit is required for any of the following: 
(1)  Maintenance work or repair work if the maintenance and repair work does not require alteration or rearrangement of electrical installation. 
(2)  Maintenance work for state and federal institutions. 
(3)  The construction, installation, maintenance, repair and renovation by a public utility regulated by the state corporation commission. 
(4)  Work performed by public service corporations, telephone and telegraph companies, rural electric associations or municipal utilities. 
(5)  The construction, installation, maintenance, repair and renovation of telephone equipment or computer systems by a person engaged in the telecommunications or information systems industry when such activities involve work exclusively for communication or data, voice or other signaling purposes; except fire alarm systems, security systems and environmental control systems that are not an integral part of a telecommunications system. 
(6)  The installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of water supply pumps, provided such work is performed from the output side of a fused disconnect or breaker box. 
(7)  Exception. Notwithstanding the foregoing exceptions, repair of meter base or service equipment which requires a service release to the utility company shall require a permit. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.050(A); Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 5-18-2010)  
Sec. 18-92. - Permits to be issued only to registered contractors. 
An electrical permit shall be issued only to a registered electrical contractor or his duly designated agent. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.050(B))  
Sec. 18-93. - Fees. 
Fees for electrical permits are as set out in section 42-18. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.060)  
Sec. 18-94. - Inspection of temporary construction pole. 
Upon installation of a temporary construction pole, the electrical contractor shall notify the city electrical inspector that the pole is ready for inspection. Having inspected the temporary construction pole, the city electrical inspector shall tag the pole approved and notify the applicable utility company authorizing connection to the supply of electricity. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.070(A))  
Sec. 18-95. - Rough-in inspection. 
No building, structure or premises shall be wired until adequate roof covering has been installed on the building, structure or premises. When any electrical equipment is to be hidden from view by insulation or the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person installing the equipment shall notify the city electrical inspector that the installation is ready for a rough-in electrical inspection. Such equipment shall not be concealed until it has been approved by the city electrical inspector and an approval tag has been attached to the electrical switch cabinet or a readily visible box. New or old work rough-in shall include all electrical equipment to make the installation complete, and be free from unintentional grounds, with joints properly made up, and ready for attachment of fixtures, drop lights and appliances. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.070(B))  
Sec. 18-96. - Temporary-final inspection. 
(a)  When for good cause it is necessary to have the electricity on any installation before a final certificate can be issued, a person may request a temporary-final electrical inspection. The city electrical inspector may, if the parts to which the current is applied are in a safe and satisfactory condition, authorize connection to the supply of electricity by the applicable utility company. All branch circuits to be used at this point of construction shall have their receptacles installed and adequate circuit protection installed in the electrical panel. All conductors in the electrical panel not being used shall be secured free and clear of the bus bars. The cover shall be installed on the electrical panel. 
(b)  A certificate of approval of temporary-final electrical service shall become void 90 days after the date of issuance. Upon expiration of this certificate, the city electrical inspector shall instruct the applicable utility company to disconnect the electrical service. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.070(C))  
Sec. 18-97. - Final inspection. 
All electrical installations for which a permit is issued shall be inspected by the city electrical inspector before the owner, occupant or tenant utilizes the electrical equipment. The person shall notify the city electrical inspector that a final electrical inspection is requested when an electrical installation is completed and in condition for a service connection to the supply of electricity by the applicable utility company. If the installation is in compliance with this article, the person responsible for installing the electrical equipment shall be required to energize and test each circuit, socket and receptacle before requesting a final electrical inspection. Approval of a temporary-final electrical inspection does not exempt a person from final inspection. No building or structure shall be occupied until the final electrical inspection has been approved. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.070(D))  
Sec. 18-98. - Reinspection. 
(a)  The city electrical inspector shall place a correction notice in the same location as the approval tag if the electrical installation is not satisfactory. The correction notice shall contain the defects, the date and the inspector's signature. The city electrical inspector shall then notify the person responsible for the defects. Upon correcting the violations, the person shall request a reinspection by the city electrical inspector. 
(b)  The reinspection fee set out in section 42-18 shall be paid by the electrical contractor listed on the electrical permit. The city electrical inspector shall send a statement in the amount as set by section 42-18 to the electrical contractor for each reinspection required. Failure to pay the reinspection fee shall result in no inspections being made in the future until the reinspection fee has been paid by the contractor. 
(c)  If the wiring installed by a homeowner is found to be dangerous and in violation of the current National Electrical Code and/or the provisions of these regulations, the electrical inspector shall attach a correction notice to the electrical switch cabinet or a readily visible box. The correction notice shall list the defects and corrections needed. If the electrical inspector deems it necessary, he may require a certificate of inspection signed by a licensed electrical contractor with the city, stating that the installation has been inspected and all corrections made before a reinspection is performed. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.070(E))  
Secs. 18-99—18-110. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Electrical Board[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authority, § 2-221 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-111. - Established. 
There may be hereby created an electrical board, as deemed necessary by the city council, which shall operate as set forth in this subdivision. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.090)  
Sec. 18-112. - Membership; term of members; removal of members. 
(a)  The electrical board shall consist of three members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Members shall be a holder of a license from the state. 
(1)  One member shall be an electrical contractor registered with the city. 
(2)  One member shall be a journeyman electrician registered with the city. 
(3)  One member shall be a person engaged primarily in the design or maintenance of electrical installations. 
(b)  The city electrical inspector shall be an ex officio member of the electrical board and shall not have a vote. Members shall be appointed for terms of three years or until a successor is appointed. In the event of a vacancy during a term, the mayor shall appoint a replacement to fulfill the unexpired portion of the term, provided this replacement is approved by the city council. 
(c)  One citizen of the city shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council to serve for a term of three years as an alternate member of the electrical board. The alternate member shall be a person engaged primarily in the design or maintenance of electrical installations. The alternate member shall act as a replacement in the absence of any of the regular members, and in so doing shall have all the powers and duties of a regular electrical board member. 
(d)  Any appointed members may be removed from office by the mayor, with the approval of the council, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Absence from more than one-half of six consecutive meetings of the electrical board. 
(2)  Inefficiency. 
(3)  Neglect of duty. 
(4)  Malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.090)  
Sec. 18-113. - Chairperson. 
The electrical board shall elect one of its members to act as a chairperson for a term of one year, and he shall have a vote on all matters before the board. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.090(D))  
Sec. 18-114. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the electrical board to: 
(1)  Revoke or suspend any electrical contractor's registration or any journeyman electrician's registration on the grounds set forth in section 18-144. 
(2)  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the electrical inspector in the interpretation or enforcement of this article. 
(3)  Act as a recommending body to the city council in the adoption of the electrical code and/or additional provisions for the safety of electrical installations in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.100)  
Sec. 18-115. - Procedure for appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to the electrical board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any interpretation of the electrical code by the electrical inspector. Such appeal shall be filed not more than 15 days after the date of the decision or interpretation of the electrical inspector by filing a notice of appeal with the electrical inspector and the chairperson of the electrical board. All appeals shall be in writing, specifying the grounds for the appeal. 
(b)  The electrical inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon the action from which the appeal was taken, including the reports substantiating the position of the electrical inspector. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from. 
(c)  The chairperson of the electrical board shall fix a reasonable date and time for the hearing of an appeal. The date of the hearing shall always be within 15 days of receipt of the written appeal. The appellant shall be given written notice of the date and time of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested. The appellant, his representative and any other person whose interest may be affected by the matter on appeal small be given an opportunity to be heard. 
(d)  The electrical board may modify or reverse any decision or order of the electrical inspector, in any particular case, when and only when in its opinion the strict application and enforcement thereof would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional undue hardship upon or manifest injustice to an appellant and would be contrary to the spirit and the purpose of this article or the public interest, or when it has been determined that the true intent has been incorrectly interpreted. 
(e)  Every ruling made upon any appeal to the board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based upon the evidence and testimony received at the hearing accorded by the board. The ruling shall specify the reason for granting, denying or modifying the appeal and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in the office of the electrical inspector and shall be open to public inspection. A copy of such decision shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the electrical inspector for two weeks after filing. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.180)  
Secs. 18-116—18-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS, JOURNEYMEN, ELECTRICIANS AND APPRENTICES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— State regulation of electricians, 59 O.S. § 1680 et seq. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 18-131. - Qualifications of electrical contractors; supervision of work. 
(a)  An electrical contractor must be knowledgeable of this article. He must be licensed as a electrical contractor with the state and have at least five years of practical or associated experience in electrical wiring. 
(b)  An electrician's helper shall be under the direct supervision of a journeyman electrician at all times on any one installation. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15.16.110, 15.16.120)  
Sec. 18-132. - Unlawful use of registration. 
It is unlawful for the holder of a registration under this division to loan or transfer such registration or to allow the use of such registration directly or indirectly by any other person to obtain an electrical permit. The registration of persons violating this section shall be revoked. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.140(A))  
Secs. 18-133—18-140. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Registration[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Local registration of electricians authorized, 59 O.S. § 1696. 
 
Sec. 18-141. - Registration of contractors and journeymen required; qualifications; fee. 
(a)  Contractors. No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade or occupation of electrical contractor and/or electrical wiring without first registering with the department of community development. An applicant for registration must meet the following prerequisites: 
(1)  The applicant shall hold a current electrical contractor's license issued by the state. 
(2)  The applicant shall pay an initial registration fee as set out in section 42-18. 
(b)  Journeymen. No person shall work as a journeyman electrician in the city without first registering with the department of community development. No person shall be issued such a registration until he pays the fee for registration established in section 42-18. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15.16.110, 15.16.150(A), (B))  
Sec. 18-142. - Expiration; renewal. 
All electrical contractor's and journeymen electrician's registrations shall expire on October 31 of the year issued. However, registrations issued after September 1 shall expire on October 31 of the following year. The renewal fee shall be as set in section 42-18. The renewal fee shall be doubled if registration is not renewed within 90 days after expiration. A new application is required if registration is not renewed within 180 days after expiration. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15.16.130, 15.16.160)  
Sec. 18-143. - Transfer. 
No electrical contractor's or journeyman electrician's registration shall be assignable or transferable. 
(Code 1977, § 15.16.140(A))  
Sec. 18-144. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  After ten days' notice and adequate opportunity for a hearing, the electrical board may suspend or revoke an electrical contractor's registration for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Serious or repeated violations of the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Failure of the electrical contractor to pay the annual registration fee; 
(3)  Grossly unethical conduct in connection with the electrical trade or business; 
(4)  Poor workmanship or service; or 
(5)  Installing inferior or substandard materials, fixtures or equipment. 
(b)  A journeyman electrician's registration may be suspended by the electrical board for repeated violations of this article. Any journeyman electrician committing three or more serious violations of the provisions of this article on any one particular installation shall have his journeyman's registration suspended for a period of six months after a hearing has been held by the electrical board. If the electrical board determines that the violations are not hazardous to life and property, the suspension may be waived. 
(c)  If the department of public safety or the state fire marshal determines that a fire has resulted from faulty wiring or unsafe wiring practices, the electrical contractor who installed the wiring shall have his registration revoked. Repeated violations of the provisions of this article after a suspended registration has been reinstated shall result in revocation of the registration if the electrical board determines that the electrical contractor is not competent. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15.16.140(B), (C), 15.16.170)  
Secs. 18-145—18-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL CODE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Local regulation of mechanical systems, 59 O.S. § 1850.12. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-171. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
The International Mechanical Code, as sponsored and published by the International Code Council (hereinafter, the "IMC"), in the version as currently and may hereafter be adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the City of Mustang, State of Oklahoma, as governing law controlling all matters relating to the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except as to such portions as are specifically amended or deleted in this chapter. It is the intention of this section that subsequent editions of the IMC and any amendments thereto adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission shall apply within the City of Mustang and constitute the mechanical code of the City of Mustang effective from and after April 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 1, 11-4-2014; Ord. No. 1136, § 1, 2-16-2016) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1113, adopted Nov. 4, 2014, repealed former § 18-171 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 18-171 pertained to exceptions and derived from the 1977 Code, § 15.30.090. 
 Subsequently, section 1 of Ord. No. 1136, adopted Feb. 16, 2016, changed the title of § 18-171 from "2009 International Mechanical Code adopted" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 18-172. - Amendments to the 2009 International Mechanical Code. 
The City of Mustang hereby adopts all amendments of the 2009 International Mechanical Code (herein "IMC") as prescribed by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, except as amended herein: 
(1)  IMC § 101.1 Title. Insert "City of Mustang, Oklahoma" 
(2)  IMC § 106.5.2 Fee schedule is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "Fees will be set by the Mustang City Council as described in Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma." 
(3)  IMC § 106.5.3 Fee refunds is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "In case of abandonment or discontinuance, the cost of work performed under a permit may be estimated, an adjustment of the fee made, and the portion of the fee for uncompleted work returned to the permit holder if requested in writing. Such refund shall be made at the discretion of the City Manager or his designee, provided that no refund of a prescribed minimum fee shall be made. If such discontinuance is due to revocation of permit, a similar adjustment and return may be made; provided that no refund shall be made until all penalties incurred or imposed by due authority have been collected. After such a refund has been made no work shall be resumed until a new application has been made and a new permit has been issued." 
(4)  IMC § 108.4 Violation penalties is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or who fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in Section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained constitutes a separate offense. The application of the penalty in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions." 
(5)  IMC § 108.5 Stop work orders. The last sentence of this section is amended as follows: "Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be deemed to be in violation and subject to the penalties outlined in IMC § 108.4 as noted above." 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 2, 11-4-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 1113, adopted Nov. 4, 2014, repealed former § 18-172 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 18-172 pertained to International Mechanical Code adopted; amendments, and derived from the 1977 Code, § 15.30.010.  
Sec. 18-173. - Registration of persons engaged in mechanical work. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall install, replace or repair gas pipes or vented gas appliances (unless such person is licensed as a plumbing contractor or journeyman plumber pursuant to the laws of the state) or undertake any mechanical work as provided for and described in the Mechanical Licensing Act (59 O.S. § 1850.1 et seq.) without first registering with the city department of community development. Registration will be issued upon the applicant's showing to the satisfaction of the community development director or his designee proof of a current and valid mechanical license from the state and the payment of the annual fee as set forth in section 42-18. The continued validity of such registration shall be dependent upon the registrant's maintaining a current valid state mechanical license, and the expiration, revocation or suspension of a state mechanical license shall automatically invalidate the registration issued by the city. No person shall continue to engage in mechanical work following such suspension or revocation or otherwise engage in such mechanical work without a valid city registration when such registration is required. 
(b)  Grounds for suspension or revocation. After ten days' notice and adequate opportunity for a hearing, the city council may revoke or suspend a city mechanical registration for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Making a material misstatement in the application for registration or the renewal of registration; 
(2)  Obtaining any registration by false or fraudulent representation; 
(3)  Loaning or allowing the use of such registration by any other person or illegally using a registration; 
(4)  Demonstrating incompetence to act as a mechanical journeyman or mechanical contractor; 
(5)  Violating any provisions of this article; or 
(6)  Willfully failing to perform normal business obligations without justifiable cause. 
(c)  Procedure for suspension or revocation. A request that the registration be suspended or revoked may be presented to the city council by the community development director, or by any aggrieved person who shall specify the reasons for the request, who shall agree to testify at a hearing and who shall sign such request before a notary public. Failure to perform any of these acts shall invalidate the request as determined by the council. A copy of such request shall be attached to the notice of hearing and provided to the registrant by the city. At the hearing, the registrant may be represented by counsel, may present witnesses in his behalf, and may cross examine other witnesses. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15.30.020, 15.30.060) 
State Law reference— Local registration authorized, 59 O.S. § 1850.12.  
Secs. 18-174—18-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MECHANICAL BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authority, § 2-221 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-191. - Established. 
There may be hereby created a mechanical board, if deemed necessary by the city council, which shall operate as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1977, § 15.30.040)  
Sec. 18-192. - Membership; term of members; removal of members. 
(a)  The mechanical board shall consist of three members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Members shall be holders of mechanical licenses from the state. Members shall be appointed for three years. 
(b)  One member shall be a mechanical contractor registered with the city. One member shall be a mechanical journeyman registered with the city. One member shall be a person engaged primarily in the design or maintenance of mechanical installations. If persons who meet such qualifications are not available for appointment, then persons most nearly meeting these qualifications shall be appointed. 
(c)  The city mechanical inspector shall be an ex officio member of the mechanical board and shall not have a vote. 
(d)  In the event of a vacancy during a term, the mayor shall appoint a replacement to fulfill the unexpired portion of the term, provided this replacement is approved by the city council. 
(e)  One citizen of the city shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the council, to serve for a term of three years, as an alternate member of the mechanical board. The alternate member shall be a person engaged primarily in the design or maintenance of mechanical installations. The alternate member shall act as a replacement in the absence of any of the regular mechanical board members. 
(f)  Any appointed members may be removed from office by the mayor, with the approval of the council, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Absence from more than one-half of six consecutive meetings of the mechanical board. 
(2)  Inefficiency. 
(3)  Neglect of duty. 
(4)  Malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1977, § 15.30.040)  
Sec. 18-193. - Chairperson. 
The mechanical board shall elect one of its members to act as a chairperson for a term of one year. The chairperson shall have a vote on all matters before the board. 
(Code 1977, § 15.30.040(D))  
Sec. 18-194. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the mechanical board to: 
(1)  Acknowledge the revocation or suspension of any city mechanical registration or any mechanical journeyman's registration upon the revocation, suspension or refusal to issue or renew the state license by the state mechanical hearing board. Such revocation or suspension shall be automatic upon a showing of such state action. Notice of such revocation or suspension shall be provided to the community development director and the city clerk. 
(2)  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the mechanical inspector in the interpretation or enforcement of this article. Such appeals shall be heard pursuant to section 18-195. 
(3)  Act as a recommending body to the city council in the adoption of the mechanical code and/or additional provisions for the safety of mechanical installations in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 15.30.050)  
Sec. 18-195. - Procedure for appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to the mechanical board pursuant to the conditions contained in section 18-194 may be taken by any aggrieved person. Such appeal shall be filed with city clerk not more than 15 days after the date of the decision or interpretation of the mechanical inspector. All appeals shall be in writing, specifying the grounds for the appeal. 
(b)  The city clerk shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon the action from which the appeal was taken, including the reports substantiating the position of the mechanical inspector. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from. 
(c)  The chairperson of the mechanical board shall fix a reasonable date and time for the hearing of an appeal. The date of the hearing shall be within 15 days of receipt of the written appeal unless otherwise agreed by both parties. The appellant shall be given written notice of the date and time of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested. The appellant, his representative and witnesses shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
(d)  The mechanical board may modify or reverse any decision or order of the mechanical inspector, in any particular case, when and only when in its opinion the strict application and enforcement thereof would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional undue hardship upon or manifest injustice to an appellant and would be contrary to the spirit and the purpose of this article or the public interest, or when it has been determined that the true intent of this article has been incorrectly interpreted. 
(e)  Every ruling made upon any appeal to the board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based upon the evidence and testimony received at the hearing accorded by the board. The ruling shall state the reason for granting, denying or modifying the appeal and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Every decision shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and of the community development director and shall be open to public inspection. The decision of the mechanical board shall be final. 
(Code 1977, § 15.30.070)  
Secs. 18-196—18-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING CODE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Plumbing and plumbing contractors, 59 O.S. § 1001 et seq.; duty of city to prescribe plumbing regulations, 59 O.S. § 1015. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-221. - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
The International Plumbing Code, as sponsored and published by the International Code Council (hereinafter, the "IPC"), in the version as currently and may hereafter be adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the City of Mustang, State of Oklahoma, as governing law controlling all matters concerning the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except as to such portions as are specifically amended or deleted in this chapter. It is the intention of this section that subsequent editions of the IMC and any amendments thereto adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission shall apply within the City of Mustang and constitute the plumbing code of the City of Mustang effective from and after April 1, 2016. 
(Code 1977, § 15.20.020; Ord. No. 1114, § 1, 11-4-2014; Ord. No. 1136, § 1, 2-16-2016) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1114, adopted Nov. 4, 2014, changed the title of § 18-221 from "International Plumbing Code adopted; amendments" to read as herein set out. 
 Subsequently, section 1 of Ord. No. 1136, adopted Feb. 16, 2016, changed the title of § 18-221 from "2009 International Plumbing Code adopted" to read as herein set out. 
Charter reference— Adoption by reference, § 2-14. 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 18-222. - Amendments to the 2009 International Plumbing Code. 
The City of Mustang hereby adopts all amendments of the 2009 International Plumbing Code (herein "2009 IPC") as prescribed by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, except as amended herein: 
(1)  IPC § 101.1 Title. Insert "City of Mustang, Oklahoma" 
(2)  IPC § 106.6.2 Fee schedule is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "Fees will be set by the Mustang City Council as described in Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma." 
(3)  IPC § 106.6.3 Fee refunds is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "In case of abandonment or discontinuance, the cost of work performed under a permit may be estimated, an adjustment of the fee made, and the portion of the fee for uncompleted work returned to the permit holder if requested in writing. Such refund shall be made at the discretion of the City Manager or his designee, provided that no refund of a prescribed minimum fee shall be made. If such discontinuance is due to revocation of permit, a similar adjustment and return may be made; provided that no refund shall be made until all penalties incurred or imposed by due authority have been collected. After such a refund has been made, no work shall be resumed until a new application has been made and a new permit has been issued." 
(4)  IPC § 108.4 Violation penalties is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or who fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in Section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained constitutes a separate offense. The application of the penalty in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions." 
(5)  IPC § 108.5 Stop work orders. The last sentence of this section is amended as follows: "Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be deemed to be in violation and subject to the penalties outlined in IPC § 108.4 as noted above." 
(6)  IPC § 904.1 Roof extension is amended in its entirety as follows: "All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 6 inches (152 mm) above the roof. Vent terminals may not be used for any purpose other than weather protection." 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 11-4-2014)  
Secs. 18-223—18-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 18-241. - Permits. 
No plumbing work shall be undertaken within the city until a plumbing permit has been obtained from the inspection department of the city. The fees to be paid for a plumbing permit shall be as set out in the fee schedule in section 42-18. 
(Code 1977, § 15.20.040)  
Sec. 18-242. - Authority to allow use of special equipment and installations. 
The city plumbing board shall have the authority to allow the installation and use of special equipment, material, plumbing methods and installations if in its judgment they are reasonably safe for the intended use. 
(Code 1977, § 15.20.030)  
Sec. 18-243. - Plumbing board. 
A plumbing board may be created for the purpose of hearing complaints against any registered journeyman plumber or plumbing contractor, if deemed necessary by the city council, which will operate as set forth in this article. The board shall be responsible for the updating of the plumbing ordinances and codes. Each appointed member shall hold office for a period of three years or until his successor takes office, except that the planning director and building inspector of the city shall have indefinite terms. The board shall consist of the following: 
(1)  One registered journeyman plumber who is registered in the city. 
(2)  One registered plumbing contractor who is registered in the city. 
(3)  One licensed water operator registered with the state department of health and employed by the city. 
(4)  The planning director and building inspector of the city. 
The board members shall be appointed with the approval of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 15.20.120)  
Secs. 18-244—18-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PLUMBER REGISTRATION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Local registration of plumbers, 59 O.S. § 1020. 
 
Sec. 18-261. - Journeymen. 
No person shall work as a journeyman plumber in the city without registering with the city. The city clerk shall issue a city journeyman plumber's certificate to any person possessing a valid unrevoked and unexpired license as a journeyman plumber issued by the state commissioner of health, provided the journeyman plumber pays to the city clerk's office an initial registration fee as set forth in section 42-18. 
(Code 1977, § 15.20.070)  
Sec. 18-262. - Contractors. 
No person shall work as a plumbing contractor in the city without registering with the city. The city clerk shall issue a plumbing contractor's registration to any person who: 
(1)  Possesses a valid, unrevoked and unexpired plumbing contractor's license issued by the state commissioner of health. 
(2)  Pays an initial plumbing contractor's registration fee as set forth in section 42-18. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15.08.080, 15.20.080)  
Sec. 18-263. - Supervision of work. 
No individual shall engage in the business of installing, repairing or altering plumbing unless the plumbing work performed in the course of such business is under the direct supervision of a plumbing contractor registered with the city. 
(Code 1977, § 15.20.090)  
Sec. 18-264. - Expiration; renewal. 
Registrations issued under this division shall expire on October 31 of the year issued; however, certificates issued after September 1 shall expire on October 31 of the following year. Renewal fees for journeyman plumber's certificates shall be as set forth in section 42-18. The renewal fee for aplumbing contractor's registration shall be as set forth in section 42-18. The renewal fee shall be doubled if a certificate is not renewed within 90 days after expiration. A new application is required if registration is not renewed within 180 days after expiration. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15.20.100, 15.20.110)  
Sec. 18-265. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The plumbing hearing board shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the registration of any journeyman plumber or plumbing contractor for not to exceed one year if it finds reason to believe that the registrant has: 
(1)  Violated any provisions of this Code or the laws of the state relating to plumbing; 
(2)  Caused injury or damage to the person or property of any person as a result of any negligent act or omission; 
(3)  Allowed the use of his registration by any unsupervised person; 
(4)  Willfully failed to perform his normal business obligations without justifiable cause; or 
(5)  Violated the general ordinances of the city or the laws of the state relating to public decency or illegal business practices. 
(b)  Written charges specifying the complaint shall be filed with the city clerk's office requesting a hearing before the board by the complaining person. A copy of the charges shall be served on the registrant, who shall be notified of the date of the hearing, which shall not be less than 30 days after the service of such notice. The registrant may appear and be heard at the hearing. All testimony shall be under oath, and the chairperson of the board shall have the power to administer oaths. 
(Code 1977, § 15.20.130)  
Secs. 18-266—18-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MOVING BUILDINGS[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-291. - House mover's license. 
No person except a licensed house mover shall engage in the business of moving houses, buildings or other structures within the city. A house mover's license may be obtained from the city clerk. Application for such license shall be in writing and shall show the name and address of the owner of the business, and if the business is a partnership the name of each member thereof, and if such applicant is a corporation the corporate name of such applicant and the business address of the applicant. 
(Code 1977, § 15.36.010)  
Sec. 18-292. - Police escort. 
The city may require the house mover to provide a police escort for the purpose of regulating traffic along the route on which a house, building or structure is being moved. Any such police protection shall be at the expense of the house mover. 
(Code 1977, § 15.36.100)  
Sec. 18-293. - Moving during certain hours prohibited. 
No house, building or structure shall be moved within the city between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m., or between the hours of 3:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m. 
(Code 1977, § 15.36.110)  
Secs. 18-294—18-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 18-311. - Required; cleanup of lot; deposit. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to move any building, house or structure along or across any street, alley, boulevard or other public ground or thoroughfare within the city limits without first having obtained a written permit from the city clerk allowing the moving thereof. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued to move any building until the service sewer line from the building, house or structure to be moved shall have been plugged by a licensed plumber at the riser at a point not less than four feet deep from the surface of the ground. It shall be the duty of the person obtaining the permit to immediately clean up the lot from which the building was moved by filling in all holes and removing any debris and trash from the premises. The person shall deposit with the city clerk before removing the building the sum set forth in section 42-18 as a guarantee that the lot will be cleaned up as stated. If the person does not clean up the lot within ten days after the removal of the building, the city manager is authorized to clean up the lot and expend all or a portion of the deposit to clean up the lot. If the lot is cleaned up by the person, the city clerk will refund the deposit. 
(Code 1977, § 15.36.040)  
Sec. 18-312. - Application; issuance. 
(a)  Before any permit is issued under this division by the city clerk, an application therefor shall be submitted to the city planning commission to determine whether any zoning or plat restrictions or land use or other requirements will be violated by the removal of the house, building or structure. 
(b)  The city planning commission shall also determine whether the house, building or structure, when moved to its new location, will conform to the general nature, quality and character of the other houses, buildings and structures in the neighborhood, and whether the placing of the house, building or structure would tend to devalue the surrounding property or would result in the creation of a blighted condition in the area or neighborhood. 
(c)  The city planning commission shall, within 30 days from the date of the application, conduct a public hearing on the application and prepare its recommendations to the city council as to whether the permit should be approved, approved with modifications, or denied. No permit shall be issued without the prior approval of the city council. 
(1)  An application recommended by the planning commission for approval, or approval subject to modifications, shall be transmitted to the city council with the report and recommendations of the planning commission within 30 days of the planning commission action for hearing before and city council action thereon. 
(2)  An application recommended for denial by the planning commission shall not be considered further unless the applicant, within 15 days of the action by the planning commission, shall file with the city clerk and the recording secretary of the planning commission a written request for a public hearing before the city council. If no such request is filed, then $50.00 of the original permit fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Upon notice of a request for a public hearing before the city council, the planning commission shall transmit to the city council the application, its report and recommendations, and a copy of its minutes of the hearing. The recording secretary of the planning commission shall notify all interested parties of the time and place of the city council meeting pursuant to subpart (d) herein. 
(d)  When an application is presented to the city clerk, he shall cause notice of the application to be given to all property owners or residents within a 300-foot radius of the site on which the house, building or structure is to be moved, and the notice shall state the time and place when the application shall be heard by the city planning commission; however, failure to give the notice shall in no manner deprive the city council of the right to grant or refuse the issuance of the permit. 
(e)  The application shall describe the present location and the type and size of the house, building or structure to be moved, and be accompanied by a plot plan showing the proposed location of the house, building or structure with relation to setback and side lot lines, and the route over the streets of the city on which it is intended that the house, building or structure shall be moved. The applicant shall furnish recent photographs showing front and rear views of the house, building or structure to be moved. If the house, building or structure is to be moved to a location within the city, the applicant shall describe all improvements and repairs intended to be made on the house, building or structure. The city planning commission shall determine whether such improvements and repairs are adequate to comply with the plumbing, electrical and building codes of the city; and the city planning commission, if it determines other improvements or repairs are necessary to so conform, may require other improvements or repairs to be made as a condition to the issuance of the moving permit. The application shall show the date and proposed time of moving. 
(Code 1977, § 15.36.050; Ord. No. 1174, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 18-313. - Inspection of building. 
It is the duty of the building inspector, upon the filing of an application for a permit to move a building, to cause an inspection of such building to be made and to cause such further investigation to be made as may be necessary for the purpose of determining whether or not the provisions of this article have been or can be complied with. For such inspection, a fee shall be paid by the applicant to the city clerk as set forth in section 42-18. 
(Code 1977, § 15.36.060)  
Sec. 18-314. - Bond. 
(a)  Required. Prior to the issuance of a building moving permit, the applicant must post with the city a bond or undertaking to be approved by the city clerk in the penal sum of $2,500.00, payable to the city, conditioned that the applicant will cause all improvements and repairs required by the city council as a condition to the issuance of the permit to be completed within 90 days from the date of the moving of the house, building or structure onto its new location. 
(b)  Forfeiture. If the improvements and repairs have not been completed within the time set out in subsection (a) of this section and in accordance with the requirements set forth in the permit, and the city council has adopted a resolution making a finding to that effect and declaring a forfeiture, the bond or undertaking shall be forfeited to the city; provided, however, that the city shall, prior to the passing and adoption of such resolution, give written notice to the applicant by registered mail and to the surety at the address shown on the application and to the address of the surety, at least ten days prior to the meeting when the resolution is to be considered. The notice shall state both the time and place of the hearing, and shall itemize the improvements and repairs which have been completed according to the permit, and shall set forth the sections of the plumbing, building or electrical code violated. 
(Code 1977, § 15.36.070)  
Sec. 18-315. - Fee. 
For the moving of houses, buildings or structures as provided in this article, the permit fee shall be as set forth in section 42-18. The fees shall be paid by the applicant for such permit to the city clerk at the time of or before the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1977, § 15.36.080)  
Sec. 18-316. - Approval of route; clearance of utility lines. 
(a)  No permit for the removal of any house, building or structure upon any street shall be issued until the route to be taken in such removal shall have been approved by the city council. 
(b)  In all cases where it is necessary to remove any electric line, telephone line or telegraph line, it shall be the duty of the house mover to give not less than 24 hours' notice to the public utility company or person owning or operating the lines. The notice shall state the place, the construction which is necessary to be removed or temporarily changed or altered, the date on which it is desired to have such clearance made, and the time it will be necessary to keep such space clear. No building, house or structure shall be moved over the streets of the city until the city or the public utility company or the person owning or operating the public utility line shall have had a reasonable time, not exceeding seven days, to make such clearance. The city may make reasonable charges to the house mover for the cost of removing, raising or temporarily changing or altering such lines owned or operated by the city. The house mover shall pay any costs charged by a utility company for the raising or removing of or temporarily changing or altering such lines owned by the company. 
(Code 1977, § 15.36.090)  
ARTICLE VII. - FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 18-317. - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
That International Fuel Gas Code, as sponsored and published by the International Code Council (hereinafter, the "IFGC"), without appendices, in the version as currently and may hereafter be adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the City of Mustang, State of Oklahoma, as governing law controlling all matters concerning fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances within the City of Mustang, including but not limited to the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except as to such portions as are specifically amended or deleted in this chapter. It is the intention of this section that subsequent editions of the IFGC and any amendments thereto adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission shall apply within the City of Mustang and constitute the fuel gas code of the City of Mustang effective from and after April 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 1, 11-4-2014; Ord. No. 1136, § 1, 2-16-2016) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1136, adopted Feb. 16, 2016, changed the title of § 18-317 from "2009 International Fuel Gas Code adopted" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 18-318. - Amendments to the 2009 Fuel Gas Code. 
The City of Mustang hereby adopts all amendments of the 2009 International Fuel Gas Code (herein "IFGC") as prescribed by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, except as amended herein: 
(1)  IFGC § 101.1 Title. Insert "City of Mustang, Oklahoma" 
(2)  IFGC § 106.6.2 Fee schedule is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "Fees will be set by the Mustang City Council as described in Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma." 
(3)  IFGC § 106.6.3 Fee refunds is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "In case of abandonment or discontinuance, the cost of work performed under a permit may be estimated, an adjustment of the fee made, and the portion of the fee for uncompleted work returned to the permit holder if requested in writing. Such refund shall be made at the discretion of the City Manager or his designee, provided that no refund of a prescribed minimum fee shall be made. If such discontinuance is due to revocation of permit, a similar adjustment and return may be made; provided that no refund shall be made until all penalties incurred or imposed by due authority have been collected. After such a refund has been made, no work shall be resumed until a new application has been made and a new permit has been issued." 
(4)  IFGC § 108.4 Violation penalties is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or who fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in Section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained constitutes a separate offense. The application of the penalty in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions." 
(5)  IFGC § 108.5 Stop work orders. The last sentence of this section is amended as follows: "Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be deemed to be in violation and subject to the penalties outlined in IMC[IFGC] § 108.4 as noted above." 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 2, 11-4-2014)  
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages and low-point beer, ch. 6; amusements and entertainment, ch. 10; animal establishment and animal shelter permits, § 14-191 et seq.; emergency services, ch. 34; fees, ch. 42; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 82; sign contractors, § 94-101 et seq.; taxation, ch. 110; utilities, ch. 118; commercial districts, § 122-471 et seq.; industrial districts, § 122-641 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Security guards and private investigators. 
The provisions of the Oklahoma Security Guard and Private Investigator Act (59 O.S. § 1750.1 et seq.), are adopted by reference and punishable as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 22-2. - Septic tank haulers. 
Septic tank haulers operating within the city boundaries shall be required to hold a valid state septic hauler's license, a copy of which must be on file with the city clerk. Haulers must submit reports of all hauling activity, upon the form provided by the community development department, for the previous month, to the community development department, on or before the fifth day of each succeeding month, provided that, if the fifth day falls on a weekend or holiday, then the report shall be due the first working day thereafter. Each day of operation without a valid license shall constitute a separate offense. Each day following the due date for reporting of each succeeding month for which a report of activity for the previous month has not been submitted as required in this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.100(F); Ord. No. 661, § 1, 3-4-1997) 
State Law reference— Licensing of septic tank cleaners, 27A O.S. § 2-6-801.  
Sec. 22-3. - Taxicabs; license required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate one or more taxicabs in the city without securing a taxicab operator's license. Upon application, the clerk of the municipality will issue such license upon the following conditions: 
(1)  That the applicant pay an annual license tax in the amount fixed in section 42-22; 
(2)  That the applicant take out and file with the clerk proof of financial responsibility as set forth in 47 O.S. § 8-104. Such license shall be in effect only when such policy is in force. 
(b)  Such licenses shall expire on April 30. 
(Code 1977, § 5.24.010)  
Secs. 22-4—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TELEPHONE EXCHANGES 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Fee levied; payment. 
There is levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each and every person operating a telephone exchange in the city, in an amount equal to two percent of the gross revenues for each current year for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the city, to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulations, and police control of the construction of lines and equipment of the telephone company in the city. The inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the city on or before July 1 of each year, and shall be paid into and appropriated and expended from the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5.28.010)  
Sec. 22-32. - Fee to be in lieu of other fees and taxes. 
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this article by the owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied by this article shall be and continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, exercises, franchises, licenses, privileges and permit fees or taxes or assessments except ad valorem taxes; provided, however, that it is not intended to extinguish or abrogate any existing arrangements whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit, duct space or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm and/or police call systems of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5.28.020)  
Secs. 22-33—22-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PAWNBROKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, 59 O.S. § 1501 et seq.; local regulation of pawnbrokers, 59 O.S. § 1514. 
 
Sec. 22-61. - License. 
(a)  No person shall operate as a pawnbroker or as a receiver of goods under chattel mortgage without first securing a city license and making payment therefor as provided in this article. 
(b)  There is levied as a license fee for the operation of the business of pawnbroker the sum fixed in section 42-22, per year. All licenses shall expire on October 31 after they are issued; provided any license issued after May 1 of the calendar year shall be charged a one-half year license fee. 
(c)  Any pawnbroker who is guilty of a violation of this article, or who shall permit any employee in the course of such employment to be guilty of a violation of this article, may, in addition to the fine otherwise provided as a penalty therefor, upon conviction, be deprived of his license; and upon such conviction the municipal judge may order such license revoked. 
(Code 1977, § 5.32.010)  
Sec. 22-62. - Records, tickets required. 
Every pawnbroker shall keep at his place of business a register in which he will enter in writing a minute description of all property taken, purchased or received by him, including any number that may be in or upon any article, together with the time, name and place of residence (giving street and number) of the person leaving the property, also the amount loaned, the interest charged and the time when the loan falls due; which registry shall be kept clean and legible. He shall make such entry within one hour after the receipt or purchase of such property. Every entry will be made in ink and will not in any manner be obliterated or erased. To the person negotiating or leaving such property, he shall give a plainly written or printed ticket, having upon it a full and perfect copy of all entries required to be kept in such register, for which copy no charge shall be made. It will be the further duty of every pawnbroker to make out and deliver to the chief of police, or any police officer upon demand, a legible and correct copy from the register of all personal property or other valuable things received, deposited or purchased, together with the time when received or purchased and a description of the person by whom left in pledge or from whom the personal property was purchased. No person will be required to furnish such description of any property purchased from manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an established place of business or of any goods purchased at open sale or from any bankrupt stock, or from any other person having an established place of business, but such goods must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open and legitimate purchase, and must be shown to any officer when demanded. 
(Code 1977, § 5.32.020)  
Sec. 22-63. - Inspection of register or merchandise. 
The register required by section 22-62 shall at all times be kept open to the inspection of the chief of police and sheriff of the county, or the deputy of either, any officer of the police force of the city, the city attorney and the district attorney of the county, and anyone authorized in writing for that purpose by the chief or captain of the police force, which authority shall be exhibited to the pawnbroker. The pawnbroker will, upon request, show and exhibit to such person or officer for inspection, any articles purchased, taken or received by him. 
(Code 1977, § 5.32.030)  
Sec. 22-64. - Business hours. 
No pawnbroker will purchase, take or receive on deposit or in any other manner from any person, any article of property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:30 a.m., and all pawnbrokers will remain closed all day on Sunday and legal holidays. 
(Code 1977, § 5.32.040)  
Sec. 22-65. - Soliciting business on streets. 
It is unlawful for any person to solicit business for any pawnshop from any person while such person is on the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places within the city, or to call to or in any manner attract the attention of any person while such person is on the streets, sidewalks, alleys or any public place for the purpose of asking such person to patronize any pawnshop. 
(Code 1977, § 5.32.050)  
Secs. 22-66—22-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1132, §§ 1—4, adopted Dec. 1, 2015, repealed art. IV in its entirety and enacted a new art. IV to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 22-101—22-110, 22-151—22-164, 22-181—22-197, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 712, § 1, adopted June 15, 1999. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-101. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Mustang Cable Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-102. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Affiliate means an entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with a franchisee. 
Application means any proposal, submission or request to: 
(1)  Construct and operate a cable system within the city; 
(2)  Transfer a franchise or control of a franchise; 
(3)  Renew a franchise; 
(4)  Modify a franchise; or 
(5)  Seek any other relief from the city pursuant to this article, a franchise agreement, the cable act as amended, or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rules and regulations. 
Basic service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
Cable act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming and other programming service. 
Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Subchapter II of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (D) an open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573; or (E) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
City means the City of Mustang, a municipal corporation. 
Council or city council means the City Council of The City of Mustang, Oklahoma, or such other legally appointed or elected successor or agency constituting the governing body of the city. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or elected successor thereof. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, (including a renewal of an authorization which has been granted subject to 47 U.S.C. § 546), issued by the city, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system within public rights-of-way for the business of delivering a cable service to the residents of the city, which is a business affected with a public interest. Said business could not be conducted without the occupation of and placement of private commercial facilities in the public streets and other public ways of the city, which is essential to the performance of the general function or purpose of the grantee. 
Franchise fee means the fee a franchisee is required to pay under the terms of a franchise for consideration of the rights and privileges granted therein, subject to the limitations of 47 U.S.C. § 542. 
Franchisee means any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article and shall include any successor thereto. 
Gross revenues means all cash, credits, property or other consideration of any kind or nature received directly or indirectly by the franchisee, its subsidiaries and affiliates who are cable operators arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from the operation of the system to provide cable service within the city. Gross revenues shall include, but not be limited to, monthly fees charged to subscribers for basic service; any optional, pay per view, premium, per-channel or per-program service or charges for any other type of service; installation, disconnection and change in service fees; leased channel fees; fees, payments or other consideration received from programmers for carriage of cable service programming; converter and equipment rental fees; advertising revenues; revenues from home shopping channels; fees from use of access channels; and revenues from studio rental, production fees and equipment charges when applicable. Gross revenues shall not include any sales, excise or other taxes or fees which are imposed directly on any cable service subscriber by any governmental unit or agency and which are collected by the franchisee on behalf of such governmental unit or agency, late payment fees, revenues from contracts for in-home maintenance service unless they relate solely to the maintenance of equipment used only for the provisioning of cable services and not for the provisioning of any other service provided by a franchisee or its affiliates, revenue from the sale of capital assets or equipment. Exchange or other nonmonetary compensation shall be includable in gross revenues at the retail value of the compensation received by the franchisee. 
May is permissive. 
Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, normal business hours must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
Ordinance means the Mustang Cable Ordinance, unless otherwise indicated. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, corporation or any lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said individual, partnership, association, organization or corporation. 
Public school means any elementary, junior high or high school within the city by a public school system. 
Public way means each of the following which has been dedicated to the public or hereafter is dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public ways and extensions and additions thereto, together with such other public property and areas that the city shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time. 
Service area means the present municipal boundaries of the city and any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means. 
State means the State of Oklahoma. 
Shall and will are mandatory and not merely directory. 
Subscriber means any person who lawfully receives any form of cable service from a franchisee. 
Transfer of franchise means any transaction in which: 
(1)  Any ownership or other interest in a franchise or its system is transferred from one person or group of persons to another person or group of persons, none of whom already own a controlling ownership interest in the transferring person; or 
(2)  The rights and/or obligations held by the franchisee under a franchise agreement are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons, none of whom already own a controlling ownership interest in the transferring person. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-103. - Waiver by franchisee. 
A franchisee shall abide by all provisions of this article and the franchise agreement, and by accepting a franchise agrees that it will not at any time in the future set up as against the city or the council that claim that the provisions of this article are unreasonable, unlawful, arbitrary or void, except as to matters that are preempted or superseded by federal or state law or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-104. - Choice of law, venue and attorney fees. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, this article and any franchise agreement shall be governed by the laws of the state. The district court of the county and the United States Court for the Western District of Oklahoma shall have venue and jurisdiction exclusively for any action in law or equity which may be instituted to enforce the terms of this article, the franchise agreement or other applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  If any legal action is instituted by either party to enforce any terms of this article or the franchise agreement, the attorney fees, costs of the action including, but not limited to, court costs, expert witness fees and all other actual expenses incurred by the prevailing party shall be paid by the losing party. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-105. - Forfeiture or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. The city reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise only under the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach under this chapter and the franchise grant: 
(1)  If the franchisee should default in the performance of any of its material obligations under this chapter or under the franchise. 
(2)  If the franchisee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the liability and indemnification coverages as may be required herein. 
(3)  If any court of competent jurisdiction, the Federal Communications Commission or any state regulatory body by rules, decision, or other action determines that any material provision of the franchise documents, including this chapter, is invalid or unenforceable prior to the commencement of construction of the cable system. 
(4)  If the franchisee should frequently violate any orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the franchisee relative to this franchise. 
(5)  If the franchisee fails to receive necessary Federal Communications Commission certification. 
(6)  If the franchisee fails to provide cable services for any reason within the control of the franchisee over the cable system. 
(7)  If the franchisee is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have attempted to evade any of the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city. 
(b)  [ At fault .] A franchisee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond the franchisee's control. A fault shall not be deemed to be beyond the franchisee's control if committed by an affiliate or a corporation or other business entity in which the franchisee holds a controlling interest, whether directly or indirectly. 
(c)  Procedure prior to revocation. 
(1)  The city manager may make written demand that the franchisee do or comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the franchisee continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand, the city manager may place his request for termination of the franchise upon the next regular council meeting agenda. The city manager shall cause to be served upon such franchisee, at least ten days prior to the date of such council meeting, a written notice of his intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the city clerk at least once ten days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(2)  The council shall consider the request of the city manager and shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the franchisee was with just cause. 
(3)  If such failure, refusal or neglect by the franchisee was with just cause, the council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
(4)  If the council shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by the franchisee was without just cause, then the council may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of such franchisee shall be terminated and bond forfeited unless there be compliance by the franchisee within such period as the council may fix. 
(d)  Disposition of facilities. In the event a franchise is revoked, or is otherwise terminated, the city may order the removal of the network facilities from the city within a period of time as determined by the city or require the original franchisee to maintain and operate its network until a subsequent franchisee is selected. 
(e)  Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, the franchisee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the company's removal of its equipment and appliances without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires, or attachments. The city shall inspect and approve the condition of the public ways and public places, and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal. The liability indemnity and insurance as provided herein and the performance bond provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the franchisee with the terms and conditions of this paragraph and this chapter. 
(f)  Restoration by city, reimbursement of costs. In the event of a failure by the franchisee to complete any work required by subsection (c) above and/or subsection (d) above, or any other work required by city law or ordinance within the time as may be established and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may cause such work to be done and the franchisee shall reimburse the city the costs thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the city may recover such costs through the performance bond provided by the franchisee. The city shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Extended operation. Upon the revocation of a franchise, the city may require the franchisee to continue to operate the network for an extended period of time not to exceed one year from the date of such expiration or revocation, or as otherwise provided for by applicable law. The franchisee shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the cable television system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. During such interim period, the franchisee shall not sell any of the system assets nor shall the franchisee make any physical, material, administrative or operational change that would tend to (1) degrade the quality of service to the subscribers, (2) decrease income, or (3) materially increase expenses without the express permission, in writing, of the city or its assignee. The city shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(h)  City's rights not affected. The revocation or termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the city under the franchise or any provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-106. - Administration. 
(a)  The city manager, either directly or through a duly appointed designee, shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-to-day administration of this article and any franchise agreement issued hereunder. The city manager shall be empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the city, except for those actions specified in this article that are reserved to the council. The city manager may recommend that the council take certain actions with respect to the franchise. The city manager shall keep the council apprised of developments in cable and provide the council with assistance, advice and recommendations as appropriate. 
(b)  A franchisee shall have the right to appeal to the council any decision of the city manager relating to such franchisee or its franchise agreement. Such appeal must be made by written request within 15 calendar days of the city manager's written decision which the franchisee seeks to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-107. - Filings and communications with regulatory agencies. 
A franchisee shall comply with the rules of any court or agency requiring service of pleadings, filings, or other documents upon the city. Upon request of the city, a franchisee shall provide the city a copy of, or an electronic link to, all petitions, applications and any communications submitted by the franchisee to or received from the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting, directly or indirectly, the system operations authorized pursuant to a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 12-1-2015)  
Secs. 22-108—22-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 22-151. - Grant of authority; franchise required. 
(a)  In order to make cable services available to the residents of the city, the city may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this article and the execution of a franchise agreement. 
(b)  No person may construct or operate a system in the city without a franchise granted by the city and having entered into a franchise agreement with the city. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the city from seeking additional franchisees at any time pursuant to a request for proposals or applications. Responses shall comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-152. - Characteristics. 
(a)  A franchise shall be for a term or period of time not to exceed 15 years to serve all or specified areas of the city, and shall take effect upon the execution of a franchise agreement. 
(b)  A franchise authorizes the franchisee to use the public ways within the city for installing cables, wires, lines, underground conduit and other facilities to operate a cable system within the city, but does not authorize such use on private property or privately owned easements. Provided, nothing herein is intended nor shall be construed as limiting any right that may be granted to franchisee under federal law to use private easements dedicated to compatible uses without obtaining the owner's consent. 
(c)  A franchise shall be nonexclusive, and will not preclude the issuance of another franchise, nor affect the city's right to authorize use of any public way by other persons as it deems appropriate. However, any additional grant of franchise to provide cable service in the city shall be in compliance with applicable law. 
(d)  A franchise shall not relieve the franchisee of any requirement of any applicable ordinance, rule, regulation or specification of the city lawfully enacted by the city. The franchisee shall at all times be subject to the lawful exercise of the police power of the city to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city. However, any ordinance, rule, regulation or specification of the city enacted after a franchisee has entered into a franchise agreement shall not materially alter the rights or obligations of the franchisee under the existing ordinance and franchise agreement unless specifically authorized by state or federal law. 
(e)  The franchisee, at its expense, shall comply with all laws, orders and regulations of federal, state and municipal authorities and with any directive of any public officer pursuant to law who shall legally impose any regulation, order or duty upon the grantee with respect to the franchise. 
(f)  Any franchise granted hereunder shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled, or exercisable by the grantee, or any successor to any interest of the grantee, of, or pertaining to, the construction, operation, or maintenance of any cable system in the city; and the acceptance of any franchise hereunder shall operate, as between the grantee and the city, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities within the city, to the effect that, as between the grantee and the city, all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any cable television system in the city shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to said franchise, and not under or pursuant to another right, privilege, power, immunity, or authority whatsoever. 
(g)  The provisions of this article shall apply to a franchise agreement as if fully set out in such agreement. The terms of this article shall prevail over conflicting provisions of the franchise agreement unless the franchise agreement contains an explicit intent of waiver. 
(h)  The franchisee shall make cable service available to all residents and businesses within the city, subject to the provisions of subsection 22-181(a)(3). 
(i)  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted except those specifically prescribed therein. 
(j)  Any privilege claimed under a franchise by a grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior existing lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property. 
(k)  Any franchise granted hereunder shall be binding upon the grantee, and all successors, lessees or assignees as may be approved by the city. 
(l)  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department, or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other officer, employee, department, or board of the city. 
(m)  Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of the city, utility company, or from others maintaining utilities in streets. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-153. - Applications for grant, modifications or transfer. 
(a)  In selecting a franchisee pursuant to this chapter, the city may prepare a request for proposal to seek bids for a cable system to be established by franchise in the city. This request for proposal shall include information and instructions relating to the preparation and filing of proposals. 
(b)  A written application shall be filed with the city clerk for the: 
(1)  Grant of a new franchise; 
(2)  Modification of a franchise agreement; 
(3)  Transfer of a franchise pursuant to this article, the franchise agreement or the cable act. 
The applicant has the burden to demonstrate compliance with all applicable laws and entitlement to the relief sought. 
(c)  The applicant must file an original and five copies of the application together with any required filing fee as set forth in subsection (j) of this section. The application shall also conform to any request for proposals and shall contain all requested information. 
(d)  All applications shall identify persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application. 
(e)  All applications shall identify persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application. 
(f)  All applications accepted for filing by the city shall be available during the city's regular business hours for public inspection. 
(g)  An application for the initial grant of a franchise shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and identification of ownership and control of the applicant, including: 
a.  The names and addresses of the ten largest holders of an ownership interest and all persons with a five percent or more ownership interest in the applicant; 
b.  The names of persons who control the applicant including, without limitation, all officers and directors; 
c.  Any other business affiliation and cable interest of each named person. 
(2)  A statement as to whether the applicant, or any person controlling the applicant, or any officer, director or major stockholder has been adjudged bankrupt, had a cable franchise revoked, or been found guilty of any violation of any security or antitrust law, or of the commission of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude; and if so, the identification of such person and a full explanation of such circumstances. 
(3)  A demonstration of the applicant's technical, legal and financial ability to construct and/or operate the proposed system, including identification of key personnel. 
(4)  A description of the applicant's prior experience in system ownership and construction, and identification of all communities the applicant or its principals have served. 
(5)  Identification of the proposed cable service area and a detailed description of the facilities proposed and the characteristics of the system including, but not limited to, channel capacity, technical design, and performance and quality expectations. 
(6)  A detailed description of the construction of the proposed system, together with a proposed construction schedule. Where appropriate, the applicant shall include an explanation of how services will be converted from the existing facilities to the new facilities. 
(7)  A description of all services to be provided, including, without limitation, all broadcast and nonbroadcast signals and all nontelevision services to be carried on the system. If tiers of service are to be used by the franchisee, a description of each tier service to be available to subscribers shall be provided. 
(8)  A description of the proposed rate schedule for cable service and equipment to be provided or used in association with the basic cable service tier, together with all forms or information required to allow the determination by the city of the maximum initial permitted rates and charges. Additionally, and for informational purposes, the franchisee shall disclose to the city any and all charges to be made for all other services and equipment. 
(9)  A demonstration of how the applicant's proposal will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, taking into account the costs thereof including a description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent community needs assessment conducted by or for the city. 
(10)  A statement showing pro-forma financial projections for the first five years. 
(11)  An affidavit of the applicant or authorized officer thereof certifying to the truth and accuracy of all information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments and that the application proposal meets all regulatory authority requirements. 
(12)  Any other information which may be necessary to demonstrate compliance with all laws as may be relevant to the city's consideration of the application. 
(h)  An application for modifications of the franchise agreement shall include, as a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The specified modifications requested. 
(2)  The justification and basis for the requested modification, including a statement of impact the requested modification may have on subscribers or others, and the financial impact approval or disapproval may have on the applicant. 
(3)  Any other relevant information which may be reasonably necessary for the city to make an informed decision. 
(i)  An application for approval of the transfer of a franchise shall comply with the requirements of section 22-158. 
(j)  Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee in the amount of $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-154. - Grant of franchise. 
(a)  The city may grant or renew a franchise for a period not to exceed 15 years in accordance with the requirements of this article and the terms of a franchise agreement. 
(b)  The grant of a franchise may be conditioned upon completion of construction within times prescribed or upon performance of specific obligations as set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(c)  Proposals will be evaluated according to the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the applicant as required or suggested by the Federal Communications Commission. Preference may be given to applicants demonstrating the best total service package and more reasonable installment and subscriber rate schedules, the most expeditious installation schedule, and to those applicants demonstrating a significant sensitivity to the knowledge of local conditions. 
(d)  The application shall be reviewed by the city manager and staff to determine whether the application complies with all requirements of this division. If, the application is sufficient, the city manager and the applicant shall negotiate the terms and conditions of the proposed franchise agreement. The proposed franchise agreement shall provide that it is subject to the approval of the qualified electors of the city. The proposed franchise agreement shall further provide that the applicant acknowledges its acceptance of the proposed franchise and the obligation of the applicant to comply with all the provisions of this article, the proposed franchise agreement and the terms and conditions of the applicant's proposal as submitted to the city as a part of the application, except to the extent such items are preempted or superseded by federal or state law. 
(e)  After examining all applications submitted pursuant to the prescribed procedures, with respect to the applicant's legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications, including adequacy and feasibility of its construction plans, and after reviewing the recommendations of the staff, the council shall select the person who they consider has presented the proposal in the best interests of the city and if required by applicable law, shall submit the question of granting a nonexclusive franchise, pursuant to the terms of this chapter, to the citizens of the city for their choice either at a special or general election. However, no provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed as to require the council to submit to a vote any prospective grantee following the receipt of any franchise application. 
(f)  The grant, transfer, modification of a franchise agreement or other actions related to such proceedings may be subject to a processing fee in an amount not to exceed the city's reasonable out of pocket expenses. In the event of an initial grant of a franchise, such costs shall include fees incurred by the city for consultants or attorneys required to consider the application. The city shall notify the franchisee of such costs and the franchisee shall have 30 days to render payment in full. All fees shall be due the city irrespective of the approval or disapproval by the city of the requested action or the approval or disapproval by the electorate. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-155. - Acceptance and effective date of franchise. 
(a)  No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and passed by the city council or a vote of the qualified electors, as applicable, shall become effective for any purpose unless and until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed with the city clerk, duly executed by the proper officers of the franchisee. Written acceptance, which shall be in the form and substance approved by the municipal counselor, must contain, in addition to any other matters included, the following express representations by the grantee that: 
(1)  It has carefully read the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement and accepts all of the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and the franchise agreement and agrees to abide by same; and 
(2)  It further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this chapter and expressly waives any claims that any provisions hereof are unreasonable, arbitrary or void; and 
(3)  By accepting the franchise, it acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept same by any promise, verbal or written, by or on behalf of the city or by any third person regarding any term or condition of this chapter or the franchise agreement not expressed therein. The grantee further pledges that no promise or inducement, oral or written, has been made to any city employee or official regarding receipt of the cable system franchise. 
(b)  The written acceptance shall be filed by the grantee not later than 12:01 p.m. of the 30th day next following the passage of an ordinance approving a franchise, or if an election was allowed, following the franchise election granting such franchise. In default of the filing of such written acceptance as herein required, the grantee shall be deemed to have rejected and repudiated the franchise and shall be deemed to have forfeited the grantee's proposal bond or certified check in lieu thereof. Thereafter, the acceptance of the grantee shall not be received by the city clerk. The grantee shall have no rights, remedies, or redress unless and until the council, by resolution, shall determine that such acceptance be received, and then upon such terms and conditions as the council may impose. 
(c)  In addition to the written acceptance and within the same 30-day period the grantee shall: 
(1)  File a certificate of insurance as provided herein; and 
(2)  File a performance bond if required by the franchise; and 
(3)  Advise the city in writing of the grantee's address for mail and official notifications from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-156. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  Finding. The city has authority to grant a non-exclusive franchise to a cable television operator for the right to use the public streets, and other public ways, for the purpose of maintaining and operating a cable television business within the city. The business of delivering cable services to the residents of the city is a business affected with a public interest. The construction, installation, maintenance and operation of a cable system involves the occupation of and placement of private commercial facilities in the valuable and scarce public streets and other public ways within the city and which are maintained by the city at a significant cost, and such use is essential to the performance of the general function or purpose of the cable television operator. The city further finds that the grant of a franchise for use of rights-of-way to provide service is a valuable property right without which a grantee would be required to invest substantial capital. 
(b)  A grantee of a franchise hereunder shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount to be set by the franchise agreement as a percentage of gross revenues derived from operation of the cable system by the grantee to provide cable service. Such payment shall be in addition to any other payment, charge, permit fee or bond owed to the city by the grantee and shall not be construed as payment in lieu of personal or real property taxes levied by state, county or local authorities; provided, however, such fee shall include and be in lieu of any fee required by the city for any construction, building, or other permit for use or occupation of, or work in, the streets, except for the inspection fee and service charge levied under chapter 42 of this Code. As compensation for the use of valuable public ways and privileges granted to operate a system, and to defray the cost of the regulation, the franchisee shall pay to the city a franchise fee of three percent of the franchisee's gross revenues received from the operation of its system to provide cable service within the city. The city reserves the right to increase the franchise fee up to five percent of the franchisee's gross revenue upon 90 days' notice to the franchisee. Further, in the event the cable act, the FCC rules and regulations or other federal laws are amended to permit the city to assess a franchise fee of a greater amount than stated in this subsection, the city shall have the right to negotiate with the franchisee for an increase in the franchise fee to the maximum then permitted. 
(c)  The franchise fee shall be payable to the city on a quarterly basis and shall be due no later than 45 days after the end of the calendar quarter for which the franchise fee is being calculated. 
(d)  Should FCC, state or federal law or regulation be amended in the future to allow the city to recover fees for services not set forth in the definition of gross revenues set forth in section 22-102, then, in that event, the franchisee shall upon 90 days' written notice commence making the additional payment to the city as legally authorized and to the fullest extent of such authorization. 
(e)  If the franchise fee payment is not received by the city on the due date, the franchisee shall be assessed interest on any delinquency from the due date until paid in full at the rate of 18 percent per annum. If any franchise fee shall be delinquent for more than 90 days, the franchisee shall be deemed in material default and subject to the provisions of this article regarding termination of a franchise. 
(f)  The franchisee shall submit with each payment a report showing the amounts of gross revenues for the preceding quarter on which the franchise fee is determined. Additionally, the franchisee shall submit to the city an annual revenue audit statement within three months of the close of the fiscal year, setting forth the computation of gross revenues for the preceding year and an explanation of the method of computation. The annual statement shall be submitted to the city by a nationally recognized certified public accountant firm. The required reports shall be prepared at the expense of the franchisee on forms reasonably acceptable to the city and certified by the franchisee's chief financial officer or the certified public accountant firm. The same reports shall be due within 90 days of the termination of the franchise. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided in the cable act and FCC regulations, all payments required by this section shall be in addition to all other fees and payments required to be made by the franchisee to the city. 
(h)  Acceptance by the city of any payment shall not be construed as an accord or satisfaction that such payment is correct, nor shall acceptance be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for additional sums which may be due. 
(i)  The city shall have the right, at its cost and upon reasonable notice, to inspect and audit all books and records of the franchisee which may be necessary for the determination of gross revenues and computation of franchise fees due. If the city determines franchise fees have been underpaid in an amount in excess of three percent, the cost of audit shall be paid by the franchisee. The books and records necessary for such audit shall be maintained by the franchisee in Oklahoma County or Canadian County. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-157. - Renewal. 
A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be renewed pursuant to the procedures established by the Cable Act or such other procedure to which the city and a grantee mutually agree. In the event that the city and an existing franchisee cannot agree upon terms for renewal of the franchise agreement, the parties may mutually agree to hold over the current franchise agreement for no more than one year or as otherwise provided for by applicable federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-158. - Transfers. 
(a)  No transfer of a franchise shall occur without prior approval of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed. 
(b)  An application for a transfer of a franchise shall provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service, to the extent required by FCC rules. 
(c)  At least 120 calendar days prior to the contemplated effective date of a transfer, the franchisee shall submit to the city an application, together with any required FCC transfer forms, for approval of the transfer. To the extent consistent with FCC rules, such application and/or the FCC forms shall include the following: 
(1)  A statement of the reason for the contemplated transfer. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the proposed transferee. 
(3)  A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the proposed transferee, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  The names, business addresses, state of residence and country of citizenship of all general partners and corporate officers of the proposed transferee. 
b.  The names, business addresses, state of residence and country of citizenship of all persons and entities having, controlling or being entitled to have or control ten percent or more of the ownership of the proposed transferee and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity. 
c.  The name and address of any parent or subsidiary of the proposed transferee and of any other business entity owning or controlling in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the proposed transferee. 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement or annual report of the proposed transferee, for the three fiscal years immediately preceding the date of the request for transfer approval, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from the proposed transferee's lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the proposed transferee and the city, setting forth a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the proposed transfer to construct, install, maintain and operate the proposed system in the city. If the corporate or business entity organization of the proposed transferee has not been in existence for a full three years, the proposed transferee shall submit a certified financial statement for the period of existence. 
e.  A detailed description of all previous experience of the proposed transferee in operating cable television systems and providing cable television services or related or similar services, including a statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchises awarded to the proposed transferee, its parent, subsidiaries or affiliates currently operating or in the status of transfer; and the status of such franchises with respect to completion thereof. 
f.  Other information the city may reasonably request consistent with FCC regulations. 
(d)  In making a determination on whether to grant an application for a transfer of a franchise, the city council, in good faith, shall consider the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the transferee to operate the system; whether the incumbent franchisee is in material compliance with its franchise agreement and this article and, if not, the franchisee's or proposed transferee's commitment to cure such material noncompliance; and whether operation by the transferee would adversely affect cable service to subscribers, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest. 
(e)  No application for a transfer of a franchise shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this article and the franchise agreement, and that it will assume the obligations and liabilities of the previous franchisee under this article and the franchise agreement. 
(f)  Approval by the city of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under this article or the franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. 
(g)  The city may impose on a proposed transferee a processing fee to reimburse the city for its actual out of pocket costs in excess of the filing fee in considering an application for transfer of a franchise. The fee shall not exceed $10,000.00. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the forgoing, a franchisee may transfer a franchise agreement or cable system to an affiliate by providing written notice to the city at least 30 days in advance of such internal corporate restructuring or transfer, provided such transfer is not related to a merger or acquisition between the grantee or an affiliate and an unaffiliated third party. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-159. - Franchise reviews and modification. 
Upon written notice given by the city or the franchisee, one to the other, the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement may be modified, provided that both the city and the franchisee are agreeable to such modification. Modifications shall be directed toward effecting alterations in the terms and conditions to reflect those technical, economic, or regulatory changes which have occurred during the interim period. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-160. - Election and costs. 
The Cable Act preempts any state or local requirement of a voter-approved cable television franchise. In the event the preemption is eliminated and applicable state or local law requires franchises to be voter-approved, then, in order for a nonexclusive franchise to be granted pursuant to this chapter, an election must be held and a majority of those voting must vote in favor of the granting of such franchise. The entire cost of the election together with all printing and publishing costs relating thereto shall be prepaid by the applicant selected by the council to be grantee, regardless of whether or not the applicant is granted a franchise by said election. When the actual costs of the election are known, the final payment may be adjusted accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-161. - Insurance. 
(a)  The franchisee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, at its own cost and expense, automobile insurance on all its vehicles, and general comprehensive liability insurance, insuring the franchisee and the city, the council, its officers, private subcontractors, agents and employees, whether elected or appointed, from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for loss, injury or damage to persons or property, both real and personal, occasioned or caused by the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of the system. The insurance shall provide amounts of coverage not less than the following: 
General Liability Insurance 
Bodily injury per person ..... $1,000,000.00 
Bodily injury per occurrence ..... 2,000,000.00 
Property damage per occurrence ..... 500,000.00 
Automobile Insurance 
Bodily injury per person ..... 1,000,000.00 
Bodily injury per occurrence ..... 2,000,000.00 
Property damage per occurrence ..... 500,000.00 
In no event shall the coverage or amounts be less than those established as the city's liability limits under Oklahoma Governmental Tort Claims Act, as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  The franchisee shall also provide workers' compensation coverage as required by the laws of the state. 
(c)  All insurance policies shall be with companies licensed to conduct business in the state. 
(d)  All insurance policies must name the city as an additional insured and no cancellation shall be effective, except upon 30 days' written notice to the city, and unless another policy is in effect on or before the date of cancellation. 
(e)  The insurance coverage, as evidenced by the certificates of insurance, shall be filed and maintained with the city. 
(f)  The franchisee shall provide proof to the city of compliance with this section no later than the effective date of the franchise. 
(g)  If the franchisee fails to maintain the insurance required in this section, the city may, at its option, obtain and keep such insurance in full force and effect. The franchisee shall promptly reimburse the city for such insurance costs. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-162. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Except in the event of the city's, its employees' or agents' negligence or wrongful acts, the franchisee shall, at its cost and expense, indemnify, save, hold harmless and defend the city, its officials, boards, commissions, agents, consultants and employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, demands, penalties, liabilities, proceedings or judgments for damages or equitable relief filed by third parties resulting from or arising out of or through: 
(1)  The franchisee's construction, installation, maintenance or operation of its system. 
(2)  Any processes or procedures, acts or omissions by the franchisee in connection with the consideration of an award to the franchisee of a franchise and/or any amendments thereto. 
(3)  The conduct of the franchisee's business, including, without limitation, any acts or omissions of the franchisee, its servants, employees or agents, whether or not such act or omission is authorized, required, allowed or prohibited by this article or the franchise agreement. 
(b)  This indemnification shall include all expenses, including, but not limited to, out of pocket expenses, attorneys' fees and litigation expenses incurred by the city in defending itself from such claims and demands, provided, if any action at law or suit in equity is instituted by a third party (a "claim") with respect to which the city intends to seek indemnification under this section, the city shall promptly notify the franchisee of such action or suit. The franchisee shall have the right to conduct and control any claim through counsel of its own choosing, but the city may, at its election, participate in a defense of any such claim at its sole cost and expense. It is further provided that if a conflict of interest should exist or develop between the franchisee and the city, then the city may proceed in the litigation, claim, proceeding or action which, in the exercise of its discretionary authority, represents the best interest of the city, at its own cost and expense. 
(c)  This indemnification shall also include, but not be limited to, claims based on invasion of right of privacy, libel, slander, copyright infringements, defamation, violation of trade name, service mark or patent rights. 
(d)  In addition to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own separate counsel at its own costs. Compliance by the franchisee with these indemnity provisions shall not limit any other remedies available to the city, at law or equity or waive any defense, position or objection the city may assert. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as an intent to waive or circumvent the provisions of the Governmental Tort Claims Act, 51 O.S. § 151 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-163. - Performance bond. 
(a)  The franchise agreement shall provide that, prior to the initial commencement of any system construction, upgrade or other work in the streets or other public ways of the city, the franchisee shall establish and maintain a performance bond in favor of the city, in an amount specified in the franchise agreement or other authorization as may be necessary to ensure the franchisee's faithful performance of each term and condition of this article, the franchise agreement and all applicable ordinances, statutes, rules and regulations, relating to the performance of any construction, upgrade or other work which is required of the franchisee. 
(b)  If the franchisee shall fail to fulfill the material obligations as imposed, or breaches any such obligations, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally, from the principal and sureties, any damages or loss suffered by the city proximately resulting from the failure of the franchisee to faithfully perform the material provisions of this article and the franchise agreement, including the cost of removal of property of the franchisee, the cost of completing the obligations of the franchisee, together with a reasonable attorney's fee. 
(c)  The franchise agreement may provide the amounts, terms and periods of maintenance of such performance bond. Upon completion of all construction, upgrade or other work in the streets or other public ways to the satisfaction of the city, the city may reduce the amount of the bond to an amount determined by the city sufficient to protect the city in the event of breach. Bond requirements may be also increased by the city to secure additional construction upgrade or other work. 
(d)  Any performance bond required by this action shall be issued by a surety authorized to conduct business in the state. The performance bond shall contain a restriction prohibiting cancellation or lapse without 30 days' written notice to the city from the surety or issuer of the performance bond of its intention to cancel or not renew. In the event of such cancellation or nonrenewal, the franchisee shall establish and maintain another performance bond, subject to the terms and conditions contained in this section; the intent of this provision is to prevent any lapse in coverage of a performance bond so long as applicable and required. 
(e)  The performance bond shall be filed and maintained with the city clerk. 
(f)  The rights available to the city pursuant to the performance bond are in addition to all other rights and remedies available to the city. The exercise of any such rights shall not be construed to excuse or waive unfaithful performance or breach by the franchisee, or limit the liability of the franchisee to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-164. - Maps, reports and records. 
(a)  A franchisee shall maintain up-to-date copies of the franchisee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms for regular subscriber service, policy regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the franchisee's policy in connection with its subscribers, and shall provide such information to the city upon request. 
(b)  The franchisee shall at all times maintain records sufficient to demonstrate the proper payment of the franchise fee required by section 22-156 of this chapter. 
(c)  A franchisee shall maintain a full and complete set of plans, records and "as built" maps showing the exact location of all cable system equipment installed or in use in the city streets, exclusive of subscriber service drops. Plans, records and "as built" maps will be available for inspection by the city manager or his designee during normal business hours. Copies of maps shall be provided upon request in a mutually agreeable format. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to inspect the books and records specified in this section and such other records as may be reasonably required by the city to perform its regulatory responsibilities under this article and the Cable Act. The city agrees to carry out any such inspection at reasonable hours and upon reasonable notice. Access by the city to the franchisee's books and records shall not be denied on grounds that such books and records contain proprietary or confidential information, provided, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality of any such information. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Secs. 22-165—22-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK AND FRANCHISEE BUSINESS PRACTICES 
 
Sec. 22-181. - Minimum facility and service. 
(a)  The following are minimum requirements for facilities and service for all cable franchises granted by the city. The city may establish in the franchise agreement additional requirements, where the city and franchisee determine that additional requirements are necessary to meet public needs. 
(1)  The system shall be capable of both one-way and two-way transmission and shall consist of a fiber optic trunk system consisting of a series of nodes and a coaxial cable distribution system. The system must be capable of delivering, at a minimum, 110 6MHZ analog channels (750 MHZ) with converters or digital/high definition signals. 
(2)  The franchisee shall provide one outlet consisting of all non-pay-per-view or premium channels cable service without charge to all facilities and/or buildings owned or occupied by the city or by an educational institution. 
(3)  Cable service shall be available to every dwelling and business within the city, unless residents reside in a remote or relatively inaccessible area or in annexed areas already served by another cable operator. The franchisee will build to these remote and inaccessible areas and extend service inside the city limits as long as such extension meets the return on investment as established by the franchisee. However, at a minimum, the franchisee will build to these remote and inaccessible areas and extend service inside the city limits on the following schedule: For every one-fourth mile of cable plant required to serve a particular section of the city, ten or more customers must have placed orders for service. Expenses associated with the provision of service to businesses beyond 125 feet from an existing subscriber tap shall be shared equally between the franchisee and such businesses. 
(b)  The franchisee shall provide two access channels for non-commercial educational and/or governmental access programming, The city may delegate the responsibility for programming the educational channel to a public educational institution. 
(c)  A franchisee shall provide leased access channels as required by federal law. 
(d)  The franchisee shall comply with the Federal Emergency Alert System Regulations, 47 C.F.R. Part 11. 
(e)  The system will provide standby power to be installed at locations as determined by the franchisee, but shall include backup power at the headend. The power system shall be capable of self activation at any time there is a loss of commercial power and shall be capable of continuous generation for an undetermined amount of time and perform self diagnostics. 
(f)  When constructing or reconstructing the system, the franchisee shall place its facilities in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The franchisee shall place its cable, appurtenances and transmission facilities underground in those areas where the transmission and distribution facilities of the telephone company and electric company are both located underground. 
(2)  The franchisee shall, remove, relocate, or rearrange its cable, appurtenances and transmission facilities underground in any area where, during the term of a franchise, and upon reasonable notice by the city, the transmission and distribution facilities of the telephone company and electric company are moved underground. A franchisee shall have access, on a non-discriminatory basis, to any public funds under the control or direction of the city, used to reimburse the costs of removing, relocating, or rearranging facilities located in the public ways. 
(3)  Where aerial cable is allowed, the franchisee shall not erect any new poles along any public way except as may be reasonably necessary to fill small gaps in the existing aerial utility systems and only then with approval of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(g)  The franchisee shall make no pavement cuts in the installation, maintenance or removal of its system, except upon compliance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-182. - Signal quality requirements. 
The franchisee shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the FCC with regard to the operation of a cable system, including but not limited to technical requirements, subscriber notices and closed captioning obligations. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-183. - Carriage of broadcast video signals. 
The franchisee shall receive and distribute all broadcast television signals as required by the Cable Act and FCC rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-184. - Erection, removal and common use of poles. 
(a)  No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the franchisee without prior approval of the city. The franchisee shall have no vested interest in the location of any pole or wire-holding structure. Such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the franchisee at its own expense whenever the city determines that public convenience would be enhanced thereby. 
(b)  If poles or other wire-holding structures are already existing for use in serving the city and are available for use by the franchisee, and the franchisee does not make arrangements for such use, the city may require the franchisee to use such poles or structures, upon reasonable terms and conditions, if the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby, and the terms of the use available to the franchisee are just and reasonable. 
(c)  Where a public utility serving the city desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the franchisee, but an agreement therefor with the franchisee cannot be reached, the city may require the franchisee to permit such use for such consideration and on such terms as the city shall determine to be just and reasonable, taking into account pole rates charged the franchisee by the public utility, if the city determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with operations of the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-185. - Safety requirements. 
(a)  The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. 
(b)  The franchisee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the city, and as such codes may respectively be amended or replaced, and all applicable state and local laws, codes and ordinances. 
(c)  All structures and lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys and public ways or places of the city, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-186. - Removal of facilities upon request. 
(a)  Upon termination of service by any subscriber, the franchisee shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his request. 
(b)  The question of ownership of wiring installed inside the residence or business of a subscriber shall be determined by the rules promulgated by the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-187. - Customer service requirements. 
(a)  The franchisee shall render efficient service, promptly make repairs and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. The requirements established in this section shall be deemed minimum service standards and may be supplemented by terms of the franchise agreement or mutually agreed upon amendments to this article. 
(b)  If required by the franchise agreement, a franchisee shall maintain an office within the city. The office shall be adequately staffed during normal business hours and capable of providing at all times all services the franchisee offers at its district office and other offices. 
(c)  All employees of the franchisee who are involved in field work which require the employee to enter onto private property shall wear, on the outside of clothing, a photograph identification badge. 
(d)  Telephone availability requirements may be provided by equipment and personnel located at the city office or other offices of the franchisee. 
(e)  The franchisee shall provide a listed local, toll free or collect call telephone access telephone number which will be available to subscribers and members of the public 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(f)  The franchisee shall comply with the customer service standards established by the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-188. - Facility placement; regulations. 
(a)  All transmission and distribution structures and equipment, including utility poles, erected by the franchisee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to the extent feasible, to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, alleys or other public ways and places, while allowing the franchisee to adequately perform its requirements under the franchise. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the franchisee to obtain the necessary pole attachment agreements from the city and/or private utility companies using poles within the city. All pole attachment agreements with the city shall be negotiated and approved by the council. 
(c)  If, at any time during the period of a franchise, the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, the franchisee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove or relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(d)  Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the franchisee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way. 
(e)  The franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its facilities to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of facilities to permit the moving of buildings shall be paid by the person requesting such removal or raising or lowering of facilities, and the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary facility changes. 
(f)  A franchisee shall not place its facilities, equipment or fixtures where they will interfere with public utility facilities or equipment, nor obstruct or hinder the service of such utilities to the residents. 
(g)  The city may issue such rules and regulations concerning the installation and maintenance of the system as may be consistent with this article and the franchise agreement. 
(h)  Upon completion of any work, the franchisee shall restore all property to its former condition. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-189. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  The right is reserved to the council to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained in this section and in existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its lawful police powers or powers granted to the city by federal or state law. However, such regulation, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable, of general applicability and not in conflict with the material rights granted in this article. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to inspect the books, records, maps, plans and other like materials of the franchisee reasonably necessary to enforce the franchise granted under this article, at any time upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours. 
(c)  The city shall have the right, during the life of a franchise, to install and maintain for a fee, upon the poles owned by the franchisee, any wire and pole fixtures that do not interfere with the system of the franchisee. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed within public ways subject to the provisions of this nonexclusive franchise and other pertinent provisions of the state and local law. If city inspections reveal that the franchisee has failed, in the city's reasonable judgment, to fulfill its obligation under the terms of this nonexclusive franchise, or is otherwise impeding the public ways in an unauthorized manner, or performing in a manner contrary to federal, state or local law, the city shall notify the franchisee in writing of its specific deficiencies. Absent commencement of corrective action or filing of a request for review before the city council by the franchisee within 48 hours of receipt of such notification, the city may undertake the necessary repairs or restoration at the franchisee's sole expense. 
(e)  At the expiration of the term for which a franchise is granted, or upon its termination or cancellation, as provided in this article, andabsent a franchise renewal, the council may require the franchisee to continue operations for a period not to exceed six months from the date of the council's decision. In the event of nonrenewal of the franchise, the franchisee shall have 180 days from the date it ceases operations to remove, at its own expense, all portions of its system from all public ways within the city and to restore such public ways to a condition reasonably satisfactory to the city, taking into account normal wear and tear. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-190. - Subscriber privacy. 
A franchisee shall comply with all provisions of applicable federal and state law as it related to subscriber privacy. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 22-191. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(a)  A franchise granted under this article shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the laws of the United States, the state and city ordinances, and any amendments thereto. 
(b)  The franchisee shall, at all times during the life of a franchise, be subject to all lawful powers of the state and the city, and to such reasonable regulations of general applicability as the state and city shall provide. 
(c)  The franchisee shall conform to all zoning and platting requirements of the city prior to the commencement of any and all construction work. 
(d)  The franchisee shall obtain building permits for all buildings constructed, pay all building permit fees, tap charge fees and all other fees as required by the ordinances of the city, and at the rates that are in full force and effect at the time of application for building permits. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-1-2015)  
Secs. 22-192—22-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-201. - Definitions. 
When used in this Code, words and phrases shall have the meaning as defined pursuant to the rules adopted by the Oklahoma State Department of Health, Oklahoma Administrative Code section 310:681-1-1, et seq., and as they may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 22-202. - Restrictions on marijuana. 
The growing, possession, processing, transporting, sale, or use of marijuana within the city is limited to that authorized by this chapter 22, article V, and by state law, 63 O.S. § 420A, et seq. Any growing, possession, processing, transporting, sale, or use of marijuana within the city that is not authorized in, or without having obtained the applicable permit provided in this article, shall constitute an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as authorized in section 1-8 of this Code. Provided, possession of up to 1.5 ounces of marijuana by persons who can state a medical condition, but not in possession of a state issued medical marijuana license, shall constitute a misdemeanor offense with a fine not to exceed $400.00. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 1177, § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 22-203. - Restrictions applicable to all permits. 
All permits issued pursuant to this chapter 22, article V, shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at all times on the permitted premises. No permit holder may consent to or allow the use or display of the permit by a person other than the person to whom the permit was issued. No person may use a permit or exercise any privileges granted by the permit except at the place, address, premises or location for which the permit is issued. Permits issued cover only the person or entity named in the permit and shall not be refundable or transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 22-204. - Permit inspections and other requirements. 
(a)  All permits outlined in this article will be subject to inspection of the facilities by an authorized municipal inspector prior to issuance. 
(b)  The inspection prior to a permit decision will occur at a time scheduled and approved by both the applicant and the municipal inspector. 
(c)  The applicant will be required to be present during the inspection. 
(d)  The smell or noxious odor emitted from smoking or consumption of marijuana by a person possessing a valid state issued medical marijuana license shall be treated as a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 22-205. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No commercial marijuana establishment shall allow the consumption of alcohol, medical marijuana, or medical marijuana products on the premises. 
(b)  No commercial marijuana establishment shall employ any person under the age of 18. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 1191, § 1, 8-6-2019)  
Sec. 22-206. - Smoking on city property prohibited. 
Smoking or using marijuana shall be prohibited on all city property, including but not limited to vehicles, buildings, parks or other facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Secs. 22-207—22-219. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA RETAILER PERMITS 
 
Sec. 22-220. - Business license and permit requirements. 
(a)  All dispensaries of medical marijuana are required to obtain a medical marijuana metailer permit and a business license from the city clerk. 
(b)  The medical marijuana retailer permit fee shall be the amount set forth in section 42-22(4) of this Code. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments. 
(c)  A medical marijuana retailer permit will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location is located outside an approved zoning district as set forth in chapter 122 of this Code, or within a restricted area as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 1191, § 2, 8-6-2019)  
Sec. 22-221. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  A medical marijuana retailer permit will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within 1,000 feet of any of the following locations: 
(1)  Any private or public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or trade school, college or university; 
(2)  Any library or museum; 
(3)  Any public playground; 
(4)  Any public park, pool, or recreation facility; or 
(5)  Any juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility or substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center. 
(b)  For the distance requirements outlined in this ordinance, the distances described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the nearest property line of the parcel of land on which the use described in subsection (a) above is located to the nearest property line of the building or unit in which the proposed dispensary establishment would be located. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 1191, § 3, 8-6-2019)  
Sec. 22-222. - Conditions of operation. 
(a)  Buildings where medical marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off premises. 
(b)  The dispensary establishment must collect the applicable sales tax on all sales. 
(c)  The hours of operation shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Operations shall be closed on Sundays as well as Christmas, Thanksgiving, July 4th and New Year's Day. 
(d)  Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of the medical marijuana retailer permit. 
(e)  It is the intent of the city that nothing in the medical marijuana retailer ordinances be construed to: 
(1)  Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a public nuisance; 
(2)  Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or 
(3)  Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 1191, § 4, 8-6-2019)  
Secs. 22-223—22-239. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MARIJUANA COMMERCIAL GROWER PERMITS 
 
Sec. 22-240. - Business license and permit requirements. 
(a)  All commercial growers of marijuana are required to obtain a marijuana commercial grower permit and a business license from the city clerk. 
(b)  The marijuana commercial grower permit fee shall be the amount set forth in section 42-22(4) of this Code. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments. 
(c)  A marijuana commercial grower permit will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location is located outside an approved zoning district as set forth in chapter 122 of this Code, or within a restricted area as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 22-241. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  A marijuana commercial grower permit will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within 1,000 feet of any of the following locations: 
(1)  Any private or public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or trade school, college or university; 
(2)  Any library or museum; 
(3)  Any public playground; 
(4)  Any child care center; 
(5)  Any place of worship or religious assembly; 
(6)  Any public park, pool, or recreation facility; 
(7)  Any juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility or substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center; or 
(8)  Any residentially zoned district. 
(b)  For the distance requirements outlined in this article, the distances described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the nearest property line of the parcel of land on which the use described in subsection (a) above is located to the nearest property line of the building or unit in which the proposed marijuana commercial grower facility would be located. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 1191, § 5, 8-6-2019)  
Sec. 22-242. - Conditions of operation. 
(a)  A marijuana commercial grower permit will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location is located outside an approved zoning district as set forth in chapter 122 of this Code, or within a restricted area as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Growing of marijuana pursuant to a marijuana commercial grower permit shall be within an enclosed structure. The facility shall have a security fence at least ten feet in height and with limited access. The gates to the secure area must be locked at all times. 
(c)  The marijuana commercial grower facility must be constructed in such a manner that the growing of the marijuana plants cannot be seen by the public from a public right-of-way. 
(d)  The growing area, including any lighting, plumbing or electrical components used shall comply with city building, fire and other applicable codes. 
(e)  Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of life and property. 
(f)  It is the intent of the city that nothing in the medical marijuana retailer ordinances be construed to: 
(1)  Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a public nuisance; 
(2)  Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or 
(3)  Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Secs. 22-243—22-259. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MARIJUANA PROCESSOR PERMITS 
 
Sec. 22-260. - Business license and permit requirements. 
(a)  All marijuana processors are required to obtain a marijuana processor permit and a business license from the city clerk. 
(b)  The marijuana processors permit fee shall be the amount set forth in section 42-22(4) of this Code. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement of marijuana processing facilities. 
(c)  A marijuana processors permit will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location is located outside an approved zoning district as set forth in chapter 122 of this Code, or within a restricted area as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 22-261. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  A marijuana processors permit will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within 1,000 feet of any of the following locations: 
(1)  Any private or public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or trade school, college or university; 
(2)  Any library or museum; 
(3)  Any public playground; 
(4)  Any child care center; 
(5)  Any place of worship or religious assembly; 
(6)  Any public park, pool, or recreation facility; 
(7)  Any juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility or substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center; 
(8)  Any residentially zoned district; or 
(b)  For the distance requirements outlined in this article, the distances described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the nearest property line of the parcel of land on which the use described in subsection (a) above is located to the nearest property line of the building or unit in which the proposed marijuana processor facility would be located. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 1191, § 6, 8-6-2019)  
Sec. 22-262. - Conditions of operation. 
(a)  Buildings where marijuana processing occurs must be equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off premises. 
(b)  The marijuana processor facility must collect the applicable sales tax on all sales. 
(c)  The hours of operation shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Operations shall be closed on Sundays as well as Christmas, Thanksgiving, July 4th and New Year's Day. 
(d)  Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of the marijuana processor permit. 
(e)  It is the intent of the city that nothing in the medical marijuana retailer ordinances be construed to: 
(1)  Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a public nuisance; 
(2)  Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or 
(3)  Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by state law. 
(f)  Processing facilities must remain locked at all times when not in operation. The facility must have an electronic security system and have an appropriate security fence that must be at least ten feet tall around the facility. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Secs. 22-263—22-280. - Reserved.  
Chapter 26 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 62; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 114. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, § 5-1. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts not of record, 11 O.S. § 27-101 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Clerk means the clerk of the city, including any deputy or member of the office staff of the clerk while performing duties of the clerk's office. 
Court means the municipal court of the city. 
Judge means the judge of the municipal court, including any acting judge or alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state and this article. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.020) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-32. - Creation ratified. 
The creation of the municipal court is ratified. 
State Law reference— Creation of municipal court, 11 O.S. §§ 27-101, 27-102.  
Sec. 26-33. - Jurisdiction. 
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of the city is charged, including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance with applicable law. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.030) 
State Law reference— Municipal court jurisdiction, 11 O.S. § 27-103.  
Sec. 26-34. - Chief of police. 
All writs or process of the court shall be directed, in his official title, to the chief of police of the city, who shall be the principal officer of the court. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.130) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-110.  
Sec. 26-35. - City attorney. 
The attorney for the city, or his duly designated assistant, may be employed to prosecute actions in the municipal court, and to prosecute and resist appeals therefrom as may be deemed necessary and desirable by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.150) 
State Law reference— Functions of city attorney, 11 O.S. § 27-108.  
Sec. 26-36. - Clerk. 
(a)  Bond. The clerk of the court shall give bond in the form provided by 11 O.S. § 27-111, in the sum of $3,000.00, or as the council shall direct. When approved, it shall be filed with the city clerk and retained in the city archives. 
(b)  Collection of fines. For every judgment of conviction entered, the clerk of the court shall collect the fine imposed. 
(Code 1977, §§ 2.40.160, 2.40.350) 
State Law reference— Clerk of court generally, 11 O.S. §§ 27-109, 27-111.  
Sec. 26-37. - Handling and disposition of funds. 
On the first and 15th day of each month the clerk of the municipal court shall pay to the city treasurer all money received by him as clerk, except such special deposits or fees as shall be received to be disbursed by him for special purposes. All money paid to the treasurer shall be placed in the general fund of the city, or in such other fund as the city council may direct, and it shall be used in the operation of the city government in accordance with budgetary arrangements governing the fund in which it is placed. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.140) 
State Law reference— Clerk to deliver funds to treasurer, 11 O.S. § 27-109(5); disposition of fines, fees and forfeitures, 11 O.S. § 27-112.  
Sec. 26-38. - Violations bureau. 
(a)  A violations bureau is established as a division of the office of the clerk of the municipal court, to be administered by the clerk or subordinates designated by him for that purpose. 
(b)  Persons who are cited for violation of one of the regulatory ordinances of this city, which violation is listed on the minimum fine schedule, may elect to pay a fine in the violations bureau according to a schedule, which shall be adopted and approved by the city council by resolution, except that this provision shall not apply to those persons who have been cited for violation of more than one traffic offense and have been found guilty or have entered pleas of guilty or nolo contendere to the offense in the municipal court within the 12-month period preceding the date of the issuance of the citation. A copy of the approved schedule shall be on file with the city clerk and court clerk for public inspection. Such persons shall pay the specified amount and sign a written plea of guilty or nolo contendere prior to their court appearance date. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.210) 
State Law reference— Fines in lieu of appearance, 11 O.S. § 27-116.  
Sec. 26-39. - Witness fees. 
Witnesses in any proceeding in the court, other than police officers or peace officers, shall be entitled to $5.00 per each day of attendance, plus $0.10 for each mile actually and necessarily traveled in going to and returning from the place of attendance, if their residence is outside the limits of the city. However, no witness shall receive fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or the same travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with the clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of attendance for each witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting out: 
(1)  The names of not more than three witnesses; 
(2)  Mileage as allowed by law; 
(3)  That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and 
(4)  That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper defense. 
The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.310)  
Sec. 26-40. - Court costs. 
Costs in the municipal court shall be the total of any mileage, witness or juror fees accrued in any case together with a charge as set forth in section 42-26 for any case, whether it be a jury or nonjury trial. Where any unpaid penalties, costs, fines, fees and monetary obligations are referred for collection pursuant to a contract with a collection agency, the municipal clerk shall collect as a collection fee on each item so referred the amount set forth in section 2-176 on each unpaid item. In addition, the municipal court clerk shall collect all other fees as allowed by applicable Oklahoma State Law. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.390; Ord. No. 875, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1033, § 2, 12-1-2009) 
State Law reference— Costs, 11 O.S. §§ 22-138, 27-126.  
Sec. 26-41. - Rules of conduct. 
(a)  The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with the ordinances of the city, for the proper conduct of the business of the court. 
(b)  There is no duty on the part of the city or any of its officers or employees to formally prosecute actions in the municipal court. In the absence of a prosecuting officer, the judge shall proceed with the case and hear evidence and examine witnesses in such manner as he may deem necessary to effect justice. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.170)  
Sec. 26-42. - Defendant to be present. 
The defendant must be present in person at the trial. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.270)  
Sec. 26-43. - Police traffic enforcement fund. 
(a)  Any person convicted of an offense, including traffic offenses, but excluding parking, standing and seat belt violations, punishable by a fineof $10.00 or more or by incarceration or any person forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense, shall be ordered by the court to pay $20.00 as a separate fee, which fee shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any and all fines, penalties and fees otherwise provided for by law for such offense. 
(b)  There is hereby established a police traffic enforcement fund for the sole purpose of funding the purchase of equipment, specialized training of law enforcement officers and the development of programs to enforce state and local traffic laws. Program development may include, but not be limited to, all associated costs for citizen educational programs and citizen partnerships to reduce traffic law violations and traffic accidents. 
(c)  The police traffic enforcement fund shall be a separate fund, not supplanting normal training or equipment funds established within the municipal budget. 
(d)  The court clerk shall deposit the monies set aside pursuant to subsection (a) into the appropriate fund in accordance with municipal ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 920, § 1, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 4-18-2017)  
Sec. 26-44. - Defendant to pay cost of incarceration. 
(a)  The municipal court shall require a person who is actually received into custody at the city jail facility or who is confined in a city or county jail or other holding facility at the request of the city, for any offense, to pay the municipality the costs of incarceration, both before and after conviction, upon conviction or receiving a deferred sentence. The costs of incarceration shall be collected by the clerk of the court as provided for collection of other costs and fines, which shall be subject to review under the procedures set forth in Section VIII of the Rules of the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals, Chapter 18, Appendix of Title 22 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Costs of incarceration shall include booking, receiving and processing out, housing, food, clothing, medical care, dental care, and psychiatric services. The costs for incarceration shall be an amount equal to the actual cost of the services and shall be determined by the chief of police for city jails and holding facilities, by the county sheriff for county jails or by contract amount, if applicable. In the event a person requires emergency medical treatment for an injury or condition that threatens life or threatens the loss or use of a limb prior to being actually received into the custody of any jail facility, the provisions of 21 O.S. § 533 shall apply to taking custody, medical care and cost responsibility. 
(b)  Except for medical costs, ten percent of any amount collected by the court clerk shall be paid to the office of municipal attorney, and the remaining amount shall be paid to the municipality. The court shall order the defendant to reimburse all actual costs of incarceration, upon conviction or upon entry of a deferred judgment and sentence unless the defendant is a mentally ill person as defined by 43A O.S. § 1-103. The chief of police shall give notice to the defendant of the actual costs owed before any court-ordered costs are collected. The defendant shall have an opportunity to object to the amount of costs solely on the grounds that the number of days served is incorrect. If no objection is made, the costs may be collected in the amount stated in the notice to the defendant. The chief of police or municipality may collect costs of incarceration ordered by the court from a jail account of the inmate. If the funds collected from the jail account of the inmate are insufficient to satisfy the actual incarceration costs ordered by the court, the municipality is authorized to collect the remaining balance of the incarceration costs by civil action. When the chief of police or municipality collects any court-ordered incarceration costs from a jail account of the inmate or by civil action, the court clerk shall be notified of the amount collected. 
(c)  Except as may otherwise be provided in 21 O.S. § 533, any offender receiving routine or emergency medical services or medications or injured during the commission of a felony or misdemeanor offense and administered any medical care shall be required to reimburse the municipality responsible for the operation of the jail the full amount paid by the municipality for any medical care or treatment administered to such offender during any period of incarceration or when the person was actually received into custody for any reason in the jail facility. 
(d)  Costs of incarceration shall be a debt of the inmate owed to the municipality responsible for the operation of the jail and may be collected as provided by law for collection of any other civil debt or criminal penalty. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 1, 12-6-2005) 
State Law reference— Defendant to pay cost of incarceration, 22 O.S. § 979a  
Sec. 26-45. - Jury trials; qualifications of jurors. 
In all prosecutions in the municipal court for any offense for which the city with the concurrence of the court, seeks imposition of a fine of more than $500.00, excluding court costs, or imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment, a jury trial shall be had unless waived by the defendant and the city, provided that the city has compiled its penal ordinances in accordance with the provisions of 11 O.S. §§ 14-109 and 14-110. If the city has not compiled its ordinances as provided by law, the fine shall not exceed $50.00. In prosecutions for all other offenses, or in cases wherein a jury trial is waived by the defendant and the city, trial shall be to the court. A jury in the municipal court shall consist of six jurors, five of whom may return a verdict. Jurors shall be good and lawful men and women, citizens of the county in which the court sits, having the qualifications of jurors in the district court. 
(Ord. No. 986, § 1, 12-19-2006)  
Sec. 26-46. - Enforcement of alcohol laws fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established an enforcement of alcohol laws fund to be used to defray costs for enforcement of laws relating to juvenile access to alcohol, other laws relating to alcohol and other intoxicating substances, and traffic-related offenses involving alcohol or other intoxicating substances. 
(b)  Fifty dollars of each alcohol-related fine or deferral fee collected by the municipal court shall be set aside for the enforcement of alcohol laws fund. The court clerk shall deposit the monies set aside pursuant to this subsection into the appropriate fund in accordance with municipal ordinance. 
(c)  The enforcement of alcohol laws fund shall be a separate fund, not supplanting normal training or equipment funds established within the municipal budget. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 1, 6-4-2013) 
State Law reference— Enforcement and penalties for violation of municipal ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-111.  
Sec. 26-47. - Police technology fee. 
(a)  A police technology fee shall be and is hereby established in the amount of $25.00. This fee shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any and all costs, fees, fines or penalties otherwise provided for by law and assessed on every citation disposed of in the municipal court except those that are voided, declined for prosecution, dismissed without costs, or the defendant is acquitted. 
(b)  There is hereby established a police technology fund. The monies from the police technology fund shall be used for the sole purpose of funding the acquisition, operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of police technological advances and upgrades, data processing equipment and software related to the administration of the municipal laws and the municipal criminal justice system. 
(c)  The police technology fund shall be a separate fund, not supplanting normal training or equipment funds established within the municipal budget. 
(d)  The court clerk shall deposit the monies collected pursuant to subsection (a) into the police technology fund. 
(Ord. No. 1146, § 2, 4-18-2017)  
Sec. 26-48. - Expungement fee. 
There is hereby established a fee for processing an order for expungement of records from municipal court and police department files. The fee shall be $150.00, and shall be paid by the person seeking expungement when the order of expungement is presented to the court or provided to the city for processing. 
(Ord. No. 1166, § 1, 7-3-2018; Ord. No. 1170, § 1, 8-7-2018)  
Secs. 26-49—26-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - JUDGE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Judge generally, 11 O.S. § 27-104 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-61. - Number of judges. 
There shall be one judge of the court. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.040) 
State Law reference— Number of judges to be fixed by ordinance, 11 O.S. § 27-104(A).  
Sec. 26-62. - Appointment. 
Judges and alternate judges shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. A proposed appointment shall be submitted in writing to the city council at the next to the last regularly scheduled meeting prior to the date upon which the appointment is to take effect, and shall be acted upon at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The city council may decide upon the proposed appointment by a majority vote of a quorum present and acting. Failure of decision upon a proposed appointment shall not prevent action thereon at a later regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, unless the mayor, in writing, withdraws the proposed appointment. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.080) 
State Law reference— Appointment of judges, 11 O.S. § 27-104(A).  
Sec. 26-63. - Term. 
The term of the judge expires on January 13 in each odd-numbered year. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.050) 
State Law reference— Term of judge, 11 O.S. § 27-104(A).  
Sec. 26-64. - Appointment of alternate judge. 
There shall be appointed, for each judge of the court, an alternate judge, possessed of the same qualifications as the judge. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.060) 
State Law reference— Alternate judge, 11 O.S. § 27-106.  
Sec. 26-65. - Salary of alternate judge and acting judge. 
An alternate judge or an acting judge shall be paid as specified by the council for each day devoted to the performance of his duties, except that, for any month, the total payments so calculated shall not exceed the salary of the judge in whose stead he sits. An alternate or acting judge who sits for an entire month shall receive the same salary as the judge in whose stead he sits. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.090(B)) 
State Law reference— Compensation of acting judge, 11 O.S. § 27-106.  
Sec. 26-66. - Vacancies. 
A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent: 
(1)  Dies; 
(2)  Resigns; 
(3)  Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or 
(4)  Is removed, and the removal proceeding has been affirmed finally in judicial proceedings or is no longer subject to judicial review. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.110) 
State Law reference— Filling vacancies in office of judge, 11 O.S. § 27-107.  
Sec. 26-67. - Removal. 
Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the city council for the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of the state for the removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the filing of a verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by the mayor or 25 or more qualified electors of the city; in the latter event, verification may be executed by one or more of the petitioners. The city council shall set a date for hearing the matter, and shall cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served personally upon the judge at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing, the judge shall be entitled to representation by counsel, to present testimony and to cross examine the witnesses against him, and to have all evidence against him presented in open hearing. So far as they can be made applicable, the provisions of article II of the Oklahoma Administrative Procedure Act (75 O.S. § 308a et seq.) shall govern removal proceedings under this section. Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority of all members of the city council, in favor of such removal. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.100)  
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, § 6-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; city council, § 2-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Elections generally, 26 O.S. § 1-101 et seq.; municipal elections, 11 O.S. § 16-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Absentee ballots. 
Pursuant to the provisions of 26 O.S. § 14-101 et seq., absentee ballots as provided by and controlled by state law shall be permitted in all primary, runoff, general and special elections held within, for and on behalf of the city. It is specifically recognized and declared that the Charter contains no provision restricting or prohibiting the use of absentee ballots in city elections. 
(Code 1977, § 1.20.010) 
State Law reference— Absentee voting, 26 O.S. § 14-101 et seq.  
Secs. 30-2—30-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WARDS 
 
Sec. 30-15. - Wards created. 
For the purpose of creating more nearly equal representation for the people of the City of Mustang from their respective wards in the election of and representation in the legislative branch of the city government, and for other purposes, the city, pursuant to section 11-3 of the Charter, is divided into six political districts, to be known as Wards One, Two, Three, Four, Five and Six, as described in this article. For purposes of this section, descriptions of the ward boundaries set forth below refer to the center of the street, right-of-way of other defining boundary, unless otherwise specifically noted in the description. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 2, 12-5-2006)  
Sec. 30-16. - Ward One. 
Ward One shall embrace and be limited to all of the area which is embraced within the corporate limits and bounded as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of N. Mustang Road and SW 74th Street; thence east along SW 74th Street to S. Meadow Lane; thence southerly along S. Meadow Lane to E. Hillcrest Lane; thence east along E. Hillcrest Lane to S. Castlerock Lane; thence south along S. Castlerock Lane to E. Linden Lane; thence east along E. Linden Lane to S. Pointe Lane; thence north along S. Pointe Lane to E. Juniper Lane; thence east along E. Juniper Lane to S. Sara Road; thence north along S. Sara Road to SW 59th Street; thence west along SW 59th Street to N. Mustang Road; thence south along N. Mustang Road to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 2, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 1061, § 2, 11-15-2011)  
Sec. 30-17. - Ward Two. 
Ward Two shall embrace and be limited to all of the area which is embraced within the corporate limits and bounded as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of SW 59th Street and N. Mustang Road; thence south along N. Mustang Road to SW 74th Street; thence west along SW 74th Street to W. Westchester Way; thence northerly along W. Westchester Way to W. Windsor Way; thence easterly along W. Windsor Way to W. Dorchester Way; thence easterly along W. Dorchester Way to N. Czech Hall Road; thence north along N. Czech Hall Road to SW 59th Street; thence east along SW 59th Street to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 2, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 1061, § 2, 11-15-2011)  
Sec. 30-18. - Ward Three. 
Ward Three shall embrace and be limited to all of the area which is embraced within the corporate limits and bounded as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of SW 59th Street and N. Czech Hall Road; thence south along N. Czech Hall Road to W. Dorchester Way; thence westerly along W. Dorchester Way to W. Windsor Way; thence southerly along W. Windsor Way to W. Westchester Way; thence southerly along W. Westchester Way to SW 74th Street; thence west along SW 74th Street to N. Clear Springs Road; thence north along N. Clear Springs Road to SW 59th Street; thence east along SW 59th Street to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 2, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 1061, § 2, 11-15-2011)  
Sec. 30-19. - Ward Four. 
Ward Four shall embrace and be limited to all of the area which is embraced within the corporate limits and bounded as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of S. Frisco Road and SW 59th Street; thence east along SW 59th Street to N. Clear Springs Road; thence south along N. Clear Springs Road to SW 74th Street; thence east along SW 74th Street to S. Silver Drive; thence southerly along S. Silver Drive to W. Carson Drive; thence west along W. Carson Drive to S. Oakey Drive; thence north along S. Oakley Drive to W. Dowden Drive; thence west along W. Dowden Drive to S. Czech Hall Road; thence south along S. Czech Hall Road to SW 89th Street; thence west along SW 89th Street to S. Frisco Road; thence north along S. Frisco Road to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 2, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 1061, § 2, 11-15-2011)  
Sec. 30-20. - Ward Five. 
Ward Five shall embrace and be limited to all of the area which is embraced within the corporate limits and bounded as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of SW 89th Street and S. Mustang Road; thence north along S. Mustang Road to E. Carson Lane; thence easterly along E. Carson Lane to S. Lewis Lane; thence northerly along S. Lewis Lane to E. Perry Lane; thence east along E. Perry Lane to E. Mohr Lane; thence easterly along E. Mohr Lane to S. Meadow Lane; thence northerly along S. Meadow Lane to E. Linden Lane; thence easterly along E. Linden Lane to S. Glen Lane; thence north along S. Glen Lane to E. Hillcrest Lane; thence west along E. Hillcrest Lane to S. Meadow Lane; thence northerly along S. Meadow Lane to SW 74th Street; thence west along SW 74th Street to S. Silver Drive; thence southerly along S. Silver Drive to W. Carson Drive; thence west along W. Carson Drive to S. Oakey Drive; thence north along S. Oakey Drive to W. Dowden Drive; thence west along W. Dowden Drive to S. Czech Hall Road; thence south along S. Czech Hall Road to SW 89th Street; thence east along SW 89th Street to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 2, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 1061, § 2, 11-15-2011)  
Sec. 30-21. - Ward Six. 
Ward Six shall embrace and be limited to all of the area which is embraced within the corporate limits and bounded as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of S. Lewis Lane and E. Perry Lane; thence east along E. Perry Lane to E. Mohr Lane; thence easterly along E. Mohr Lane to S. Meadow Lane; thence northerly along S. Meadow Lane to E. Linden Lane; thence easterly along E. Linden Lane to S. Glen Lane; thence north along S. Glen Lane to E. Hillcrest Lane; thence east along E. Hillcrest Lane to S. Castlerock Lane; thence south along S. Castlerock Lane to E. Linden Lane; thence east along E. Linden Lane to S. Pointe Lane; thence north along S. Pointe Lane to E. Juniper Lane; thence east along E. Juniper Lane to S. Sara Road; thence north along S. Sara Road to SW 59th Street; thence east along SW 59th Street to N. County Line Road; thence south on N. County Line Road to the north boundary of Fireworks City, USA; thence west along the north boundary of Fireworks City, USA to the northwest corner of Fireworks City USA; thence south along the west boundary of Fireworks City, USA to SW 74th Street; thence east along SW 74th Street to S. County Line Road; south along S. County Line Road to SW 89th Street; thence west along SW 89th Street to S. Mustang Road; thence north along S. Mustang Road to E. Carson Lane; thence easterly along E. Carson Lane to S. Lewis Lane; thence northerly on S. Lewis Lane to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 2, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 1061, § 2, 11-15-2011)  
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 46; law enforcement, ch. 62. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FALSE ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means the code enforcement officer or his designee as designated by the city manager to perform the administrative functions of this article. 
Alarm business and alarm industry mean the business by any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility. This does not include any person who installs his own alarm on his own property to protect his personal property. 
Alarm system means one or more devices designed to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion, entry, robbery, fire or other emergency condition, which signals are responded to by public law enforcement officers, fire department personnel, private security guards or security officers. This definition excludes systems installed in motor vehicles. 
Alarm user means any person in control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
Audible alarm system means an alarm system not interconnected to an alarm business or the police service communication center, but which is activated by sounding a bell, siren or other device that makes an audible or visual signal at the location protected by the alarm system, indicating a need for police, fire or other emergency response. This definition excludes alarm systems installed within motor vehicles. 
Burglary alarm system means an alarm system signaling entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the alarm system. 
Emergency telephone system means any telephone system utilizing a three-digit number, "911," for reporting an emergency to the appropriate public agency providing law enforcement, fire, medical or other emergency services, including ancillary communications systems and personnel necessary to pass the reported emergency to the appropriate emergency service and personnel. 
Enhanced 911 system means an emergency phone system which is designed to receive emergency phone calls when the three-digit number "911" is dialed. The system places the person requesting emergency service in touch with fire, police and ambulance services by dialing a single number. 
False alarm—activation of alarm. 
(1)  A false alarm is the activation of a burglary, robbery, fire or other alarm for the purpose of summoning emergency assistance or which causes the police or fire department to be summoned, at a time when no emergency exists. False alarms include those caused by: 
a.  Error or mistake. An action by any person, or agent thereof, owning or operating any dwelling, building or place which results in the activation of any alarm system when no emergency exists. 
b.  Malfunction. Any activation of any alarm system caused by a flaw in the normal operation, design, installation or maintenance of the system, faulty equipment, or change in the environment or premises upon or within which the alarm system is operating. 
c.  Intentional misuse. Any intentional activation of an alarm system when no burglary, robbery, vandalism, fire or other emergency is in progress. This subsection shall not apply to testing during installation and regular maintenance when the user notifies the police service in advance and receives permission for the test. However, this subsection shall apply to any call made to the 911 number for the purposes of making a false alarm or false complaint, or the reporting of false information which could result in the dispatch of emergency services from any public agency as defined by 63 O.S. § 2813. 
(2)  An alarm will not be considered a false alarm if it is determined that the alarm was the result of: 
a.  Natural or manmade catastrophe, or an act of God. Such events include tornadoes, floods or other similarly violent conditions. 
b.  Vandalism causing physical damage to the premises. 
c.  Attempted entry of a location causing visible physical or other evidence of damage to the location. 
d.  Severe weather causing physical damage to the premises. 
An alarm will not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user calls the police service and cancels the alarm before the police department responds by using his personal identification number assigned when a city alarm permit was issued. 
False alarm incident includes any and/or all of the following: false alarms, and/or false complaints and/or reporting of false information, and/or calls made for nonemergency purposes on the 911 number. 
Fire alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of fire or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which the fire department personnel are expected to respond. This definition includes alarm systems installed within motor vehicles. 
Interconnect means to connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
Public agency, as defined by 63 O.S. § 2813, means any city, town, county, municipal corporation, public district, public trust or public authority located within the state which provides or has authority to provide firefighting, law enforcement, ambulance, emergency medical or other emergency services. 
Robbery alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
Telephone dialing device and TDD mean a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or coded signal an emergency message indicating a need for police, fire or medical response. 
User fee means the amount assessed to alarm users for false alarm responses in excess of the maximum number allowed in any one fiscal year. The fee is figured on a per-response basis for false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 1(9.11.020), 6-16-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-32. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  Sections 34-34 and 34-35 and division 2 of this article will be enforced by the alarm administrator or his designee, and by the police and fire chiefs and/or their designees, as coordinated and directed by the city manager. 
(b)  Persons violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 1(9.11.070), 6-16-1998)  
Sec. 34-33. - Purpose and scope of article. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to enhance and protect the emergency services of the city. 
(b)  This article governs false alarms or false complaints or knowingly reporting false information which could result in the dispatch of emergency services from any public agency as defined in 63 O.S. § 2813, provides for punishment of violations, and establishes a system of administration. This article also governs burglary, robbery and fire alarm systems, requires permits, establishes fees, provides for revocation of permits, and establishes a system of administration. 
(c)  Section 34-36 governs other false alarms. 
(d)  Section 34-32 provides for penalties. 
(e)  The provisions of this article shall apply only to systems located in whole or in part within the city. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 1(9.11.010), 6-16-1998)  
Sec. 34-34. - Unlawful use of 911 service. 
(a)  False alarms. No person shall call the number "911" for the purpose of making a false alarm or a false complaint or knowingly reporting false information which could result in the dispatch of emergency services from any public agency. 
(b)  Bomb threats. No person shall call the number "911" for the purpose of making bomb threats, whether or not made for the purpose of extorting money, goods and/or services. This prohibition applies whether or not there is a real bomb, dynamite cap and/or other explosive material and/or device in, at or around, or in transit to, the site area and/or location communicated by way of the 911 emergency telephone system. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 1(9.11.030), 6-16-1998)  
Sec. 34-35. - Fee for abuse of 911 service. 
(a)  Any person who owns a telephone or who is charged line or rent charges from the telephone utility, who uses the 911 number for non-emergency calls or who allows minor children to use the 911 number for non-emergency purposes, after notification, may be assessed a fee as set forth in section 42-34 for the sixth and each subsequent abuse, such fee to go for the maintenance and any other expense of the system. 
(b)  When records in the city's possession indicate that at least three false alarm incidents, composed of false alarms and/or false complaints and/or reporting of false information and/or calls made for non-emergency purposes on the 911 number, occurred within any one fiscal year, the alarm administrator shall notify the telephone owner/subscriber/renter, by mail to the owner's address: 
(1)  Of the number of false alarm incidents on record; and 
(2)  That any more than five responses to false alarm incidents in any one fiscal year will result in assessment of a service fee at the rate set forth in section 42-34 per false alarm incident after the first five. 
(c)  When the city's records indicate that three false alarm incidents have occurred within one fiscal year, the alarm administrator shall notify the telephone owner/subscriber/renter by certified mail of the number of false alarm incidents on record. The alarm user will be notified that any false alarm incident beyond the fifth on record may be the subject of a separate assessment in the amount set forth in section 42-34 for the sixth and each subsequent abuse, such fee to go for the maintenance and any other expense of the system. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 1(9.11.040), 6-16-1998; Ord. No. 1149, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
State Law reference— Use of 911 number for non-emergency purposes, 63 O.S. § 2820.  
Sec. 34-36. - False alarms made other than through 911 service. 
(a)  This section shall pertain to false alarms made other than through the 911 emergency service system as set forth in this article. 
(b)  No person shall harass or attempt to harass or mislead any officer by false alarms or unauthorized use of a device of whatever nature to summon police, fire protection or other emergency aid without reasonable cause. 
(c)  No person shall turn or send in any false alarm of fire, or make any false signal or alarm willfully calculated to falsely or unnecessarily call out the fire department or others engaged in the prevention of fires. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 1(9.11.060), 6-16-1998)  
Secs. 34-37—34-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ALARM SYSTEMS AND ALARM BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 34-51. - Alarm businesses; standards for alarm systems. 
(a)  Duty of alarm businesses to provide instructions to users. Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any user an alarm system which is installed on the user's premises shall furnish the user with instructions that provide adequate information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and to obtain service for the alarm system. 
(b)  State licensing of alarm businesses. No business or individual shall operate within the city limits who offers alarm equipment for sale or lease, installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, replacement or service without a state license as required by 59 O.S. § 1800.6. 
(c)  Alarm business registration and permit. Every business providing any of the following alarm services: selling, installing, repairing, modifying, maintenance or system monitoring, shall be required to register with the city for each fiscal year (commencing on each July 1 and continuing through the following June 30) the numbers and copies of the state licenses of the company or individual providing alarm service to the user. A city permit will be issued upon confirmation that all required state licenses have been issued and are current. If monitoring services are provided, the alarm company must furnish a 24-hour-per-day phone number. Failure to register with the city and obtain a permit shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(d)  Standards for alarm systems. Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "NFPA 70 Pamphlet" and "NFPA 72 Pamphlet," as they exist on June 16, 1998, are hereby adopted as the code of the city for the control of alarm systems as provided in this article, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of NFPA 70 Pamphlet and NFPA 72 Pamphlet are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this article as fully as if set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 1(9.11.050(A)), 6-16-1998) 
Charter reference— Adoption by reference, § 2-14. 
State Law reference— Alarm Industry Act, 59 O.S. § 1800.1 et seq.; adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 34-52. - Alarm user's permit. 
(a)  Required; application; fee. Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user's permit for each type of alarm, from the city clerk or his designee, prior to the use of the alarm. A permit application for a burglary, robbery, holdup or fire alarm user's permit and a fee as set forth in section 42-34 for up to three types of systems at each residence, business or other facility, except as excluded by this article, shall be filed with the city. The fee shall be paid to the city at the time of application. Alarm businesses may pay the fee on behalf of the user when the permit is obtained. If the alarm business does not pay the fee, the alarm business shall provide an application and notice of fee to the user. The fee must be paid and the application submitted prior to use. Each additional type of system beyond the first three noted in this section shall be subject to an additional fee as set forth in section 42-34. A transfer fee as set forth in section 42-34 will be charged if there is a change of occupancy resulting in a change in the identification of the user. This charge will not be assessed if one of the users on the application remains at the residence (for example, situations involving death or divorce). The permit application shall include information as to the identification of the user, the number of and type of alarms installed, the alarm company providing the service, the monitoring agent, and numbers to be called if an emergency shall occur. Any changes to the original registration and/or information provided in the application must be reported to the city alarm administrator within 30 days of such changes, or within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for users having applications on file needing changes. Failure to make such notification within 30 days shall constitute a violation of this article. Permits are also required for audible alarms and alarms with automatic dialing devices attached. This provision does not pertain to alarm systems installed within motor vehicles. Each approved application and permit shall bear the signature of the city clerk or his designee. 
(b)  Additional charge for failure to pay fee. A charge as set forth in section 42-34 will be added to the fee provided for in subsection (a) of this section if a user fails to obtain a permit upon installation of an alarm system. This charge will be in addition to any penalties which might be imposed as provided in this article. 
(c)  Exemptions from fee. An alarm user which is a publicly owned and operated facility, and persons 62 years of age or older whose alarm system is installed on the lot or parcel hosting their primary permanent residence, shall be subject to the provisions of this article; however, a permit may be issued without payment of the fee provided for in this section. 
(d)  Permit stickers. Every alarm user shall display all permit stickers. 
(1)  Location. The permit stickers shall be located on the front of any facility containing such alarm so that such stickers will be readily noticeable and available for viewing by police, fire and/or other emergency personnel responding to an alarm. 
(2)  Contents. The stickers shall contain such other supplemental information regarding the alarm system as may be requested in advance, during normal business hours, by the alarm administrator and/or police chief and/or fire chief or his designated representatives. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 1(9.11.050(B)), 6-16-1998)  
Sec. 34-53. - Automatic dialing devices. 
It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to any telephone line which, when activated, dials the digits "911." When a permit is issued, the alarm user will be given a phone number to be programmed into his system which goes directly to the police service communication center. It is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to dial the digits "911" or the permit for which has been revoked after receiving notice from the city clerk or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 1(9.11.050(C)), 6-16-1998)  
Sec. 34-54. - False alarms; credit for fees paid under prior ordinances. 
(a)  When records in the city's possession indicate that at least five false alarms or complaints, or reporting of false information, have occurred within one fiscal year, the alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user by certified mail of the number of false alarms on record. The alarm user will also be notified that any more than nine responses to false alarms, as defined under "false alarm—activation of alarm" in section 34-31, in any one fiscal year will result in the alarm user being billed at the rate set forth in section 42-34. 
(b)  When the city's records indicate that nine false alarms or complaints, or reporting of false information, have occurred within one fiscal year, the alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user by certified mail of the number of false alarms on record. The alarm user will also be notified that, for the remainder of that fiscal year, any responses falling under "false alarm—activation of alarm," as defined in section 34-31, will result in the alarm user being billed the amount set forth in section 42-34. Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city acknowledges that there may occur certain situations beyond the reasonable control of the user which could result in an excess of false alarms or complaints. Therefore, upon written request of the user, the city manager is delegated the discretionary authority to waive the charge in those cases where he determines that such waiver is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare and that such excessive false alarms were outside the reasonable control of the user. In such cases, the city manager's decision shall be final. 
(c)  The alarm administrator shall, in both his notifications by certified mail per subsections (a) and (b) of this section, inform the alarm user of the revocation penalty noted in subsection (d) of this section and its applicability should future false alarm billings not be paid. 
(d)  If the amount billed to the alarm user for emergency responses to false alarms is not paid within 30 days of the statement date, the alarm administrator or his designee may revoke the alarm user's permit. 
(e)  The city's notice of revocation to the alarm user shall specifically state that the permit holder does have the right to appeal to the city manager, as noted in subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  If the alarm user's permit is revoked, the alarm user may appeal the revocation to city manager, provided such appeal is made within ten calendar days from the date of revocation. The city manager has the discretionary authority, for good cause shown, to rescind the revocation. The city manager's decision shall be final. 
(g)  If the alarm user's permit is revoked and the alarm user seeks to operate his alarm for the remainder of the fiscal year, the alarm user must first make application to the city and pay the appropriate fee. 
(h)  It shall be a violation of this article to operate an alarm system when the permit for that system has been revoked by the alarm administrator or his designee and a new alarm permit has not yet been obtained. 
(i)  No alarm permit will be issued to an individual or business who owes billing to the city which results from implementing the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(j)  The city utility billing department will notify the alarm system administrator of new customers. 
(k)  Users who have paid fees in any amount pursuant to prior ordinances will be given credit for payment of the registration fee imposed by this division and will not be subject to an additional registration fee. However, payment of prior fees totally in excess of the amount imposed by this division will not entitle users to any refund, except that persons who have paid renewal fees for fiscal year 1998-99 will be given a refund. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 1(9.11.050(D)), 6-16-1998)  
Secs. 34-55—34-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES CODE 
 
Sec. 34-100. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this code, shall have meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambulance means any vehicle which is designed and equipped to transport ill or injured persons in a reclining position to or from health care facilities. 
Ambulance response time standards means: 
For the western division beneficiary jurisdiction and non-beneficiary jurisdictions: 
Priority 1: 8 minutes 59 seconds 
Priority 2: 12 minutes 59 seconds 
Priority 3: 60 minutes 0 seconds 
Priority 4: 20 minutes 0 seconds (after agreed-upon pickup appointment) 
For the eastern division non-beneficiary jurisdictions: 
Priority 1: 11 minutes 59 seconds 
Priority 2: 12 minutes 59 seconds 
Priority 3: 60 minutes 0 seconds 
Priority 4: 20 minutes 0 seconds (after agreed-upon pickup appointment) 
Ambulance service means a person or organization, governmental or private, which operates one or more ambulances as defined herein for purposes of transporting ill or injured patients in a reclining position to or from health care facilities. 
Amended and Restated Trust Indenture means the Amended and Restated Trust Indenture for the Emergency Medical Services Authority dated March 23, 1990 and any amendments thereto. 
Base station physician means a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of Oklahoma, from whom ambulance and first responder personnel may take medical direction by radio or other remote communications device; and who has been certified by the regional medical director as being knowledgeable of the EMS system's medical protocols, radio procedures, and the general operating policies of the EMS System. 
Beneficiary member jurisdiction means the City of Tulsa, and the City of Oklahoma City. 
Eastern division means that portion of the regulated service area which is located east of Stroud. 
Emergency medical services authority (EMSA) means the trust established by the City of Tulsa, pursuant to 60 Okla, Statutes, § 176 et seq., as amended and whose beneficiaries are, jointly, the City of Tulsa and the City of Oklahoma City, and which is established to provide ambulance services to the Cities of Tulsa, Oklahoma City, and other jurisdictions within the regulated service area. 
Emergency call means a request for ambulance service by or for a patient whose apparent condition, at the time the call is received, presumptively meets the criteria for classification as priority 1 or priority 2, when classified in accordance with telephone algorithms and medical priority dispatch protocols approved by the medical control board. 
Emergency medical personnel means those persons who participate directly in the performance of one or more emergency medical services, as defined herein. 
Emergency medical services (EMS) means the following pre-hospital and inter-hospital services: 
(1)  Access and coordination. The answering and processing of telephone requests from the public for ambulance or first responder services, and including EMS dispatching, emergency and routine; the giving of medical pre-arrival instructions to callers by telephone; but excluding the process of 911 complaint-taking when the caller is immediately transferred to an EMS control center. 
(2)  First responder services. Those emergency services, excluding transportation, which are performed by a first responder agency certified by the medical director. 
(3)  Medical transportation. Ambulance services, both emergency and routine, including patient assessment, transportation, and medical procedures performed on-scene, enroute, during inter-facility transport, or at an emergency receiving facility when performed at the request of the receiving physician. 
(4)  On-line medical direction. Instructions given by base station physicians to first responders or ambulance personnel at the scene of an emergency, while enroute to a hospital, or during an inter-facility patient transfer. 
Emergency Physicians Foundation (EPF) means that administrative agency established jointly by this and other jurisdictions which have approved the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement, pursuant to 74 Oklahoma Statutes, § 1001 et seq., as amended and have adopted this uniform code for emergency medical services. 
EMS control center ("control center") means either of two facilities operated by EMSA, one of which serves as central EMS communications center for the eastern division, and the other of which serves as central EMS communications center for the western division. EMSA may, at its option, consolidate the operations of the two EMS control centers to create a single EMS control center to serve the entire regulated service area. 
EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement means that certain agreement of same title approved by the governing body of the beneficiary jurisdictions. 
First rsponder means any person, fire department unit, law enforcement unit, or non-transporting rescue unit capable of providing appropriate first responder service, excluding transportation, under the auspices of a certified first responder agency. 
Medical control board means that body of nine physicians established jointly by this and other jurisdictions pursuant to the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement and this code for purposes of providing medical supervision, monitoring, and regulation of the regional EMS system. 
Medical director or regional medical director means the licensed physician appointed by the medical control board to perform the duties and responsibilities granted and ascribed to the medical director herein and in the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement. 
Medical protocol means any diagnosis-specific or problem-oriented written statement of standard procedure, or algorithm, promulgated by the medical director and approved by the medical control board as the medically appropriate standard of prehospital care for a given clinical condition. 
Member jurisdiction means any municipality or EMS district which adopts and enforces this code and which approves the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement. 
Mutual Aid Agreement means a written agreement between EMSA and a neighboring primary provider of emergency medical service approved by the medical director as to its quality of care and medical accountability, whereby the signing parties agree to lend emergency aid to one another subject to conditions and terms specified in the agreement. 
Nonbeneficiary jurisdictions means jurisdictions that are not beneficiary jurisdictions as defined herein, including municipalities, counties, EMS districts, school districts, Indian Nations, or other legal entities that elect to contract with the trustees of EMSA in order to be included in the regulated service area. 
Operations contract means that contract awarded by EMSA by competitive bid award for provision of ambulance services throughout the regulated service area. 
Operations contractor means the person or firm contracted by EMSA pursuant to the operations contract. 
Patient means an individual who is ill, sick, injured, wounded, or incapacitated, and who is in need of, or is at risk of needing, medical care or assessment during transportation to or from a health care facility, and who is or should be transported in a reclining position, as determined in accordance with applicable provisions of the system standard of care. 
Person means and includes any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Presumptive priority classification means the designation by a system status controller (SSC) of a request for service as Priority 1, 2, 3, or 4, in accordance with telephone algorithms and medical priority dispatching protocols approved by the medical control board. 
Priority means the call priority number (i.e., Priority 1, 2, 3, or 4) assigned to every request for service received by an EMS control center. Such priorities shall be assigned only by a certified SSC, pursuant to telephone algorithms and priority dispatch protocols established by the medical director and approved by the medical control board. Classifications shall be consistent with the following definitions: 
Priority 1 call means a presumptively classified life-threatening emergency call. 
Priority 2 call means a presumptively classified non-life threatening emergency call. 
Priority 3 call means a presumptively classified request for routine patient transport scheduled less than 24 hours in advance of the requested time of pickup; or an unscheduled, nonemergency request for service. 
Priority 4 call means a presumptively classified request for routine patient transport scheduled 24 hours or more in advance of the requested time of pickup. 
Quality assurance fund means the fund account which is established pursuant to the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement and, concurrently, by adoption of this code, and which is administered by EMSA on behalf of the medical control board, and which shall be used solely to fund the activities and related expenses of the Medical Control Board in carrying out its duties and responsibilities as set forth herein and in the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement. 
Regional EMS system means that network of organizations, individuals, facilities, and equipment which provides emergency medical services, as defined herein, to jurisdictions within the regulated service area, subject to the system standard of care approved by the medical control board. 
Regulated service area means the combined area which is contained within the boundaries of the municipalities and EMS districts which have adopted and agreed to enforce this uniform code for emergency medical services, and which have approved the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement. 
Response time—ambulance means the actual elapsed time between receipt by the EMS control center of the call, and the arrival of a permitted ambulance or mutual aid ambulance (approved by the medical director) at the scene of the incident. For scheduled nonemergency (priority 4) requests, "scheduled time of pick-up" shall be substituted for the "time call received" in the response time calculation. 
Response time—first responder means the actual elapsed time between notification of the first responder agency by the EMS control center that a first response unit is needed at a given location, and the arrival of a first response unit at the incident scene. 
Routine transport call means a request for ambulance service by or for a patient whose apparent condition, at the time the call is received, presumptively meets the criteria for classification as priority 3 or priority 4, when classified in accordance with telephone algorithms and medical priority dispatch protocols approved by the medical control board. 
Special events ambulance standby service means the positioning of an ambulance and crew at the location of a publicly or privately-sponsored event. 
Sub-area is a section of the eastern division's beneficiary jurisdiction or of the combined beneficiary and nonbeneficiary jurisdiction in the western division drawn so as to divide the service area into three geographical areas for the purpose of equalizing response times within the area. 
System standard of care means the written body of standards, policies, and protocols governing all clinical aspects of the EMS system, which is approved by the governing bodies of the beneficiary member jurisdictions, and which is developed and periodically updated in accordance with procedures set forth in the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement. As used in this context, system standard of care is a comprehensive term including: 
(1)  Input standards including but not limited to personnel certification requirements, in-service training requirements, equipment specifications, on-board inventory requirements, and other requirements which the system must fulfill before receipt of a request for service; 
(2)  Performance standards including but not limited to medical priority dispatching protocols and pre-arrival instructions, medical protocols, standing orders, response time standards, protocols governing authority for on-scene control of patient care, and other performance specifications describing how the system should behave upon receipt of a request for service; and 
(3)  Outcome standards including but not limited to target survival rates for certain narrowly defined presenting problems or presumptive diagnoses, such as witnessed cardiac arrests involving patients whose medical histories meet defined criteria. Outcome standards are results the system intends to achieve by meeting its input and performance standards. 
System status controller (SSC) means a person certified by the medical director as trained and competent to properly employ telephone algorithms, medical priority dispatching protocols, and pre-arrival instructions approved by the medical control board, and to operate the EMS control center's computer-aided dispatch system in accordance with the system status plan, so as to maintain the best possible ambulance coverage of the regulated service area, given the remaining resources available at any point in time. 
System status plan means the plan and protocols for staffing, deployment, and redeployment of ambulances which is developed and utilized by EMSA's operations contractor, and which specifies how many ambulances will be staffed and available within the regulated service area each hour of the day, each day of the week, including the locations of available ambulances (not assigned to calls) within the regulated service area, specified separately for each hour of the day, for each day of the week, and every remaining number of ambulances then-available in the system, and including protocols for event-driven re-deployment of those remaining ambulances. 
Western division means that portion of the regulated service area which is located west of Stroud, and which may include the City of Stroud subject to requirements set forth in the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-101. - Medical director. 
The medical director shall be appointed by the medical control board as provided for in the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement; shall recommend a system standard of care designed to achieve a state-of-the-art quality of emergency medical care within the regulated service area; shall certify ambulances and personnel as meeting the requirements of this article, and shall have those powers and duties granted and ascribed to him in the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement, plus such additional powers and duties as are granted and ascribed to him herein. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-102. - Medical control board. 
The medical control board is hereby designated as the elected representatives constituting the Board of Directors of the EPF. Its members shall be appointed by the Emergency Physicians Foundation as provided for in the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement. The medical control board shall be the policy-making, rule-making, and fact-finding body of the EPF, and shall review and establish all aspects of the system standard of care; and shall have those powers and duties granted and ascribed to it in the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-103. - Emergency Physicians Foundation (EPF). 
The Emergency Physicians Foundation, acting through its appointed medical control board, is established, concurrently herewith, by adoption of the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement as the administrative agency to oversee clinical aspects of the care rendered by the regional EMS system to the citizens of the regulated service area. The EPF shall have the powers and duties granted and ascribed to it in the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-104. - Emergency Medical Services Authority (EMSA). 
EMSA is hereby designated as the sole provider of emergency and routine ambulance transport within the Regulated Service Area, pursuant to 60 O.S. § 1-2415, et. seq. No person or entity may provide emergency, routine or special events ambulance services in the regulated service area unless acting as EMSA's operations contractor. EMSA is authorized and directed to take such steps as are necessary to ensure the availability of both emergency and routine ambulance services within the regulated service area, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  EMSA shall at all times comply with the terms of: the EMS Interlocal Cooperation Agreement, the Amended and Restated Trust Indenture, this uniform code for emergency medical services, and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations; 
(2)  Except during emergencies as provided by law, EMSA shall at all times employ a competitively-selected operations contractor who shall operate the EMS control centers (eastern and western divisions) and directly provide all ambulance services rendered under EMSA's trade name; 
(3)  In contracting for the provision of ambulance services, EMSA shall employ such bidding processes and contracting methods as are reasonable and effective in ensuring the uninterrupted and reliable delivery of quality ambulance services to the citizens of the regulated service area; 
(4)  All services provided by EMSA through its operations contractor or, in the event of an emergency directly by EMSA, shall meet or exceed the standards set forth herein and in the system standard of care, as approved and periodically updated by the medical control board; and 
(5)  EMSA's operations contractor shall operate as a subcontractor to EMSA and under EMSA's state EMS permit. EMSA shall maintain a valid Oklahoma State EMS permit at all times. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-105. - Mandatory centralized call processing. 
(a)  All telephone requests for ambulance services, both emergency and routine, originating within the regulated service area shall terminate at an EMS control Center, where a certified system status controller (SSC) shall establish the call's priority classification, determine the patient's location, and if appropriate, deliver pre-arrival instructions. The SSC shall also determine the need for first responder service; alert the first responder agency if appropriate; and directly dispatch the call. 
(b)  During times of disaster or severe EMS system overload, declared by the president of EMSA or his designee, the EMS control center shall at all times have full authority to direct the positioning, movements, and run responses of all ambulance units of all ambulance services until such time as the declaration has been lifted. 
(c)  All calls processed by an EMS control center shall be recorded to facilitate subsequent auditing of the SSC's actions and decisions by the medical director, and all such recordings shall be safely stored and shall be erased after an appropriate interval or as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-106. - Mandatory EMS data system and reporting standards. 
EMSA's operations contractor and every certified first responder agency, shall comply with EMS data system and reporting standards as prescribed by the medical director; provided, however, that changes in data collection or reporting requirements which may reasonably be expected to require costly modification of existing computer hardware or software shall be approved by EMSA prior to implementation. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-107. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  EMSA's operations contractor shall keep in full force and effect a policy or policies of public liability and property damage insurance, executed by a financially stable insurance carrier(s) acceptable to EMSA and licensed or permitted to write insurance by the Oklahoma Insurance Commission, with coverage provisions insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of EMSA's ambulances, and providing that amount of recovery shall be in limits of not less than the following sums: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance including but not limited to commercial owner and contractor protection, operational products, completed operations, property and personal injury with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 aggregate. Coverage shall be on an occurrence basis. 
(2)  Workers compensation coverage to statutory limits as required by law; employer's liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000.00 bodily injury by incident and $1,000,000.00 bodily injury by disease for each employee. 
(3)  Comprehensive automobile liability covering all vehicles used by the operations contractor, including owned, hired, and nonowed vehicles, with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injury (including death) per occurrence, and property damage of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
(4)  Automobile physical damage insurance for comprehensive and collision covering all vehicles provided by EMSA and used under this contract. 
(b)  EMSA's operations contractor shall keep in full force and effect a general comprehensive liability and professional liability policy or policies issued by a casualty insurance company licensed or permitted to write insurance by the Oklahoma Insurance Commission, with coverage provisions insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the actions of the operations contractor or any of his employees, and providing that the amount of recovery shall be in limits of not less than the following sums: 
(1)  Professional medical liability insurance including errors and omissions with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 annual aggregate. 
(2)  "Umbrella" coverage in the amount of at least $5,000,000.00 shall be provided as additional coverage to all underlying policies. 
(c)  EMSA's operations contractor shall furnish to EMSA, an original and duplicate certificates of insurance which shall indicate the types of insurance, the amount of insurance and the expiration dates of all policies carried by the ambulance service. Each certificate of insurance shall name all jurisdictions in the regulated service area as an additional named insured, and shall contain a statement by the insurer issuing the certificate that the policies of insurance listed thereon will not be cancelled or materially altered by the said insurer absent 60 days written notice received by all jurisdictions. 
(d)  Self insurance programs must meet and comply with all applicable laws and regulations; be reasonable and limited to an amount of potential fiscal liability which would; if realized, not impair the operations contractor's ability to perform under the contract, and offer coverage to that required in subsections (a) through (c) above. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-108. - Specialized mobile intensive care certification. 
Any hospital shall be eligible to apply to the medical control board for a certification to operate a specialized mobile intensive care unit, which unit shall be used solely for inter-hospital transport of patients requiring specialized enroute medical monitoring and advanced life support which exceed the capabilities of the equipment and personnel on board a paramedic ambulance. Such certification shall be subject to review every two years. Failure by the holder of such certification to limit the vehicle to inter-hospital transports of the types of patients specified within the certification shall constitute grounds for revocation of the certification. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-109. - Clinical quality of ambulance services. 
Every ambulance responding to a Code 1, 2, 3, or 4 call at any location within the regulated service area shall be equipped, staffed, and licensed to operate at the EMT-paramedic level. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-110. - Ambulance response time performance required. 
(a)  EMSA's operations contractor shall employ sufficient personnel, acquire sufficient equipment, and manage its resources as necessary to achieve the following response time standards on all emergency calls and routine transport calls originating within the regulated service area: 
(1)  Response time standards for the eastern division beneficiary member jurisdiction and combined western division beneficiary and nonbeneficiary member jurisdictions. On the effective date of this code, subject to the exemptions set forth in subsection (b) below, the following standards of response time reliability shall be applicable to all patient transports originating from within each member jurisdiction of the eastern division member jurisdiction and the combined western division beneficiary and nonbeneficiary jurisdiction of the regulated service area: 
Priority 1 standard: 90 percent reliability or better. 
Priority 2 standard: 90 percent reliability or better. 
Priority 3 standard: 90 percent reliability or better. 
Priority 4 standard: 90 percent reliability or better. 
(2)  Response time standards for the nonbeneficiary member jurisdictions of the eastern division. On the effective date of this code, subject only to the exemptions set forth in section 34-111, subsection (b) below, the following standards of response time reliability shall be applicable to all patient transports originating within the nonbeneficiary member jurisdiction in the eastern division: 
Priority 1 and 2 standard: 75 percent minimum during each month in each Individual non-beneficiary member jurisdiction priority 1 and priority 2 transports combined, and a 90 percent minimum during each month for combined priority 1 and 2 transports within the combined nonbeneficiary jurisdictions. 
Priority 3 standard: 90 percent reliability or better during each month. 
Priority 4 standard: 90 percent reliability or better during each month. 
a.  Three sub-areas will be defined by EMSA in the area comprising the eastern division beneficiary jurisdiction and three in the combined beneficiary and nonbeneficiary jurisdictions of the western division for compliance measurement for priority 1 transports. The operations contractor shall use best efforts to ensure response time equity for priority 1 transports among the sub-areas, keeping response times in each sub-area within 15 percent of the compliance required for the entire jurisdiction. Variations of more than 15 percent from the jurisdiction standards within the same sub-area for more than three consecutive months, or more than 6 months during any 12 month period, shall be considered chronic response time discrimination. Provided, however, that in the event the volume of priority 1 transports in any sub-area during any month is less than 100, sufficient additional priority 1 transports shall be added from the sub-area, in sequential order from one or more months immediately preceding, to that month's sub-area statistics so that the total volume of priority 1 transports included in the calculation is 100. 
b.  Response time exceptions. The operations contractor shall maintain mechanisms for reserve production capacity to increase production should a temporary system overload persist. However, it is understood that from time to time unusual factors beyond the contractor's reasonable control affect the achievement of specified response time standards. These unusual factors are limited to unusually severe weather conditions, declared disasters, or period of unusually high demand for emergency services. High demand is defined as those periods when 14 or more emergency responses within the beneficiary jurisdiction are in progress simultaneously. Equipment failure, traffic congestion, ambulance failure, dispatch error or other causes shall not be grounds for granting an exception to compliance with the response time standard. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-111. - Prohibition against refusal to transport. 
It shall be a violation of this code for EMSA's operations contractor to fail to respond to a call or to transport or to render emergency medical patient assessment and treatment, as appropriate, or to otherwise refuse or fail to provide any ambulance services originating within the regulated service area because of the patient's perceived, demonstrated or stated inability to pay for such services, or because of the location of the patient within the regulated service area or because of the unavailable status or the location of any ambulance unit at the time of the request. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-112. - First responder agency certification. 
Any person or agency providing first responder services within this jurisdiction shall be certified by the medical director as a first responder. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-113. - Procedures for denial, revocation or suspension of a certification. 
For any proposed denial, suspension or revocation of a certification issued pursuant to this uniform code for emergency medical services, the following standards, which shall not be less than those standards contained in the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986, 42 U.S.C. 11112, or less than any standards contained in applicable Oklahoma Statutes or applicable Oklahoma case law, shall apply. Such procedures in any event, shall contain at least the following: 
(1)  Written notice of the charges pending against the person or entity whose certification may be suspended or revoked; 
(2)  A right to an appeal, requested in writing within 30 days of any adverse action by the medical director to the medical control board; 
(3)  The right to a de novo hearing on any adverse action by the medical control board conducted by an impartial and independent hearing officer, including a right to cross-examine witnesses, and to present witnesses and evidence on the person's own benefit, provided such hearing is requested in writing within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-114. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  To perform or permit anyone to perform duties as an ambulance driver, attendant (EMT-basic, EMT-D, or paramedic), system status controller, or first responder without a complying with the terms of this chapter, or for any EMT-paramedic to seek or accept medical direction by radio contact from anyone who is not a certified base station physician, as defined herein. 
(2)  To use, or cause to be used, an ambulance service other than an EMSA's operations contractor, except for those services described in subsection (b). 
(3)  For any person, firm or organization to respond to emergency calls originating within the regulated service area, other than EMSA's operations contractor. 
(4)  For any person, firm or organization to provide special events ambulance standby service within the regulated service area, other than EMSA's operations contractor. 
(5)  For any person, firm or organization to respond to routine transport calls originating within the regulated service areas other than EMSA's operations contractor. 
(6)  To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an ambulance, or first responder unit. 
(b)  It shall not be a violation of this code, if the vehicle or ambulance is: 
(1)  A privately owned vehicle not used in the business of transporting patients who are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or helpless. 
(2)  A vehicle rendering services as an ambulance in the event of a major catastrophe or emergency when ambulances with certifications based in the locality of the catastrophe or emergency are incapacitated or insufficient in number to render the services needed. 
(3)  An ambulance owned or operated by, or under contract with, the federal or state government. 
(4)  An ambulance transporting a patient to a location within the regulated service area, which transport originated from a point outside the regulated service area. 
(5)  An ambulance responding to a call pursuant to a mutual aid agreement with EMSA's operations contractor. 
(6)  A vehicle engaged in a routine transport call to transport a patient from a hospital, nursing home or free-standing dialysis center (i.e., a dialysis center not located on hospital grounds) which is located within the regulated service area to any jurisdiction outside the regulated service area (the "receiving jurisdiction"), if the receiving jurisdiction allows EMSA's operations contractor to lawfully engage in routine transport calls to transport patients from hospitals, nursing homes, and free-standing dialysis centers located within that receiving jurisdiction to destinations within the regulated service area. 
(7)  A vehicle engaged in a routine transport call to transport a patient from a hospital, nursing home, or freestanding dialysis center located within the regulated service area to any unincorporated area. 
(8)  A vehicle engaged in a routine transport call to transport a patient from a hospital, nursing home, or freestanding dialysis center located in either the eastern or western division of the regulated service area, to a destination in the other division of the regulated service area. 
(9)  A vehicle engaged in the interstate transport of a patient. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-115. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Mustang, Oklahoma. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-116. - Quality assurance fee. 
EMSA shall pay a monthly medical quality assurance fee, as determine by the medical control board and approved by the beneficiary member jurisdictions. The monthly fee shall be equal to one-twelfth of the annual EPF budget approved by the beneficiary jurisdictions. The fee may be recalculated every July using the same formula. Such fee shall be paid to the quality assurance fund of the medical control board. The fee shall be paid during each calendar month within 30 days after the end of the month. 
(Ord. No. 869, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Secs. 34-117—34-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 34-200. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Landlord shall mean any person, company, corporation, or other entity that owns or manages single-family and/or multifamily residential living units and leases them to tenants and is responsible for payment of the utility bills for the living units. 
Living unit shall mean a residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for a family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Medical service program shall mean the services, products, expertise, equipment, and costs associated with the EMSA "TotalCare program," billed monthly on a utility customer's bill. 
Multifamily residential utility customer shall mean a Mustang utility customer with two or more living units served by one city utility bill; provided multifamily residential living units will not include hotels, motels, or college dormitories. 
Program year shall be from October 1 through September 30 of a calendar year. Each program year shall be designated by the calendar year in which the program year begins and the year in which the program year expires (e.g., October 1, 2010 through September 30, 2011, shall be designated program year 2010/2011). 
Single-family residential utility customer shall mean a Mustang Utility Customer with one living unit receiving one city utility bill. 
Tenant shall mean the person or persons that sign the lease for a living unit at a specific location within the city limits of Mustang, which living unit receives Mustang utility services. 
Tenant's household shall include all the individuals permanently residing together in the leased living unit with the tenant. 
TotalCare program shall mean the program, as it currently exists or may hereafter be amended, which is sponsored by EMSA. 
Utility customer shall mean the person or persons that established a utility account with Mustang for utility services for a single-family residential or a multifamily residential living unit. 
Utility customer's household shall include all individuals permanently residing together in a living unit at a specific location within the city limits of Mustang, which living unit receives Mustang utility services. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 2-8-2010)  
Sec. 34-201. - Medical service program and fee. 
(a)  Each single-family residential utility customer and multifamily residential utility customer within the corporate limits of the city shall be included in the medical service program, unless the utility customer affirmatively declines participation in said program in the manner set forth in section 34-202 of this article. 
(b)  Single-family residential utility customers participating in the program shall have included within their utility bills a charge of $1.50 per month. 
(c)  Multifamily residential utility customers participating in the program shall be billed $1.50 per month per occupied living unit. There is a rebuttable presumption that 50 percent of the total number of living units served solely by a single mustang utility bill are occupied. The number of presumed living units shall be rounded down, but to not less than one. 
(d)  The total number of living units attributed to multifamily residential utility customers and landlords shall be based upon the number of housekeeping units on record with the Mustang Utilities Department. It is the responsibility of all multifamily residential utility customers and landlords to annually confirm with the utilities department whether this number of housekeeping units is in fact accurate. Adjustments may be made to the number of housekeeping units on record with the utilities department based on information provided by sworn affidavit from the multifamily residential utility customer or landlord and confirmed by the city. Multifamily residential utility customers and landlords shall make staff available to meet at the subject residences with city utilities department personnel to confirm the number of living units as provided for by the utility customer in the sworn affidavit mentioned herein. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 2-8-2010)  
Sec. 34-202. - Nonparticipation election. 
(a)  Any utility customer who desires not to participate in the medical service program for the next program year shall either (1) sign and file a declaration of nonparticipation, on forms prescribed and provided by the city, or (2) file the proper internet-based form, prior to September 30 immediately preceding the beginning of the next program year, or upon opening a utility service account for a mustang residential address. The utility customer's election to either participate or not participate in the program shall remain unchanged for the following program year unless affirmatively changed by the utility customer before the September 30 immediately preceding the program year at issue. 
(b)  If a multifamily residential utility customer or landlord or his or her authorized representative elects for a property not to participate in the medical service program, the multifamily residential utility customer or landlord or his/her authorized representative shall obtain from each tenant a written and signed acknowledgement stating that the tenant: (1) understands that the tenant and the tenant's household are not included in the medical service program; (2) understands that the tenant may affirmatively elect to personally participate in the medical service program by contacting EMSA and enrolling in the program at the full fee associated with the program; (3) understands failure to participate in the program will subject the tenant and tenant's household to the full costs associated with EMSA services; and (4) has been informed of the estimated per trip cost for an emergency ambulance transport run. The written and signed acknowledgment described herein shall be maintained in the multifamily residential utility customer's or landlord's or his/her authorized representative's records and available for inspection by the City of Mustang upon request. This acknowledgment must be obtained for all tenants existing at the beginning of the program year and all new tenants moving into the landlord's or multifamily residential utility customer's property at any time during the program year. 
(c)  Failure to obtain and maintain on file the written acknowledgement from each tenant shall be a separate violation of this section. In addition, every 30-day period from the beginning of a lease until written acknowledgment is received or the multifamily residential utility customer or landlord or his/her authorized representative elects for a property to participate in the medical service program shall constitute a separate offense for each tenant affected. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 1059, § 1, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 34-203. - Receipt of service charges. 
The service charges herein established for the medical service program shall be billed to each utility customer monthly, along with the bill for other city utility services and shall carry the same due date as now or may hereafter be established for utility service bills. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 2-8-2010)  
Sec. 34-204. - Accountability for funds received. 
The city is not responsible for either the provision of services by EMSA or the TotalCare membership. The city's sole responsibility is to properly receive, record and transfer to EMSA the funds paid by the participating utility customers for TotalCare membership under the medical services program. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 2-8-2010)  
Sec. 34-205. - Adjustment of charges, appeal. 
Any utility customer who considers the medical service program charges applicable to his living unit to be erroneous because said utility customer opted out of the program, may request review of the charges by the city's utilities department. Additionally, any landlord or multifamily residential utility customer who encounters special circumstances that would justify modifying the number of occupied living units determined in accordance with the provisions of section 6-102 (such as fire, act of God, or renovations), may request review thereof by the city's utilities department. Any other problems experienced by the utility customer with regard to his/her TotalCare benefits shall be referred to the president of EMSA or his designee. The determination by said president or designee may be appealed to the EMSA board of trustees by written notice of appeal filed with the director within ten days of the president's determination. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 2-8-2010)  
Sec. 34-206. - Penalty. 
Unless otherwise provided in this article, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, excluding costs and fees. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 2-8-2010)  
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 54; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70; natural resources, ch. 74; planning, ch. 90; signs, ch. 94; solid waste, ch. 98; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102; subdivisions, ch. 106; abandoned, derelict or junked vehicles, § 114-551 et seq.; utilities, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, 50 O.S. 
 
Sec. 38-31. - Nuisances defined. 
(a)  Nuisances generally. A nuisance is unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or is any thing or condition, which does any of the following: 
(1)  Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 
(2)  Offends decency; 
(3)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property; or 
(4)  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of property. 
(b)  Public nuisance. A public nuisance is one which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal. 
(c)  Private nuisance. Every nuisance not included in subsection (b) of this section is a private nuisance. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 50 O.S. §§ 1—3.  
Sec. 38-32. - Abatement procedures cumulative. 
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this article and by other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative one to the other, and the city may elect to follow any such procedure which is applicable in abating any particular nuisance. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.120)  
Sec. 38-33. - Nuisances prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person (owner, lessee or other person) to create or maintain a nuisance within the city, or to permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his control within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.100)  
Sec. 38-34. - Responsibility of property owner for nuisance created by former owner. 
Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.020) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 50 O.S. § 5.  
Sec. 38-35. - Lapse of time does not legalize public nuisance. 
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual obstruction of public right. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.030) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 50 O.S. § 7.  
Sec. 38-36. - Remedies against public nuisances. 
The remedies against a public nuisance are as follows: 
(1)  Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court. 
(2)  Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate court. 
(3)  Civil action. 
(4)  Abatement: 
a.  By a person injured as provided in 50 O.S. § 12. 
b.  By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.040) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 50 O.S. § 8.  
Sec. 38-37. - Remedies against private nuisances. 
The remedies against a private nuisance are as follows: 
(1)  Civil action. 
(2)  Abatement: 
a.  By a person injured as provided in 50 O.S. §§ 14, 15. 
b.  By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.050) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 50 O.S. § 13.  
Sec. 38-38. - Certain acts declared public nuisances. 
(a)  In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of this Code or law, the following are declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink, or the keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made. 
(2)  The sale, offering for sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages in violation of state law or ordinances of the city, or the keeping of a place where alcoholic beverages are sold, offered for sale or furnished in violation of state law or ordinances of the city. 
(3)  The exposure, display, sale or distribution of obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects, or the keeping of a place where such things are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed. 
(4)  The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot machines, punchboards or otherwise. 
(5)  The keeping of a place where prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse is practiced. 
(6)  The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law or ordinance are practiced or carried on. 
(7)  The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the ordinances of the city, or the keeping of a place where such dances are held. 
(8)  The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease. 
(9)  The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities, or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises. 
(10)  The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which materially or unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others. 
(11)  Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or ordinances. 
(12)  Permitting water or other liquids to flow or fall, or ice or snow to fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  All wells, pools, cisterns or bodies or containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety. 
(14)  Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse, or other things which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin or disease germs, and the premises on which such things exist. 
(15)  Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health or safety because of damage, decay or other condition. 
(16)  Any pit, hole or other thing which is so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety. 
(17)  Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety. 
(18)  Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace, health, safety or welfare. 
(19)  Any motor vehicle (whether in operating condition or not) or any trailer without a current vehicle plate as required by law for vehicles used on the public highways, when stored or kept in a residence district. 
(20)  Any of the following not conforming with the provisions of this subsection: Any camping or travel trailer, utility and hauling trailer, camper shell or boat which is parked or stored in front of the front building lines of a residence shall be placed or stored so that it does not create a traffic hazard because of an obstruction to the view of traffic. 
(21)  Any growth of 12 inches or more in height of grass or weeds on property, to include easements and right-of-way areas lying within the property boundaries and street rights-of-way. For purposes of this provision, the term "weeds" shall have the meaning ascribed in section 38-61 of this chapter. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes unless, in the determination of the code enforcement officer, such grass or weeds pose a hazard to traffic and are located in, or within ten yards of, the public right-of-way at intersections. 
(22)  The accumulation of trash not otherwise permitted by ordinance, or the nonremoval of trash from property, to include easements and right-of-way areas lying within the property boundaries and adjoining street rights-of-way. For purposes of this provision, the term "trash" shall have the meaning ascribed in section 38-61 of this chapter. 
(b)  The enumeration of certain public nuisances in this section shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions of law or ordinances defining public or private nuisances either in more general or more specific terms. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.070; Ord. No. 943, § 1, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 1172, § 3, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 38-39. - Summary abatement. 
(a)  Authorized; purpose. Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of one or more persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to require, the city manager or other appropriate officer or agency of the city government to take immediate and proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement. 
(b)  Request for abatement. The chief of the fire department, the chief of police, the city attorney, the building inspector, the electrical inspector, the plumbing inspector or any other officer subordinate to the city manager may submit, through or with the consent of the city manager, to the city council, a statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by the ordinances of the city or law, and a request or recommendation that it be abated. The city manager himself, the health officer, any councilmember, or any resident of the city may submit such a statement and request or recommendation to the city council. 
(c)  Determination by council; hearing. The council shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a nuisance in fact. For the purpose of gathering evidence on the subject, the council shall have power to subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers and other effects. Before proceeding to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, the council shall give notice of a hearing on the proposed abatement to the owner of any property concerned and to any other person alleged or deemed responsible for or to be causing the nuisance, and an adequate opportunity to be heard, if such notice and opportunity for a hearing can be given. Such notice to the owner and other persons concerned shall be given in writing by mail or by service by a police officer if their names and addresses are known, but if the names or addresses are not known and the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the persons or the public adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation within the city. 
(d)  Order to abate; abatement by city. If the council finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall direct the owner and/or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance to abate it within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the persons or the public adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If such peace, health, safety, morals or welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the owner or other person responsible for or causing the nuisance does not abate it within the specified time, the council shall direct the city manager to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as authorized by 50 O.S. § 16. The city clerk shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the owner and/or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just under the circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to the city collectible as other debts of the city may be collected. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.080)  
Sec. 38-40. - Abatement by suit in district court. 
In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the city may bring suit in the district court of the county, as provided in 50 O.S. § 17. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.090)  
Sec. 38-41. - Abatement of health nuisances. 
(a)  Pursuant to authority granted by 63 O.S. § 1-1011, the health officer shall have authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in the city to remove from such premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, or condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health, within 24 hours, or within such other time as may be reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute an offense. Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the health officer or by a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant or agent is unknown or is without the state, the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises, or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having general circulation in the city. 
(b)  If the order is not complied with, the health officer may cause the order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified to the city clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be added to the water bill or other city utility bill of the owner or occupant if he is a user of water from the city water system or such other utility service. The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it is added, and shall become due and payable, and be subject to the same regulations relating to delinquency in payment, as the utility bill itself. If such owner or occupant is not a user of any city utility service, such cost, after certification to the city clerk, may be collected in any manner in which any other debt due the city may be collected. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.110)  
Sec. 38-42. - Authority of city to determine and abate nuisances. 
As provided in 50 O.S. § 16, the city has power to determine what is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and for the protection of the public health, the public parks and the public water supply, outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the city has power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner and an opportunity for him to be heard, if this can be done. 
(Code 1977, § 8.12.060)  
Secs. 38-43—38-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CLEANING AND MOWING OF PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 38-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cleaning means the removal of trash from property. 
Owner means the owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county treasurer. 
Trash means any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials, rubbish, offal or waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for, discarded or abandoned, garbage, rags, wood, plaster, glass, nails, cans, cement, insulation, plumbing materials and fixtures, plasterboard, roofing and siding materials, brick or stone building rubble, grass and worthless vegetation, dead animals, wire (barbed or otherwise), all waste or discarded materials and substances, and any machine or machines, tires, vehicle or vehicles, or parts of a machine or vehicle which has lost their identity, character, utility, or serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling, or the ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to perform their intended functions, or are cast off, discarded, or thrown away or left as waste, wreckage, or junk. 
Weed includes but is not limited to poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac and all vegetation at any state of maturity which: 
(1)  Exceeds 12 inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or produce for human consumption grown in a tended and cultivated garden unless such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the mowing of weeds; 
(2)  Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or accumulations of refuse or trash; 
(3)  Harbors rodents or vermin; 
(4)  Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors; 
(5)  Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or 
(6)  Is dead or diseased. 
The term "weed" shall not include tended crops on land zoned for agricultural use which are planted more than 150 feet from a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use. 
(Code 1977, § 8.08.020; Ord. No. 943, § 1, 9-6-2005) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-111(D).  
Sec. 38-62. - General authority of city. 
The city may cause property within the city limits to be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the procedure in this article.  
Sec. 38-63. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes or to railroad property under the jurisdiction of the state corporation commission. However, the city may cause the removal of weeds or trash from property zoned and used for agricultural purposes pursuant to the provisions of this article, but only if such weeds or trash pose a hazard to traffic and are located in, or within ten yards of, the public right-of-way at intersections. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-111(E).  
Sec. 38-64. - Duty of city employees to report detrimental or hazardous conditions. 
Any officer or employee of the city who discovers an accumulation of trash or the growth of grass and weeds, or both these conditions, upon any premises within the limits of the city, by reason of which such premises appear to him to be: 
(1)  Detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community; 
(2)  A hazard to traffic; 
(3)  A fire hazard to the danger of property; or 
(4)  Any two or more of such results in combination; 
should report such condition to the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 8.08.030)  
Sec. 38-65. - Service of notices. 
The service of all notices prescribed by this article shall be evidenced by the return of the officer making such service, certified in his official capacity, and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 8.08.090)  
Sec. 38-66. - Order to correct conditions. 
At least ten days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property by mail, at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office, before the enforcement officer holds a hearing or takes action under this article. The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate, and the notice shall further state that, unless such work is performed within ten days of the date of the notice, the work shall be done by the city and a notice of lien shall be filed with the county clerk against the property for the costs due and owing the city. At the time of mailing of notice to the property owner, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. However, if the property owner cannot be located within ten days from the date of mailing by the enforcement officer, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication, as defined in 11 O.S. § 1-102, one time not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action by the city. If the enforcement officer anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in accordance with the provisions of section 38-74, the notice, whether by mail, posting or publication, shall state that any accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the owner's property occurring within six months from and after the date of this notice may be summarily abated by the enforcement officer, that the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner, and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner. 
(Code 1977, §§ 8.08.040(A), 8.08.050) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-111(A)(1).  
Sec. 38-67. - Cleaning or mowing by city with property owner's consent. 
The owner of the property may give written consent to the city authorizing the removal of trash or the mowing of weeds or grass. By giving written consent, the owner waives his right to a hearing by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8.08.060(B)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-111(A)(2).  
Sec. 38-68. - Hearing. 
A hearing may be held by the enforcement officer to determine whether the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property. 
(Code 1977, § 8.08.060(A)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-111(A)(3).  
Sec. 38-69. - Cleaning or mowing by city authorized. 
Upon a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or hazard, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of such conditions, the agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or grass, and performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function of the city. Immediately following the cleaning or mowing of the property, the city clerk shall file a notice of lien with the county clerk describing the property and the work performed by the city, and stating that the city claims a lien on the property for the cleaning or mowing costs. 
(Code 1977, § 8.08.060(C)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-111(A)(4).  
Sec. 38-70. - Work may be done by city employees or by contract. 
The work ordered to be performed under sections 38-67 through 38-69 may be done by the employees of the city under supervision of the enforcement officer, or it may be let by contract under such terms and conditions as the council may prescribe. 
(Code 1977, § 8.08.070)  
Sec. 38-71. - Assessment of costs. 
The enforcement officer shall determine the actual cost of such cleaning and mowing under sections 38-67 through 38-69 and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The city clerk shall forward by mail to the property owner specified in section 38-66 a statement of such actual cost and demanding payment. If the cleaning and mowing are done by the city, the cost to the property owner for the cleaning and mowing shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and equipment required. If the cleaning and mowing are done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. 
(Code 1977, § 8.08.080) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-111(A)(5).  
Sec. 38-72. - Collection of costs. 
If payment is not made within 30 days from the date of the mailing of the statement pursuant to section 38-71, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the county treasurer and the cost shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. Until fully paid, the cost and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date the cost is certified to the county treasurer. In addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the cost is certified to the county treasurer, coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid. At the time of collection, the county treasurer shall collect a fee as set forth in section 42-38 for each parcel of property. The fee shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the county. At any time prior to collection as provided in this section, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon, including an action in personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien created pursuant to this section. Upon receiving payment, if any, the city clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the lien. 
(Code 1977, § 8.08.100) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-111(A)(6).  
Sec. 38-73. - Appeals. 
Property owners shall have a right of appeal to the city council from any order of the enforcement officer under this article. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days after the administrative order is rendered. 
(Code 1977, § 8.08.060(D)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-111(A)(7).  
Sec. 38-74. - Summary abatement. 
If a notice is given by the city council to a property owner ordering the property within the city limits to be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the procedures provided for in this article, any subsequent accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the property occurring within a six-month period may be declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated without further prior notice to the property owner. At the time of each such summary abatement the city shall notify the property owner of the abatement and the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may request a hearing within ten days after the date of mailing the notice. The notice and hearing shall be as provided for in this article. Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected as provided for in sections 38-71 and 38-72. This section shall not apply if the records of the county clerk show that the property was transferred after notice was given pursuant to section 38-66. 
(Code 1977, § 8.08.040(B)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 111(B).  
Secs. 38-75—38-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER WELLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Water wells, 82 O.S. § 1020 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-101. - Purpose and scope of article. 
The regulations and standards of this article are intended to protect the city's public water supply, and to ensure that individual water wells are not cross connected with the city water supply thereby contaminating the water supply. To provide notice to the city when water wells are being drilled, and to check to see if public water supply is available. 
(Code 1977, § 13.32.010)  
Sec. 38-102. - Certification of adequacy. 
The city will not certify to any home buyer, lending institution or loan guarantee agency the adequacy of any individual water system which does not meet or exceed the standards in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 13.32.020)  
Sec. 38-103. - Inspection. 
The chief building official, or his official designee, shall inspect, at such time as he deems necessary, each water well regulated by this article. 
(Code 1977, § 13.32.070)  
Sec. 38-104. - Types of water supply. 
Dependent upon geological and soil conditions and amount of rainfall, individual water supplies shall be of the following types: drilled well, driven well, dug well or bored well. Because of the danger of contamination, surface bodies of water and land cisterns shall not be used as sources of individual water supply unless properly treated by acceptable means. 
(Code 1977, § 13.32.030)  
Sec. 38-105. - Drilling permit. 
(a)  Required; fee; issuance. It shall be unlawful for any individual, corporation or company to drill an individual water well within the city limits without first obtaining a water well drilling permit. A permit fee as set forth in section 42-38 shall be charged. The permit shall be issued by the department of community development. 
(b)  Application. The application for a drilling permit shall be made by the owner or the well drilling contractor licensed by the city. Such application shall require that the purpose of the water well shall be for regular use or for domestic purposes. If the city finds that information furnished on the application is a misrepresentation of the actual intention, the permit will be voided, and such misrepresentation shall be a violation of this Code, classified as a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1977, § 13.32.040)  
Sec. 38-106. - Contractor's license. 
(a)  No person except a licensed water well contractor shall engage in the business of drilling water wells requiring permits as provided in this article. A water well drilling contractor's license may be obtained from the community development office of the city upon presentation of a state well driller's license and payment of a license fee as set forth in section 42-38. Such license shall expire on October 31 following the date of issuance, and no reduction in fees for a partial year shall be given. Employees of duly licensed water well drilling contractors shall not be required in the regular course of such employment to obtain such license or pay such fee in order to engage in the work of drilling water wells. 
(b)  The city council shall have the right to revoke the license of any water well contractor for a violation of any of the city ordinances relating to water wells. 
(Code 1977, §§ 13.32.050, 13.32.080)  
Sec. 38-107. - Bond and insurance requirements for contractors. 
(a)  No water well contractor's license shall be issued to any applicant until the applicant therefor shall have deposited with the community development department of the city a surety bond with a power of attorney in the sum of $1,000.00, to be known as the water well contractor's bond. Such bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall expire on October 31 of each year. The bond shall be payable to the city, and as a condition shall state that the licensee shall faithfully and properly conduct his business in compliance with all the ordinances of the city relating to water wells and water well contractors, and the bond shall be conditioned for the payment of all fines and penalties imposed for the violation of such laws, and for the protection and indemnification of the city against all damages and/or injury to any person or property resulting directly or indirectly from the action of the licensee or his employees or representatives. 
(b)  The water well contractor shall be required to show proof of workers' compensation insurance and general liability insurance coverage, and copies of such documents shall be attached to the contractor's bond. 
(Code 1977, § 13.32.060)  
Sec. 38-108. - Quantity and quality of water for residential use. 
(a)  Minimum quantity. For ordinary residential use, not less than 50 gallons of water per person per day shall be provided. The combined capacity of the source and storage on the system for delivery of water to the residence shall be adequate to supply fixtures at their design demand rates. 
(b)  Water quality. Water from an individual water supply shall be certified as bacteriologically safe by the state health department prior to clearance by the city for human consumption. 
(c)  Chlorination of system. After construction or major repair, the private potable water supply shall be chlorinated to a level of 50 to 100 parts per million by the individual doing the work, to remove any contamination which may have gained entry. Ordinary liquid laundry bleach may be used to disinfect a well. (Liquid laundry bleach contains 5.25 percent available chlorine.) In a six-inch diameter well, for each foot of water there shall be 1½ gallons. For 100 gallons of water to be treated, to obtain 50 to 100 parts per million of chlorine, 14 to 28 ounces of chlorine shall be used. The chlorine is poured into the well, then the chlorine is mixed with the water in the well by inserting a garden hose through the well seal in the top of the well until the chlorine is thoroughly mixed. All the water taps in the system are opened until a strong chlorine odor is present, then the taps are closed. The chlorine shall be allowed to remain in the system for two hours, or preferably overnight. The system shall be flushed thoroughly, and after one week a sample may be collected for bacterial analysis. If other strength chlorine products are used, the amount required will vary accordingly. 
(Code 1977, § 13.32.090)  
Sec. 38-109. - Protection of water supply. 
(a)  Required. An individual water supply shall be so located and constructed as to be safeguarded against contamination. 
(b)  Cross connections. No water well shall be connected to any residence when in conflict with any other provision of this Code. Water wells may be drilled on residential lots when approved for gardening or landscape watering purposes. In no case shall public or private supplies be connected together at the same time. If a private water well and the city water supply have been connected, the water well side shall be disconnected by the removal of a two-foot piece of the pipe. 
(c)  Well location. A potable groundwater source or pump suction line shall not be located closer to potential sources of contamination than the distances shown in the following table. If the underlying rock structure is limestone or fragmented shale, the local or state health department shall be consulted on the well site location. Wells in residential areas shall be located so as to anticipate the effect of new construction on the safety of the water supply. 
TABLE 1. DISTANCE FROM SOURCES 
OF CONTAMINATION TO PRIVATE 
WATER SUPPLIES AND 
PUMP SUCTION LINES 
Source of Contamination 	Distance* 
(feet) 
Sewer 	 50 
Septic tank, subsurface disposal field and lagoon (downhill) 	 50 
Septic tank, subsurface disposal field and lagoon (same elevation as well) 	 75 
Septic tank, subsurface disposal field and lagoon (uphill from well) 	100 
Subsurface pit 	 50 
Sewer of cast iron (leaded or mechanical joints) or approved plastic 	 10 
Subsurface disposal field sand lagoon 	100 
Seepage pit 	100 
Barnyard 	100 
Farm silo 	 25 
Pumphouse floor drain draining to ground surface 	  2 
House foundation or other potential or known source of pollution (downhill from well) 	 50 
House foundation or other potential or known source of pollution (same elevation as well) 	 75 
House foundation or other potential or known source of pollution (uphill from well) 	100 
 
*Note: These distances constitute minimum separation and should be increased in areas of creviced rock or limestone, or where the direction of movement of the groundwater is from sources of contamination toward the well. 
(d)  Elevation. Water wells shall be positively drained and shall be at a higher elevation than potential sources of contamination. Wells in pits are unacceptable. 
(e)  Depth. Private potable well supplies shall not be developed from a water table less than ten feet below the ground surface, while not less than 20 feet is preferable. 
(f)  Casing material. Casings shall conform to the following material standards: 
(1)  National Sanitation Foundation approved plastic pipe. 
(2)  Standard steel pipe. 
(3)  Cast iron pipe in accordance with AWWA standards for well casing. 
(g)  Surface casings. Each well shall be provided with a watertight casing to a distance of at least ten feet below the ground surface. All casings shall extend at least eight inches above the well platform. The casing shall be large enough to permit installation of a separate drop pipe. Surface casing shall conform to the following material standards: 
(1)  National Sanitation Foundation approved plastic pipe. 
(2)  Standard steel pipe (AWWA). 
(3)  Cast iron pipe (AWWA). 
Six inches of 3,000 pound test concrete shall be placed around the well casing. 
(h)  Drilled or driven well casings. Drilled or driven well casings shall be of steel or other suitable material. Where drilled wells extend into a rock formation, the well casing shall extend to and be set firmly in the formation. The annular space between the earth and the outside of the casing shall be filled with 3,000-pound test concrete to a distance of at least ten feet below the ground surface, to make it watertight around the outside of the casing to exclude pollution. 
(i)  Dug or bored well casings. Dug or bored well surface casings shall extend to a distance of at least ten feet below the ground surface. Where the water table is more than ten feet below the ground surface, the watertight casing shall extend below the table surface. Well casings for dug wells or bored wells may be built of sections of concrete, tile, or galvanized or corrugated metal pipe. When used, these shall be surrounded by six inches of 3,000-pound test concrete poured into the hole between the outside of the casing and the ground to a depth of at least ten feet, to make it watertight around the outside of the casing to exclude pollution. 
(j)  Cover. Every potable water well shall be equipped with a tight cover at the top of the casing well or pipe sleeve so that contaminated water or other substances cannot enter the well through the annular opening at the top. A dug well cover shall be provided with a pipe sleeve which will permit the withdrawal of the pump suction pipe, cylinder or jet body without disturbing the cover. Where pump section or discharge pipes enter or leave a well through the side of the casing, the circle of contact shall be watertight. 
(k)  Drainage. All potable water wells shall be constructed so that surface drainage will be diverted away from the well. 
(l)  Terminal construction. Where possible, a four-inch slab should extend at least two feet from the casing. Where a licensed well driller certifies that proper grouting is in place and local conditions warrant, the requirement for a slab may be waived. The casing must be capped with a commercial well seal and shall have access available for disinfection of the well. Electrical cables passing through the seal must be properly sealed. Vents must be turned downward and screened. Where a pitless adaptor is used, the unit must have NSF approval. A bentonite clay seal may be substituted for cement grout from a distance of 12 inches below the adaptor to the surface to facilitate maintenance of the pitless adaptor. A dug well cover shall be provided with a pipe sleeve which will permit the withdrawal of the pump mechanisms without disturbing the cover. All potable water wells shall be constructed so that surface drainage will be diverted away from the well. 
(Code 1977, § 13.32.100)  
Sec. 38-110. - Pumping equipment. 
(a)  Generally. Pumps shall be so constructed and installed as to prevent contamination from entering a potable water supply through the pump units. They shall be sealed to the well casing or covered with a watertight seal. Pumps shall be designed to maintain their prime and shall be so installed that pump parts of the entire assembly are readily accessible for repairs. 
(b)  Pump enclosure. Any pump room or enclosure about a well pump shall be positively drained and protected from freezing by heating or other approved means. 
(Code 1977, § 12.32.110) 
ADD FIGURE PAGE 210-47 
ADD FIGURE PAGE 210-48 
ADD FIGURE PAGE 210-49 
ADD FIGURE PAGE 210-50 
ADD FIGURE PAGE 210-51  
Secs. 38-111—38-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OPEN BURNING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Clean Air Act, 27A O.S. § 2-5-101 et seq.; local regulation of air pollution, 27A O.S. § 2-5-103. 
 
Sec. 38-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The definitions contained in the Oklahoma Administrative Code (OAC 252:100-13-1), under which this article is promulgated, shall also apply. 
Campfire means an outdoor fire where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, screened metal fire pit, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and has a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height, and is used for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes. 
Combustible materials means any substance which will readily burn and shall include those substances which, although generally considered incombustible, are or may be included in the mass of the material burned or to be burned. 
Fire training means a fire purposely set as part of an organized program of drills for the training of firefighting personnel or for testing firefighting materials or equipment, which is part of a recognized training program. 
Land clearing operation means the uprooting, cutting, or clearing of vegetation in preparation for the construction of buildings, the development of residential, commercial, agricultural, or industrial properties, and for the construction and maintenance of rights-of-way. It does not include the clearing of vegetation such as trimmings, fallen limbs, branches, or leaves, or other wastes from routine property maintenance activities. 
Open burning means the burning of combustible materials in such a manner that the products of combustion are emitted directly to the outside atmosphere. 
Open pit incinerator means a device consisting of a pit (into which the material to be combusted is placed) and nozzles, pipes, and other appurtenances designed and arranged in a manner to deliver additional air and/or auxiliary fuel to, or near, the zone of combustion so that theoretically complete combustion is accomplished or approached. 
Products of combustion means all particulate and gaseous air contaminants emitted as a result of the burning of refuse and combustible materials. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish, domestic refuse and all other wastes generated by a trade, business, industry, building operation, or household. 
Yard brush means cut or broken branches, leaves, limbs, shrubbery, or tree trimmings. It does not include refuse, grass clippings, in-ground tree stumps, or any nonvegetative material. 
(Code 1977, § 8.16.030; Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, 27A O.S. § 2-5-104.  
Sec. 38-132. - Purpose of article. 
This article is for the purpose of preventing, abating and controlling air pollution resulting from air contaminants released in the open burning of refuse and other combustible materials. 
(Code 1977, § 8.16.010)  
Sec. 38-133. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall apply to all operations involving open burning except those specifically exempted by section 38-136. 
(Code 1977, § 8.16.020; Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 38-134. - Open burning prohibited. 
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse and other combustible material, except as may be allowed in compliance with section 38-136. 
(Code 1977, § 8.16.040; Ord. No. 1049, § 3, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 38-135. - Salvage operations utilizing open burning. 
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of combustible material in connection with the salvage of motor vehicles, tires, oil and similar substances, containers, coated or painted wire and metals, and other material. 
(Code 1977, § 8.16.050)  
Sec. 38-136. - Permissible open burning. 
When not prohibited by law or ordinance, the following types of burning are allowed, provided the conditions and requirements in section 38-137 and section 38-138 have been met: 
(1)  Fire training. Open burning of human-made structures for the purpose of fire training is allowed as provided for in Oklahoma Clean Air Act, 27A O.S., § 2-5-106.1. Industrial and commercial facilities and fire training schools conducting on-site live burn fire training are not subject to this provision. 
(2)  Elimination of hazards. Provided prior authorization is obtained from the fire chief, open burning is allowed for the elimination of: 
a.  A fire hazard that cannot be abated by any other means. 
b.  A dangerous or hazardous material when there is no other practical or lawful method of abatement or disposal if authorization is also received from the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality prior to such burning. 
(3)  Recreational and ceremonial fires. Open burning is allowed for camp fires and other fires used solely for recreational purposes, ceremonial occasions, or noncommercial preparation of food. 
(4)  Land management and land clearing operations. Open burning is allowed for the following land management and land clearing operations: 
a.  Fires purposely set to forest, crop or range lands for a specific reason in the management of forests, crops or game, in accordance with practices recommended by the Oklahoma Department of Wildlife Conservation, the Oklahoma State Department of Agriculture, and the United States Forest Service. 
b.  Fires purposely set for land clearing operations if conducted at least 500 feet upwind of any occupied residence other than those located on the property on which the burning is conducted. 
(5)  Hydrocarbon burning. Open burning of hydrocarbons is allowed for: 
a.  The disposal of spilled hydrocarbons or the waste products of oil exploration, development, refining or processing operations which cannot be feasibly recovered or otherwise disposed of in a legal manner. Notice must be given to the DEQ prior to such burning. 
b.  The disposal of waste hydrocarbons through a flare. The owner or operator shall be required to use a smokeless flare if a condition of air pollution is determined to exist by the DEQ. 
(6)  Open-pit incinerator. Except for hazardous material, any combustible material or refuse that is allowed to be burned under this section may be burned in an open-pit incinerator that is properly designed and operated for the control of smoke and particulate matter. The owner or operator of the open-pit incinerator shall not accept any material owned by other persons and shall not transport any material to the property where the open-pit incinerator is located in order to burn the material. 
(7)  Yard brush. Yard brush may be burned on the property where the waste is generated. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 4, 9-7-2010) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 1049, adopted Sept. 7, 2010, repealed the former § 38-136 and enacted a new § 38-136 as set out herein. The former § 38-136 pertained to municipal solid waste disposal and derived from Code 1977, § 8.16.060.  
Sec. 38-137. - General conditions and requirements for allowed open burning. 
Open burning may be conducted only if the following conditions and requirements are met: 
(1)  No public nuisance is or will be created. 
(2)  The burning is controlled so that a visibility hazard is not created on any roadway, rail track or air field as a result of the air contaminants being emitted. 
(3)  The burning is conducted so that the contaminants do not adversely affect the ambient air quality of a city or town. 
(4)  The initial burning shall begin only between three hours after sunrise and three hours before sunset and additional fuel shall not be intentionally added to the fire at times outside these limits. This requirement does not apply to the open burning allowed under subsections 38-136(2), (3), (4)a. and (5)b. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 5, 9-7-2010) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 1049, adopted Sept. 7, 2010, repealed the former § 38-137 and enacted a new § 38-137 as set out herein. The former § 38-137 pertained to permissible open burning and derived from Code 1977, § 8.16.070.  
Sec. 38-138. - Permit required for certain outdoor burning operations. 
Open burning operations require a permit issued by the fire department before ignition of any material. Permits may be issued if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Open fires shall be located not less than 50 feet from any structure or combustible fencing. 
(2)  Burning shall occur during daylight hours only. Permitted campfires are exempt from this requirement. 
(3)  Persons and equipment capable of extinguishing the fire shall be on the burn site and in attendance at all times. 
(4)  No household waste, garbage, plastic, fabric, furniture, flammable or combustible liquid, or any waste material shall be burned. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued when any weather condition may create increased fire danger, such as wind, low humidity, drought, etc., as determined by the fire department. 
(6)  Approval for burning must be obtained each day burning occurs. 
(7)  Any permit issued may be revoked by a fire or police official for the protection of life or property, or to prevent or abate the nuisances caused by such burning, or at any other time when deemed necessary. 
Permits are not required for fires contained in an incinerator; outdoor fireplace, screened metal fire pit, barbeque grill or barbeque pit, and that are used solely for recreational purposes, ceremonial occasions, or preparation of food. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 6, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 38-139. - Responsibility for consequences of open burning. 
The authority to conduct open burning under the provisions of this section does not exempt or excuse a person from the consequences, damages or injuries which may result from such conduct, nor does it excuse or exempt any person from complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and orders of the governmental entities having jurisdiction, even though the open burning is conducted in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 7, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 38-140. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in section 1-8 of this Code, plus all court costs and statutory penalties; and each day such violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense, in addition to the other remedies provided in this article. The city may institute any proper action or proceedings to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 8, 9-7-2010)  
Chapter 42 - FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-171 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; taxation, ch. 110. 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-2. - Chapter 2: Administration. 
The fee referred to in section 2-174, to be paid by the maker of any worthless check or draft payable to the city, shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 862, § 1, 9-16-2003)  
Secs. 42-3—42-5. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-6. - Chapter 6: Occupation tax for alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Occupation tax on manufacturers and sellers of alcoholic beverages. The annual occupation tax referred to in section 6-31, upon manufacturers and sellers of alcoholic beverages, shall be as follows: 
License Category 	Initial 	Renewal 
Brewer 	$1,000.00 	$1,000.00 
Small brewer 	125.00 	125.00 
Distiller 	2,500.00 	2,500.00 
Winemaker 	500.00 	500.00 
Small farm winery 	75.00 	75.00 
Rectifier 	3,125.00 	3,125.00 
Wine and spirits wholesaler 	2,000.00 	2,000.00 
Beer distributor 	750.00 	750.00 
Retail spirits 	905.00 	905.00 
Retail wine 	500.00 	500.00 
Retail beer 	250.00 	250.00 
Mixed beverage 	600.00 	600.00 
Mixed beverage/caterer combination 	850.00 	850.00 
On premises beer and wine 	450.00 	450.00 
Bottle club 	800.00 	800.00 
Caterer 	800.00 	800.00 
Annual special event 	55.00 	55.00 
Quarterly special event 	55.00 	55.00 
Nonresident, seller or manufacturer 	750.00 	750.00 
Annual public event 	1,000.00 	1,000.00 
 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the occupational tax for those service organizations or fraternal beneficiary societies which are exempt under section 501(c)(19), (8) or (10) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be $500.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 1172, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1172, § 2, adopted Sept. 4, 2018, repealed § 42-6, and enacted a new § 42-6 as set out herein. The former § 42-6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1977 Code, §§ 5.08.020, 5.16.170, 5.16.210, 9.25.250; Ord No. 762, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2000. 
State Law reference— License fees and surcharges, 37A O.S. § 2-101; municipalities - occupational tax, 37A O.S. § 4-104.  
Secs. 42-7—42-9. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 889, § 1, adopted Feb. 17, 2004, repealed § 42-10, which pertained to amusements and entertainments and derived from the Code of 1977, § 5.05.090.  
Secs. 42-11—42-13. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-14. - Chapter 14: Animals. 
The deposit referred to in section 14-252, to be paid to the city animal control shelter to ensure that an adopted animal will be spayed or neutered, shall be $25.00. 
(Code 1977, § 6.16.030)  
Secs. 42-15—42-17. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-18. - Chapter 18: Buildings and building regulations. 
(a)  Building, driveways, electrical, plumbing, heat and air, and solar heat permit and inspection fees. The fees for plan review, building, driveways, electrical, plumbing, heat and air, and solar heat permits and inspections under chapter 18 are as follows: 
(1)  Plan review fees: 
a.  Residential single-family ..... $ 50.00 
b.  Residential multifamily ..... 100.00 
c.  Church/public use building ..... 100.00 
Plus, per square foot ..... 0.02 
d.  Commercial ..... 100.00 
Plus, per square foot ..... 0.02 
(2)  Building permit fees: 
Residential 
a.  Building permit ..... $ 20.00 
Plus, per square foot ..... 0.05 
b.  Electrical permit 
Per square foot ..... 0.06 
c.  Mechanical permit 
Per square foot ..... 0.05 
d.  Plumbing permit 
Per square foot ..... 0.06 
e.  Septic permits 
New ..... 100.00 
Repair ..... 50.00 
f.  Driveway permits 
New ..... 30.00 
Repair ..... 40.00 
g.  Minimum permit ..... 50.00 
Commercial 
a.  Building permit ..... $ 50.00 
Plus, per square foot ..... 0.06 
b.  Electrical permit 
Per square foot ..... 0.06 
c.  Mechanical permit 
Per square foot ..... 0.05 
d.  Plumbing permit 
Per square foot ..... 0.06 
e.  Septic permit 
New ..... 100.00 
Repair ..... 50.00 
f.  Driveway 
New ..... 30.00 
Repair ..... 40.00 
g.  Minimum permit ..... 50.00 
(3)  Manufactured homes: 
a.  The building permit fee for a manufactured home shall be $140.00. The fee will include the following permits: 
1.  The amount charged for a moving permit to transport the unit to the building site inside the city limits; 
2.  Foundation or slab on which the unit will be set; 
3.  Permit for the construction of a garage or carport for one or two cars; 
4.  Brick or other veneer; 
5.  Roofing; and 
6.  Other construction related directly to the building unit, except permits for the electrical work, mechanical work, plumbing work, driveway, water meter, water line, sewer connection, septic tank, and temporary electrical pole. 
b.  Other fees for electrical work, mechanical work, plumbing work, driveways, water meters and lines, sewer connections and septic tanks shall be the same as for a conventionally built structure. 
(4)  Reinspection fees (all): First reinspection—$30.00; second reinspection—$45.00; and third reinspection—$60.00. 
(5)  Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission fee: $4.50, or such other amount set by the Oklahoma Building Code Commission, Oklahoma Administrative Code, Title 748, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Contractor's and journeyman's registration fees. Registration and renewal fees for contractors and journeymen under chapter 18 are as follows: 
(1)  Electrical contractor: 
a.  Registration ..... $100.00 
b.  Annual renewal ..... 50.00 
(2)  Electrical journeyman: 
a.  Registration ..... 35.00 
b.  Annual renewal ..... 15.00 
(3)  Plumbing contractor: 
a.  Registration ..... 100.00 
b.  Annual renewal ..... 50.00 
(4)  Plumbing journeyman: 
a.  Registration ..... 35.00 
b.  Annual renewal ..... 15.00 
(5)  Heat and air contractor: 
a.  Registration ..... 100.00 
b.  Annual renewal ..... 50.00 
(6)  Heat and air journeyman: 
a.  Registration ..... 35.00 
b.  Annual renewal ..... 15.00 
(7)  Solar heat and air contractor: 
a.  Registration ..... 100.00 
b.  Annual renewal ..... 50.00 
(8)  General contractor's license: ..... 50.00 
a.  Registration ..... 100.00 
b.  Annual renewal ..... 50.00 
(c)  Fees for persons moving buildings. 
(1)  Deposit. The deposit referred to in section 18-311, to be paid by persons moving buildings, shall be $100.00. 
(2)  Inspection fee. The inspection fee referred to in section 18-313, to be paid by persons moving buildings, shall be as follows: 
a.  Buildings located within the city ..... $ 5.00 
b.  Buildings located beyond the corporate limits of the city and within Canadian County ..... 20.00 
c.  Buildings located outside the corporate limits of the city and outside of Canadian County ..... 30.00 
(3)  Permit fee. The fee for a building moving permit referred to in section 18-315 shall be as follows: 
a.  Buildings with floor area of 400 square feet or less ..... $15.00 
b.  Buildings with floor area from 400 to 600 square feet ..... 20.00 
c.  Buildings with floor area from 600 to 800 square feet ..... 30.00 
d.  Buildings with floor area over 800 square feet ..... 40.00 
e.  Buildings to be moved from inside the city limits to outside the city limits ..... 10.00 
f.  Buildings moved from outside the city limits through the city limits to outside the city limits ..... 10.00 
g.  Houses ..... 40.00 
(Code 1977, §§ 15.08.080, 15.36.040(B), 15.36.060, 15.36.080; Ord. No. 707, § 1, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 733, § 1(15.08.080); Ord. No. 812, § 1(1)(2), 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 1036, § 2, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 1041, § 3, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 11-4-2014)  
Secs. 42-19—42-21. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-22. - Chapter 22: Businesses. 
(a)  Taxicabs. The license tax referred to in section 22-3 is $10.00. 
(b)  Pawnbrokers. The license fee referred to in section 22-61 is $40.00. 
(c)  Broadband telecommunications network franchise application fee. The fees referred to in section 22-153 are as follows: 
(1)  For new or initial franchise ..... $375.00 
(2)  For renewal of a franchise ..... 375.00 
(3)  For transfer of a franchise ..... 250.00 
(4)  For modification of a franchise agreement ..... 125.00 
(5)  For any other relief ..... 125.00 
(d)  Marijuana business permits. 
(1)  Medical marijuana retailer permit ..... $600.00 
(2)  Marijuana commercial grower permit ..... 1,500.00 
(3)  Marijuana processor facilities permit ..... 2,500.00 
(Code 1977, §§ 5.24.010(A)(1), 5.32.010(B); Ord. No. 712, § 1(1-5(I)), 6-15-1999; Ord. No. 1173, § 5, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 1191, § 8, 8-6-2019)  
Secs. 42-23—43-25. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-26. - Chapter 26: Courts. 
The court costs charge for cases in municipal court referred to in section 26-40 shall be $30.00. 
(Code 1977, § 2.40.390; Ord. No. 782, § 1, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 12-1-2009)  
Secs. 42-27—42-33. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-34. - Chapter 34: Emergency services. 
(a)  Fee for abuse of 911 service. The fee referred to in section 34-35, to be paid by persons abusing the 911 emergency service, shall be $50.00. 
(b)  Alarm user's permit. The alarm user's permit fees referred to in section 34-52 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Burglary, robbery, holdup or fire alarm user's permit for up to three types of systems at each residence, business or other facility ..... $25.00 
(2)  Each additional type of system beyond the first three ..... 5.00 
(3)  Transfer fee ..... 15.00 
(4)  Additional charge if a user fails to obtain a permit upon installation of an alarm system ..... 25.00 
(c)  False alarm fee. The fee for false alarms referred to in section 34-54 shall be $50.00 per response. 
(Ord. No. 689, § 1(9.11.040, 9.11.050(B), (D)), 6-16-1998; Ord. No. 1149, § 2, 6-20-2017)  
Secs. 42-35—42-37. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-38. - Chapter 38: Environment. 
(a)  Fee for collection of costs of cleaning and mowing property. The fee referred to in section 38-72, to be paid to the county treasurer for collection of costs of cleaning and mowing property by the city, shall be $5.00. 
(b)  Water well drilling permit. The fee for a water well drilling permit referred to in section 38-105 shall be $50.00. 
(c)  Water well drilling contractor's license. The fee for a water well drilling contractor's license referred to in section 38-106 shall be $50.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 8.08.100, 13.32.040, 13.32.050, 13.32.080; Ord. No. 812, § 1(3), 8-6-2002)  
Secs. 42-39—42-45. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-46. - Chapter 46: Fire prevention and protection. 
(a)  License for sale of fireworks. The license fee for sale of fireworks referred to in section 46-94 shall be $200.00. 
(b)  Fireworks display permit. The fee for a fireworks display permit referred to in section 46-99 shall be $200.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 8.20.040, 8.20.090; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 1183, § 1, 3-5-2019)  
Secs. 42-47—42-49. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-50. - Chapter 50: Floods. 
The fee referred to in section 50-168 to cover the costs of maintenance of stormwater detention facilities shall be $700.00, multiplied by the number of acres dedicated for the detention facility, multiplied by seven years. 
(Code 1977, § 13.14.060)  
Sec. 42-51. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-52. - [Chapter 52:] Food service. 
Mobile food service license fees: 
(1)  Annual license ..... $150.00 
(2)  Annual license, with special events ..... 200.00 
(3)  Special events ..... 25.00 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 13, 11-4-2014)  
Secs. 42-53—42-69. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-70. - Chapter 70: Manufactured homes and trailers. 
(a)  License fee or temporary permit. The fee referred to in section 70-33 shall not exceed $2.50 per space. 
(b)  Nonresidential mobile trailer license. The fee referred to in section 70-37(b) shall be $20.00.  
Secs. 42-71—42-73. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-74. - Chapter 74: Natural resources. 
(a)  Oil and gas well inspection fee. The annual inspection fee for oil and gas wells referred to in section 74-53 shall be $250.00. 
(b)  Application fee for oil or gas well drilling permit. The application and processing fee for an oil or gas well drilling permit referred to in section 74-71 shall be $250.00. 
(c)  Permit fee for oil or gas well drilling permit. The fee for an oil or gas well drilling permit referred to in section 74-73 shall be $7,500.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 18.02.010(C), 18.02.030, 18.02.050)  
Secs. 42-75—42-81. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-82. - Chapter 82: Peddlers and solicitors. 
The registration fee for solicitors referred to in section 82-53 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Per day ..... $ 3.00 
(2)  Per week ..... 15.00 
(3)  Per year ..... 50.00 
(Code 1977, § 5.20.050)  
Secs. 42-83—42-93. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-94. - Chapter 94: Signs. 
(a)  Redemption of impounded sign. The fee referred to in section 94-33, for redemption of an impounded sign, shall be $25.00. 
(b)  Sign permit. The sign permit fees referred to in section 94-77 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Portable signs ..... $30.00 
(2)  [Permanent signs:] 
0—100 square feet ..... 35.00 
101—200 square feet ..... 40.00 
201—500 square feet ..... 50.00 
501 or more square feet ..... 60.00 
(c)  Sign contractor's license. The fee for a sign contractor's license referred to in section 94-121 shall be $50.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14.02.90, 14.02.100, 14.02.190; Ord. No. 812, § 1(4), 8-6-2002)  
Secs. 42-95—42-97. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-98. - Chapter 98: Solid waste. 
(a)  The state user fee for users of the municipal solid waste service referred to in section 98-67 shall be $0.25 per month. 
(b)  The charge referred to in section 98-69, for replacement of the solid waste cart after termination of service for nonpayment of the utility bill, shall be $15.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 8.32.062, 8.32.070(a))  
Secs. 42-99—42-101. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-102. - Chapter 102: Streets, sidewalks and other public places. 
(a)  Application for closing street or easement under section 102-1. 
(1)  The application fee shall be $75.00. 
(2)  The notice fee shall be an amount equal to the actual cost of mailing notice in the U.S. Mail using the notice method required in the Code (first class, registered letter, or otherwise) for each property owner who is entitled to receive notice of the proceeding. In the event the application is withdrawn prior to mailing of notices, the notice fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Sidewalk construction permit. The sidewalk construction permit fee referred to in section 102-153 shall be $10.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 12.04.020, 12.20.020(e), 12.24.110, 15.08.080; Ord. No. 926, § 1, 11-16-2004; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 4-2-2019)  
Secs. 42-103—42-105. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-106. - Chapter 106: Subdivisions. 
(a)  Vacation of unrecorded plat. The fee for application for vacation of an unrecorded plat referred to in section 106-72 shall be $25.00. 
(b)  Vacation of recorded plat. The fee for application for vacation of a recorded plat referred to in section 106-73 shall be $25.00. 
(c)  Application for approval of preliminary plat. The filing fee for preliminary plat applications referred to in section 106-148 shall be as follows: 
(1)  For developments with lots two acres or greater: $250.00, plus $4.00 per lot for developments up to 50 lots, and $2.00 per lot for each lot over 50 lots. 
(2)  For developments with lots less than two acres: $250.00, plus $2.00 per lot for developments up to 50 lots, and $1.00 per lot for each lot over 50 lots. 
(d)  Application for approval of final plat. The filing fee for final plat applications referred to in section 106-177 shall be as follows: 
(1)  For developments with lots two acres or greater: $350.00, plus $4.00 per lot for developments up to 50 lots, and $2.00 per lot for each lot over 50 lots. 
(2)  For developments with lots less than two acres: $350.00, plus $3.00 per lot for developments up to 50 lots, and $2.00 per lot for each lot over 50 lots. 
(e)  Application for deed approval. The filing fee for an application for deed approval referred to in section 106-233 shall be $25.00. 
(f)  Application for short form subdivision approval. The filing fee for an application for short form subdivision approval referred to in section 106-263 shall be $75.00. 
(g)  Subdivision inspection fees. The subdivision inspection fees for streets, water and sewer referred to in section 106-364, based upon the estimated cost of construction, shall be according to the following scale: 
(1)  Two and one-half percent of the first $100,000.00 of engineering estimate or actual contracts. 
(2)  Two percent of all over $100,000.00, not to exceed $200,000.00. 
(3)  One and one-half percent of all over $200,000.00. (See Ordinance No. 419, 3- -89) 
(h)  Applications for revocable permit. The fee for application for a revocable permit shall be $150.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15.08.080, 16.04.071, 16.04.072, 16.12.022, 16.12.032, 16.24.040, 16.32.027, 16.32.036; Ord. No. 733, § 1(15.08.080), 4-4-2000; Ord. No. 812, § 1(5), 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 1138, § 9, 5-3-2016)  
Secs. 42-107—42-113. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-114. - Chapter 114: Traffic and vehicles. 
The fee referred to in section 114-394 is $3.00. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.050(c))  
Secs. 42-115—42-117. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-118. - Chapter 118: Utilities. 
(a)  Utility application fee and security deposits. The application fee for a new account and security deposits shall be as follows: 
(1)  New account application fee ..... $20.00 
(2)  Utility service deposits: 
a.  Residential (owned property) ..... $ 75.00 
b.  Residential (rented property) ..... 100.00 
c.  Commercial ..... 100.00 
d.  Temporary water flow meters ..... 1,100.00 
(b)  Water and sewer connection and inspection fees. Water and sewer connection and inspection fees under chapter 118 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Water meter installation: 
Size 	Privately 
Installed 	City 
Installed 
Installation 	Total 
¾-inch 	$   170.00 	$390.00 	$  560.00 
1-inch 	205.00 	390.00 	595.00 
1½-inch 	575.00 	390.00 	965.00 
2-inch 	760.00 	390.00 	1,150.00 
3-inch 	1,810.00 	390.00 	2,200.00 
4-inch 	3,000.00 	390.00 	3,390.00 
 
(2)  a.  Sewer connection fees: 
3-inch ..... ..... $200.00 
4-inch ..... ..... 275.00 
5-inch ..... ..... 340.00 
6-inch ..... ..... 425.00 
8-inch ..... ..... 430.00 
Apartment and mobile home parks: $100.00 per unit plus connection fee. 
b.  Sewer infrastructure impact fee. There is hereby established a sewer infrastructure impact fee, referred to as the "SII Fee," which fee shall be paid at the time an application is filed seeking a building permit. 
1.  For residential building permits, the amount of the SII fee shall be $1,000.00, which shall include attached or detached garages. 
2.  For commercial or industrial building permits, the amount of the SII fee shall be $1,000.00. 
3.  Where the building for which a permit is sought does not have access to a municipal sewer connection and will not have such access within 12 months after issuance of a certificate of occupancy, then no SII fee shall be due for such building until such time as a request is made for connection to municipal sewer facilities. The amount of the SII Fee shall be calculated in the same manner provided under subsections 1. and 2., above. 
4.  The following shall be exempted from payment of the SII Fee: 
(i)  Alterations or expansion of an existing building that has existing sewer service and where the use is not changed. 
(ii)  The replacement of a building that has existing sewer service and where the use is not changed. 
(iii)  Buildings in existence on the effective date of this ordinance [April 3, 2018] that seek connection to municipal sewer facilities after the effective date of this ordinance. 
Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
5.  There is hereby established a separate sewer infrastructure impact fee trust account, referred to herein as the "SII account." Funds collected from the SII fee shall be deposited into the SII account. Funds from the SII account may be withdrawn and used only for the following purposes, upon approval of the city council: 
(i)  To acquire, equip, and/or make capital improvements to sewer infrastructure or facilities in the City of Mustang, but not for maintenance or operations. Capital improvements are equipment, infrastructure or facilities with an expected useful life of three years or more. 
(ii)  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital improvements for which funds from the SII account may be expended, SII Account funds may be used to pay debt service, including interest, costs of issuance and related expenses, on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the improvements provided are of the type described in subsection 1. above. 
At least once each fiscal year the city manager shall present to the city council a proposed capital improvement program for sewer infrastructure and facilities, and assigning SII account funds, including any accrued interest, to specific projects. Monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the SII account until the next fiscal period. 
6.  The effective date of this subsection (a)(2) is October 18, 2006. 
(c)  Sewer user charge. The sewer user charge referred to in section 118-134 shall be $4.74 per 1,000 gallons of water. 
(d)  Minimum charge for residential sewer service. The minimum charge for residential sewer users referred to in section 118-136 shall be $9.51, based upon a minimum water consumption of 2,000 gallons. 
(Code 1977, §§ 13.08.170(D), (F), 15.08.080; Ord. No. 733, § 1(15.08.080), 4-4-2000; Ord. No. 812, § 1(6), 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 969, § 2, 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 970, § 2, 7-6-2006; Ord. No. 1106, § 10, 8-19-2014; Ord. No. 1130, § 2, 8-18-2015; Ord. No. 1163, § 1, 4-3-2018; Ord. No. 1192, § 1, 8-6-2019)  
Secs. 42-119—42-121. - Reserved.  
Sec. 42-122. - Chapter 122: Zoning. 
(a)  Application fees. 
(1)  Rezoning petitions and petitions for amendment. The application fee referred to in section 122-52, for filing a petition for a zoning amendment or an amendment to the comprehensive plan, shall be as follows: 
a.  For filing a petition to change a zoning classification, $175.00. 
b.  For filing a petition to change a zoning classification to include a use allowed only in the C6 commercial special use district, $500.00. 
c.  For filing a petition to change a zoning classification to a planned unit development, $175.00, plus an acreage charge of $15.00 per acre or any part of an acre thereof. Provided, if the planned unit development includes a use allowed only in the C6 commercial special use district, the filing fee shall be $500.00, plus the acreage charge. 
d.  For filing a petition for a comprehensive plan land use amendment, $150.00. 
(2)  Application for special use permit. The filing fee for an application for a special use permit referred to section 122-73 shall be $75.00. 
(3)  Appeal to board of adjustment. The filing fee for an appeal to the board of adjustment referred to in section 122-130 shall be $100.00. 
(4)  Application for approval of group home. The filing fee referred to in section 122-852 for an application for approval of a group home shall be $75.00. If the application requires a public hearing, an additional fee of $75.00 shall be required. 
(5)  Application for temporary occupancy permit. The permit fee referred to in section 122-242 for an application for temporary occupancy of a travel trailer shall be $75.00. 
(b)  Notice fee. In addition to the application fees, a notice fee shall be required for each application or filing for which the City is required to mail notice to third parties. The notice fee shall be an amount equal to the actual cost of mailing notice in the U.S. Mail using the notice method required in the Code (first class, registered letter, or otherwise) for each person who is entitled to receive notice of the proceeding. In the event the application or other filing is withdrawn prior to mailing of notices, the notice fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Code 1977, §§ 17.39.030(A), 17.48.090(B), 17.50.023(B)1.d, 17.50.031(B); Ord. No. 1037, § 12, 2-2-2010; Ord. No. 1100, § 2, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 1185, § 3, 4-2-2019)  
Chapter 46 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; emergency services, ch. 34; open burning, § 38-131 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal fire departments, 11 O.S. § 29-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Established; supervision. 
There shall be a fire department, the head of which is the chief of the fire department, or fire chief, appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the manager. The chief of the fire department is an officer of the city, and has supervision and control of the fire department. 
(Code 1977, § 2.16.010)  
Sec. 46-32. - Membership. 
(a)  The fire department consists of volunteer and salaried firepersons, the number of which shall be determined by the city manager upon the approval of the fire chief. 
(b)  For the purpose of this chapter, a volunteer firefighter is considered as one who is enrolled as a member of the fire department and who serves in that capacity without receiving a regular salary. 
(Code 1977, § 2.16.020; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 12-17-1996)  
Sec. 46-33. - Fire chief. 
(a)  The fire chief shall be at the head of the fire department, subject to the laws of the state, the ordinances of the city and the rules and regulations in this article. 
(b)  The chief shall be held responsible for the general condition and efficient operation of the department, the training of members, and the performance of all other duties imposed upon him. 
(c)  The chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to determine its cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism shall notify the proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for future use in the case. 
(Code 1977, § 2.16.030)  
Sec. 46-34. - Assistant chief. 
In the absence of the fire chief, the assistant chief on duty shall command the fire department and be held responsible therefor in all respects with the full powers and responsibilities of the chief. 
(Code 1977, § 2.16.040)  
Sec. 46-35. - Company officers. 
The company officers of the fire department shall be selected upon their ability to meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Their knowledge of firefighting. 
(2)  Their ability to lead men. 
(3)  Their knowledge of firefighting equipment. 
(Code 1977, § 2.16.050)  
Sec. 46-36. - New members. 
(a)  All new members of the fire department shall be on probation for one year after their appointment. 
(b)  New volunteer members, upon completion of their probation period, must be approved by the majority of the fire department. 
(Code 1977, § 2.16.070)  
Sec. 46-37. - Duties. 
It is the duty of the fire department, among others, to extinguish fires; to rescue persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate, and to administer first aid to, persons injured in or about burning structures, or elsewhere in case of an emergency; to promote fire prevention; and, unless otherwise provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and safety of persons from fire and explosions in theaters, stores and other public buildings. 
(Code 1977, § 2.16.090)  
Sec. 46-38. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The council, by motion or resolution, may adopt rules and regulations governing the fire department. Before the council adopts, amends or repeals any such rules and regulations, the city manager and the fire chief shall have a right to be heard. 
(b)  Members are required to be present at all regular meetings, call meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters. 
(c)  There shall be at least one regular business meeting each month. 
(d)  Any volunteer firefighter having two unexcused absences in succession or three unexcused absences in a period of three months will be dropped from the fire department rolls. 
(e)  Volunteer firefighters leaving the city for an extended period of time will be required to notify the chief. 
(f)  Any volunteer firefighter refusing to attend training classes provided for him will be dropped. 
(g)  Any volunteer member of the fire department shall be dropped from the rolls for the following offenses: 
(1)  Conduct unbecoming a firefighter. 
(2)  Any act of insubordination. 
(3)  Neglect of duty. 
(4)  Any violation of rules and regulations governing the fire department. 
(5)  Conviction of a felony. 
(Code 1977, § 2.16.100)  
Sec. 46-39. - Civil defense division. 
(a)  There is established under the supervision and direction of the fire department a division of civil defense, which shall be administered by the fire chief. 
(b)  The fire chief shall be the administrative head of the civil defense division, and shall be responsible for carrying out the civil defense program of the city through the general direction of the city manager. The fire chief shall have all necessary power and authority to form committees or other bodies and to appoint and designate a chairperson of such bodies as may be necessary to perfect such organization. The fire chief shall have further duty and responsibility to cooperate with all civil defense agencies of other governmental units, including the state and federal government. 
(c)  The fire chief is further authorized to formulate written plans and gather information and keep written record thereof, to govern the functions of the civil defense organization. 
(Code 1977, §§ 2.16.110—2.16.130) 
Cross reference— Emergencies, § 2-1. 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Civil Defense and Emergency Management Act, 63 O.S. § 683.1 et seq.; local civil defense organizations, 63 O.S. § 683.11.  
Sec. 46-40. - Firefighters relief fund. 
The firefighters relief and pension fund shall be operated in accordance with state law relating to the fund, and pensions and other benefits shall be paid as provided by state law. 
(Code 1977, § 2.56.020) 
State Law reference— Firefighters pension and retirement system, 11 O.S. § 49-100.1 et seq.  
Sec. 46-41. - Fire marshal division. 
(a)  There is established under the supervision and direction of the fire department a fire marshal's division, which shall be administered by the fire chief. 
(b)  The fire chief or his designee may be designated as the chief fire marshal. 
(c)  The fire marshal's division shall be responsible for investigating the cause, origin and circumstances of any fire or explosion involving a loss of life, injury to persons, or destruction or damage to property, or which is of a suspicious nature. Every fire responded to by the fire department shall be reported in writing to the chief fire marshal, using a form prescribed by the chief fire marshal. 
(d)  The chief fire marshal shall have all necessary power and authority to carry out these responsibilities and to appoint and designate other members of the department, as may be necessary as deputy fire marshals to assist in carrying out these duties. 
(e)  The chief fire marshal shall have the powers of and meet the qualifications for fire marshals, as provided by section 46-42 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 1, 11-15-2005)  
Sec. 46-42. - Fire marshal qualifications. 
(a)  Fire marshals shall meet those qualifications as may be set forth by state law, the city Code of Ordinances and by the chief fire marshall as being necessary to effectively administer this article. 
(b)  Fire marshals shall attend a basic academy on law enforcement education and training, to be determined by the fire chief, and shall meet the any requirements necessary to attend such academy. 
(c)  Fire marshals shall be commissioned by the chief fire marshal and shall be officers of the city. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 11-15-2005)  
Sec. 46-43. - Fire marshal powers. 
(a)  Fire marshals are authorized to enforce the provisions of this article to ensure compliance therewith. 
(b)  Fire marshals shall be required to perform such duties as required by the city Code of Ordinances, applicable state law and as may be assigned to them by the chief fire marshal. 
(c)  Fire marshals are authorized to make arrests for interference with firefighters or fire marshals in the discharge of the duties of their office or for any interference or obstruction of the operations of the fire department. 
(d)  Subject to the requirements of this section and any and all requirements and regulations which shall be given at the fire chief's discretion, fire marshals shall be deemed peace officers and have and exercise all the powers and authority of other peace officers, relative only to the following: 
(1)  The investigation of fire; 
(2)  The inspection of buildings only for the purpose of fire prevention and fire protection; and 
(3)  The enforcement of state statutes and municipal ordinances only for the purposes of fire prevention and fire protection. 
(e)  Members of the fire department may be required to carry out investigation and inspection functions to accomplish the duties imposed by this article. 
(f)  When, in the opinion of a fire marshal, reasonable cause exists that the fire or explosion may have been of incendiary origin, the fire marshal shall have the authority to take custody of all physical evidence relating to the cause of the fire or explosion, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law, may pursue the investigation of the matter to conclusion, and shall cooperate with the proper authorities in the collection of evidence and any prosecution of the case. 
(g)  The Mustang police and code enforcement officers shall render necessary assistance in the enforcement of this article when so requested by a fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 1, 11-15-2005)  
Secs. 46-44—46-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to prevent fire hazards, 11 O.S. § 22-113; state fire prevention standards, 74 O.S. § 324.7. 
 
Sec. 46-61. - International Fire Code adopted. 
The International Fire Code, including commentaries and Appendix chapters B, C, and D (see International Fire Code section 101.2.1), as sponsored and published by the International Code Council (hereinafter, the "IFC"), in the version as currently and may hereafter be adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, is hereby adopted as the fire code of the City of Mustang, State of Oklahoma, as governing law controlling all matters relating to the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except as to such portions as are specifically amended or deleted in this chapter. It is the intention of this section that subsequent editions of the IFC and any amendments thereto adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission shall apply within the City of Mustang and constitute the fire code of the City of Mustang effective from and after April 1, 2016. 
(Code 1977, § 15.24.010; Ord. No. 1116, § 1, 11-4-2014; Ord. No. 1136, § 1, 2-16-2016; Ord. No. 1167, § 1, 7-3-2018) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1116, adopted Nov. 4, 2014, changed the title of § 46-61 from "BOCA National Fire Prevention Code and NFPA Life Safety Code adopted" to read as herein set out. 
 Subsequently, section 1 of Ord. No. 1136, adopted Feb. 16, 2016, changed the title of § 46-61 from "2009 International Fire Code adopted" to read as herein set out. 
Charter reference— Adoption by reference, § 2-14. 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 46-62. - Amendments to the 2009 International Fire Code. 
The City of Mustang hereby adopts all amendments of the 2009 International Fire Code (herein "2009 IFC") as prescribed by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, except as amended below: 
(1)  IFC § 101.1. Title Insert: " City of Mustang, Oklahoma " 
(2)  IFC § 109.3. Violation Penalties is replaced "As described in §46-64, Article III, Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma." 
(3)  IFC § 111.4. Failure to comply is replaced "As described in §46-64, Article III, Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma." 
(Code 1977, § 15.24.020; Ord. No. 1116, § 2, 11-4-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 1116, adopted Nov. 4, 2014, changed the title of § 46-62 from "Enforcement" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 46-63. - Geographic limits adopted for 2009 International Fire Code. 
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2009 IFC are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  IFC § 3404.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited is replaced with the following: "Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above ground exterior tanks are only allowed in the Heavy Industrial (I-3) Zoning District." 
(2)  IFC § 3406.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited is replaced with the following: "Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above ground exterior tanks is only allowed in the Heavy Industrial (I-3) Zoning District." 
(3)  IFC § 3506.2 Limitations is replaced with the following: "Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited except as allowed in the Industrial (I-3) Zoning District." 
(4)  IFC § 3804.2 Maximum capacity within established limits is replaced with the following: "The storage of liquefied petroleum gas in total quantities exceeding 2000 gallons is prohibited except in the Heavy Industrial (I-3) Zoning District." 
(Code 1977, § 15.24.035; Ord. No. 1116, § 3, 11-4-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 1116, adopted Nov. 4, 2014, changed the title of § 46-63 from "Board of adjustments" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 46-64. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or who fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in section 1-8. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the penalty in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1977, § 15.24.080; Ord. No. 1075, § 2, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 1116, § 5, 11-4-2014) 
Editor's note— Sections 4 of Ord. No. 1116, adopted Nov. 4, 2014, repealed former § 46-64 which pertained to fire hydrant requirements and locations, and derived from Ord. No. 1075, § 3, adopted Nov. 6, 2012. Section 5 of said Ord. No. 1116, renumbered former § 46-65 as § 46-64.  
Secs. 46-65—46-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Fireworks, 68 O.S. § 1621 et seq.; municipal regulation of fireworks, 11 O.S. § 22-110, 68 O.S. § 1631. 
 
Sec. 46-91. - Appeals. 
Should a question arise concerning the eligibility of an organization to qualify for a license under this article or if the plot plan is not approved by the police chief or his designee or the fire chief or his designee or the application is denied for any other reason, the matter may be timely submitted to the city council for a final decision at the request of the applicant. 
(Code 1977, § 8.20.050; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-17-1996)  
Sec. 46-92. - Manufacture, sale and use generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, purchase, offer for sale, sell at retail, or use or discharge or explode any consumer fireworks, display fireworks or other fireworks and related items within the corporate limits of the city. The term "consumer fireworks," "display fireworks" and "fireworks" shall have the meanings set forth in 68 O.S. § 1622. 
(Code 1977, § 8.20.010; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 6-17-2014)  
Sec. 46-93. - Permitted sales. 
(a)  Any nonprofit civic, charitable, fraternal, educational or religious organization located and domiciled within the corporate limits of the city may be licensed by the city clerk to sell consumer fireworks and related items from June 27 through July 3, daily, from 3:00 p.m. until 9:00 p.m., and on July 4 from 9:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, youth sports teams shall not be considered as a civic, charitable, fraternal, educational or religious organization unless such team is organized and run by the Mustang Public Schools. 
(c)  In no event shall any person under the age of 12 years participate in selling fireworks. Any person under the age of 18 may sell fireworks only if supervised by an adult representative of the license holder. 
(Code 1977, § 8.20.020; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 1181, § 1, 2-5-2019)  
Sec. 46-94. - License for sale. 
(a)  Annual licenses for the sale of fireworks within the corporate limits of the city shall be obtained by filing a written application for each location with the city clerk and paying the annual license fee in the sum set forth in section 42-46 for each location no later than June 1 of each year. If the organization meets the requirements of this article, it shall be issued a license by the city clerk pending approval by the fire chief of the following requirements: 
(1)  A minimum liability insurance policy of $250,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage, from an insurance company currently licensed to do business by the state. 
(2)  A plot plan submitted to the city clerk for review by the police chief or his designee and the fire chief or his designee. The plot plan will show the location, the size of the stand, parking areas, traffic circulation patterns, and the proposed methods of storing fireworks. 
(3)  Any and all licenses required by state law. 
(b)  The approval of the plan shall be at the discretion of the chief of police or his designee and the fire chief or his designee, and their approval will be evidenced by their signature upon the plan. 
(c)  Final approval of the application will be evidenced by the fire chief by his signature or that of his designee on the application. 
(Code 1977, § 8.20.040; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-17-1996)  
Sec. 46-95. - Operation of stands; sales to children. 
All licensed fireworks stands and structures selling fireworks and related items must be staffed and operated by members of the licensed organization. An adult member (18 years or older) of the licensed organization must be present at all times during the operation of the stand. It shall be unlawful to offer for retail sale or to sell any fireworks to children under the age of 12 years, unless accompanied by an adult. 
(Code 1977, § 8.20.030; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-17-1996)  
Sec. 46-96. - Removal of stands. 
All fireworks stands and structures for the sale of fireworks and related items must be taken down and/or removed from their location within 15 days after July 4 of each year. In addition, the area wherein the stand or structure was located shall be returned to its prior condition by picking up all refuse pertaining to the operation of the fireworks stand or structure. 
(Code 1977, § 8.20.060; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-17-1996)  
Sec. 46-97. - Discharge restricted. 
(a)  The discharge of consumer fireworks shall be allowed only between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. for the period of June 27 through July 4, with the exception of July 4, when the hours shall be 9:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Discharge of fireworks is totally prohibited during all hours from July 5 through the following June 26. Discharge of display fireworks or other fireworks shall be prohibited at any time, except as provided under section 46-99. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to explode or ignite fireworks within 500 feet of any church, hospital, asylum, unharvested flammable agricultural crop, public school, or place where fireworks are stored, sold or offered for sale. 
(c)  No person shall ignite or discharge any article of fireworks within or throw any article of fireworks from a motor vehicle, nor shall any person place or throw any ignited article of fireworks into or at such a motor vehicle or at or near any group of people. 
(Code 1977, § 8.20.070; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 6-17-2014)  
Sec. 46-98. - Storage and handling. 
(a)  All fireworks and sales areas shall be conspicuously posted with signs reading "FIREWORKS—NO SMOKING." 
(b)  Fireworks offered for retail sale must be protected from direct contact and handling by the public at all times. Self-service or marketing where retail customers are allowed to move among stocks of fireworks or serve themselves from fireworks stocks or displays is strictly prohibited. Fireworks offered for retail sale must be sold according to the most current version of National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1124 Chapter 7. Mail-order, internet or other indirect sales to consumers are prohibited through any medium of either interstate or intrastate commerce. 
(c)  Fireworks shall not be sold or displayed to the public within any building or portion thereof, or any vehicle, which allows entry by any persons other than employees within such building or vehicle, unless the fireworks are kept where they cannot be reached or handled by those persons. 
(d)  An enclosed building used for sale of fireworks to the public shall have adequate exits as determined by the fire chief. The use of tents or other non-rigid shelters for the sale or storage of fireworks where the public may move about, under or within the confines of a shelter is prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 8.20.080; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 6-17-2014)  
Sec. 46-99. - Display permit. 
(a)  It is unlawful to discharge any display fireworks, except as otherwise provided by this article, at any public display, including but not limited to any public display at any public park. The fire chief or his designee shall permit the use of display fireworks for public or private displays only when the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Applications for such permits must be filed with the city clerk and must give the location of the proposed display and complete description of the nature and size of the fireworks to be used. A fee in the amount set forth in section 42-46 shall be paid to the city clerk upon the filing of the application. 
(2)  A copy of federal form ATF F5400.4, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, must be submitted with the application. 
(3)  All the provisions of NFPA 1123 must be met. NFPA 1123 refers to the most current version of National Fire Protection Association's Standard for Public Display of Fireworks. This subsection does not apply to the use of consumer fireworks by the general public. 
(4)  Every display requiring a permit shall be handled by a properly trained operator and approved by the fire chief or his designee. Such fireworks shall be discharged or fired so as not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person. 
(5)  The use of display fireworks is limited to those persons licensed as a display operator by the Oklahoma State Fire Marshal. 
(b)  Any permit issued by the fire chief or his designee shall be at his discretion and may impose such other restrictions upon the public display as the fire chief or his designee finds necessary. 
(Code 1977, § 8.20.090; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 1103, § 1, 6-17-2014)  
Sec. 46-100. - Qualifications of operators of public displays. 
The operator of any public display of fireworks must be bonded by sureties licensed to do business in the state in a sum sufficient to satisfy the city council and must possess any and all licenses required by state law. 
(Code 1977, § 8.20.100; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 12-17-1996)  
Chapter 50 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 54; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70; natural resources, ch. 74; planning, ch. 90; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102; subdivisions, ch. 106; utilities, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122. 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Floodplain Management Act, 82 O.S. § 1601 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 2, 2008, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 50-31—50-105, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 
 
Sec. 50-31. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Oklahoma has in 82 O.S. §§ 1601—1618, as amended, delegated to local governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-32. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Mustang are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-33. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.  
Sec. 50-34. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Secs. 50-35—50-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-51. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means structures which are on the same parcel of property as the principle structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principle structure (such as garages and storage sheds). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO or A1-99. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation means the elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base flood or one percent chance flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Board means the Oklahoma Water Resources Board. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocity. 
Floodplain administrator means a person accredited by the board and designated by the city to administer and implement laws and regulations relating to the management of the floodplains. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure, and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10) or (d)(3) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-52. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Mustang, Oklahoma. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-53. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Canadian County, Oklahoma and Incorporated areas" dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The current flood ordinances shall remain in effect until September 26, 2008. This article shall go into effect on September 26, 2008. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-54. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article on floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-55. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-56. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided in section 1-8, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-57. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-58. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-59. - Warning and disclaimer. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Secs. 50-60—50-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 50-71. - Designation of floodplain administrator. 
The community development director or his/her designee is hereby designated the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-72. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344) from which prior approval are required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, the Oklahoma Water Resources Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  Shall require the applicant/developer to provide base flood elevation data for any proposed development in a special flood hazard area in order to administer the provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first complies with 44 CFR, Chapter 1, Section 65.12. 
(11)  Become accredited by the board in accordance with 82 O.S. §§ 1601-1618, as amended. 
(12)  After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in the City of Mustang determine if the residential and nonresidential structures and manufactured homes have been substantially damaged and enforce the substantial improvement requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-73. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 50-92(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 50-72(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-74. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 50-73(2) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances. 
(3)  A written notice will be provided to any person granted a variance to build a structure below the base flood elevation. This notice will inform the variance applicant that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built lower than the base flood elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in subsections (a)—(i) are met, and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(l)  Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the board of adjustment, accompanied by a filing fee in the amount set forth in subsection 42-122(e). 
(m)  A copy of any variance issued shall be sent to the OWRB within in 15 days of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Secs. 50-75—50-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 50-91. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-92. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 50-73(a) is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I beam elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces and a licensed installer shall install the home and place the required placard on the dwelling. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Also, a licensed installer shall install the home. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that the bottom of the I-beam of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, support the manufactured home chassis and also installed by a licensed installer that complies with state law. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of subsection 50-73(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(6)  Accessory structure. 
a.  Structure is low valued and represents a minimal investment. 
b.  Structure shall be small and not exceed 600 square feet in size. 
c.  Structure shall be unfinished on the interior. 
d.  Structure can be used only for parking and limited storage. 
e.  Structure shall not be used for human habitation (including work, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas). 
f.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be elevated to or above the BFE or floodproofed. 
g.  Structure is constructed and placed on building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
h.  Structure is designed to have low flood damage potential, i.e., constructed with flood resistance materials. 
i.  Structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
j.  Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the structure. 
k.  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below the BFE. 
l.  Structure is to be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent and nearby structures. 
(7)  Compensatory storage. Filling or development, which diminishes the flood storage capacity of any special flood hazard area delineated on the Canadian County Flood Insurance Rate Map, the volume of development, shall be compensated. The volume lost to flood waters shall be replaced by a land cut that must equal or exceed the space lost to the base flood elevation. Subsequent to filling or development, there shall be a zero increase in the surface elevation of BFE. Furthermore, the development shall be constructed so that it will not increase the frequency of flooding or the depth of inundation of structures. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-93. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 50-32, 50-33 and 50-34 of this article. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of section 50-54; section 50-73; and the provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 50-53 or subsection 50-72(9) of this article. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-94. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 50-53 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flows may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures; 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in subsection 50-73(a) are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-95. - Floodways. 
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 50-53 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including, fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community complies with all of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 1009, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008)  
Secs. 50-96—50-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 50-111—50-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 50-131. - Purpose and applicability of division. 
The regulations and standards of this division are intended to protect the various portions of the urban area from flooding, to provide clean and sanitary channels for runoff, to prevent pollution of watersheds, streams and natural drainage channels, to prevent the encroachment of buildings and improvements on natural drainage channels, to equitably apportion the cost of improvements, to protect natural scenic areas, and to provide for the conservation of the natural resources of the area. The regulations, policies and standards contained in this division shall apply to the area outlined on the comprehensive plan, which is made a part of this division. All subdivisions of land and all improvements of any character which affect drainage in any portion of the area contained on the comprehensive plan shall be subject to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1977, § 13.12.010)  
Sec. 50-132. - Classification of drainage channels; responsibility for improvement of drainage channels. 
(a)  Primary drainage channels shall be those rivers and other channels which have been so designated on the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Secondary drainage channels shall include all channels in the area set forth on comprehensive plan which are not classified as primary channels. 
(c)  In general it is intended that channels which are designed as primary channels serve a drainage area of 640 acres or more. It is intended by this division to provide that the improvement of primary drainage channels will be the responsibility of the city primarily, since the whole city is benefited materially, except that the developer of the land containing the primary channel is expected to lay out, design and otherwise plan and carry out his improvements in a manner that will not interfere with or restrict the natural flow of water or materially change the conditions of runoff. Increased runoff and changes in primary channels which are created by improvements of an individual subdivision shall be the responsibility of the developer of the subdivision and shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this division. It is intended by this division that the improvement of secondary channels shall be the responsibility of the developer of the area served by the channel since the primary benefit is to the area served by the secondary channel and not to the city as a whole. 
(Code 1977, § 13.12.020)  
Sec. 50-133. - Methods for determining stream flow and runoff. 
The maximum condition of rainfall for a 100-year interval shall be used for the purposes of determining all runoff for the sizing of drainage channels and structures, unless otherwise specified in this division. Values used in formulas for runoff and size of drainage structures shall reflect and shall not be less than the degree of urbanization set forth in the projected land use plan contained in the general plan. The following formulas and values shall be used for calculating all stream flow and runoff for the policies and regulations established this division: 
(1)  Runoff from all drainage areas shall be determined by rational formula: 
Q = AIR 
In which: 
Q 	= 	Cubic feet per second. 
A 	= 	Area to be drained in acres, determined by field surveys for areas less than 640 acres, and by latest government quadrangle maps for larger areas. 
I 	= 	Percent of imperviousness of the area. This may vary between 40 percent and 95 percent. 
R 	= 	Rate of rainfall over the entire drainage area in inches per hour, based on time of concentration and latest government records for the area. 
 
(2)  The size of closed storm sewers, open channels, culverts and bridges shall be determined using the Manning formula: 
Q = 1,486 / n  r 2/3 s 1/2 
Q 	= 	Discharge in cubic feet per second. 
A 	= 	Cross sectional area of water in conduit in square feet. 
r 	= 	Hydraulic radius of water in conduit. 
s 	= 	Mean slope of hydraulic gradient, in feet of vertical rise per foot of horizontal distance. 
n 	= 	Roughness coefficient, based on condition and type of material of conduit lining, but not less than 0.013. 
 
(Code 1977, § 13.12.030)  
Sec. 50-134. - Protection and improvement of primary drainage channels. 
All primary drainage channels which are located within or immediately adjacent to an improvement or a subdivision shall be protected and improved by the developer as follows: 
(1)  All land having an elevation below the 100-year maximum flood elevation and not protected by levees or dikes shall be dedicated to the city for the purpose of providing drainage and for public park and utility easement use. 
(2)  The existing channel lying within or immediately adjacent to the subdivision shall be cleaned to provide for the free flow of water, and the channel shall be straightened, widened and improved to the extent required to prevent overflow beyond the limits of the dedicated drainage area. 
(3)  Site improvement shall provide for the grading of all building sites and streets to an elevation where all lots, building areas and streets will not be subject to overflow and in a manner that will provide for the rapid runoff of all rainfall; however, such improvements shall be carried out in a manner that will preserve and protect large trees and attractive physical features of the area. 
(4)  Whenever channel improvement is carried out, sodding, backsloping, cribbing and other bank protection shall be designed and constructed to control erosion for all the anticipated conditions of flow for the segment of channel involved. 
(5)  A drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement unless it is placed in an enclosed storm sewer, or unless a paved street surface is provided on both sides of a paved channel to give access to abutting properties. 
(6)  Culverts, bridges and other drainage structures shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications of the city at all locations where drainage channels intersect with continuous streets or alleys. 
(Code 1977, § 13.12.040)  
Sec. 50-135. - Protection and improvement of secondary drainage channels and surface drainage. 
(a)  All secondary drainage channels which are located within or immediately adjacent to an improvement or a subdivision, and all surface drainage conditions, shall be protected and improved as follows: 
(1)  Secondary drainage channels which have a primary function of collecting surface water from adjacent properties or intercepting and diverting side hill drainage shall be provided with an improved open channel. 
(2)  Secondary drainage channels which have a primary function of transporting water through the block or collecting water from cross channels and which have a drainage area of less than 40 acres shall be an improved open channel or closed storm sewer. Where the secondary drainage channel has a drainage area of greater than 40 acres, an improved open channel or closed storm sewer shall be provided. 
(3)  A drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement unless it is placed in a closed storm sewer, or unless a paved street surface is located on both sides of a paved drainage channel to give access to abutting properties. 
(4)  Site grading shall be carried out in such a manner that surface water from each lot shall flow directly to a storm sewer, improved channel or paved street without crossing more than two adjacent lots. 
(5)  Surface water collected on streets shall be diverted to storm drains at satisfactory intervals to prevent overflow of six-inch-high curbs during a 100-year frequency rain for the area and grades involved; provided, however, that in no case shall the drainage area served by one street exceed 20 acres, regardless of the amount of flow. 
(6)  Drainage easements of satisfactory width to provide working room for construction and maintenance shall be provided for all storm sewers. In no case shall the total easement be less than 20 feet. 
(7)  Open channels shall be improved by providing a paved section that will carry the runoff from a rain of 50-year frequency and a sodded section to carry the runoff from a rain of 100-year frequency. The design of the channel improvements shall be in accordance with the standards set forth on figure B or figure C of Ordinance No. 168, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Whenever an open improved channel is required or authorized for a secondary drainage channel under the provisions of this division and the channel crosses residential lots 80 percent or more of which have a width of not less than 90 feet and an area of not less than 13,500 square feet and the channel improvement is to be designed as an integral part of the landscaping of the area that will be maintained by the property owners of the area, then the planning commission may modify the requirements of this section to permit a channel improvement design in accordance with figure D of Ordinance No. 168, on file in the office of the city clerk. The developer may elect to provide a paved section to accommodate runoff from a rain of 100-year frequency, provided that sodding shall be carried out to the extent necessary to protect paved surfaces. 
(Code 1977, § 13.12.050)  
Sec. 50-136. - Standards for improvements. 
(a)  Bridges or culverts shall be provided where watercourses cross continuous streets or alleys. 
(b)  Bridges and culverts shall be sized to accommodate a 50-year frequency rain, based on the drainage area involved. 
(c)  Closed storm sewers shall be constructed of precast or prefabricated pipe or built in place of closed box design to conform with city construction specifications to serve a 50-year frequency rain for the drainage area involved. 
(d)  Open-paved storm drainage channels shall be constructed in accordance with city specifications. 
(e)  Side slopes above the paved section shall be shaped and sodded on a slope of four horizontal to one vertical or flatter. 
(f)  Fences shall not be erected below the shoulder of the sodded section, and in no case shall fences be closer than six feet (measured horizontally) to the edge of the paved section. 
(Code 1977, § 13.12.060)  
Sec. 50-137. - Improvements and easements outside subdivision boundaries. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to require improvements, provision of drainage easements and provision of agreements beyond the boundaries of the subdivision to facilitate the flow of water through the addition, to avoid the probability of lawsuits based on damage from changed runoff in the subdivision, and to provide continuous improvement of the overall storm sewer system. 
(b)  Requirements outside the addition may include the following: 
(1)  Improvements may be required in channels or storm sewers flowing to or from the addition, or in channels or storm sewers located in adjacent areas that are affected by flow of water from the addition. 
(2)  The following kinds of improvements may be required: 
a.  Enlargement or replacement of undersized drainage structures to provide free flow. 
b.  Removal of obstructions. 
c.  Straightening of the channel. 
d.  Widening or deepening of the channel. 
e.  Construction of erosion control structures. 
f.  Backsloping, sodding and/or riprapping of the bank. 
g.  Construction of closed or open-paved storm sewers for purposes of closing gaps or continuation of the overall storm sewer system. 
(3)  Easements, where required, shall conform to section 50-133. 
(4)  Property owner agreements, where required, shall be designed to protect the city from probable lawsuits for damage caused by changed runoff conditions. 
(Code 1977, § 13.12.070)  
Secs. 50-138—50-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRAINAGE POLICY AND IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 50-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Base flood and 100-year flood mean the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
Detention means the temporary storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff. 
Detention facility means a facility that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff. 
Development. 
(1)  The following activities shall constitute development: any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to: 
a.  Buildings or other structures. 
b.  Mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
(2)  The following activities shall not constitute development: 
a.  Lawn and yard care. 
b.  Gardening. 
c.  Tree care and maintenance. 
d.  Removal of trees or other vegetation damaged by natural forces. 
e.  Agricultural activities. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Historic means pre-development or existing conditions at the time of development for all storm frequencies. 
Stormwater runoff means that portion of the rainfall that is drained into the stormwater drainage system. 
(Code 1977, § 13.14.020) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-162. - Penalty. 
Any violation of the provisions of this division is punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 13.14.100)  
Sec. 50-163. - Purpose and applicability of division. 
(a)  It is the intent of this division to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the public from the dangers arising from improper drainage and unwise diversion, use and obstruction of drainage channels, to protect natural scenic areas, and to provide for the conservation of the natural resources of the area. All subdivisions of land and all developments or improvements of any character which affect drainage in any portion of the city shall be subject to the provisions of this division. 
(b)  The provisions of this division shall apply to and be binding upon every person who seeks to develop, redevelop, grade, regrade, excavate, landfill, berm or dike land subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13.14.010)  
Sec. 50-164. - Interpretation of division. 
In the interpretation and application of this division and the city's drainage standards, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1977, § 13.14.090)  
Sec. 50-165. - Drainage policy adopted. 
The standard drainage policy, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and shall be used for all runoff flow and sizing for the regulations established in this division. The current standard drawing and details shall be used. 
(Code 1977, § 13.14.030) 
Editor's note— The city's "Standard Drainage Policy for the City of Mustang" is on file with the city clerk.  
Sec. 50-166. - Stormwater management required. 
(a)  It shall be the goal of the owner/developer to limit the storm runoff leaving his property to the so-called historic value (before development). To achieve this, the developer/owner shall provide stormwater management for the increased stormwater runoff resulting from his development. 
(b)  Where a developer/owner proposes development or use of only a portion of the property, provision for stormwater runoff control shall be required for that portion of the property proposed for immediate development or use. 
(c)  The development shall provide a sufficient stormwater drainage system for the conveyance of existing stormwater runoff received from upstream and from the subject property, with specific allowance having been made for the continued conveyance of stormwater runoff from properties adjacent to the proposed development which may develop in the future. 
(d)  All roofs, paved areas, yards, courts and courtyards, other than one-family or two-family residential structures, shall drain into an existing or improved storm sewer system or to an approved place of disposal, not generally including streets. Release of stormwater onto arterial (section line) streets may be considered acceptable if: 
(1)  Present street flow does not exceed four inches in depth at the face of the curb during a 50-year storm event; or 
(2)  The release of stormwater when added to existing street flow does not increase the depth of flow at the face of the curb above four inches in depth during a 50-year storm. 
Release of stormwater onto all other classifications of streets may be considered acceptable if the depth of flow does not exceed six inches in depth at the face of the curb during a 100-year storm event. The addition of off-site stormwater improvements may be waived by the city council if, in the opinion of the city council, the addition of storm sewers would cause extreme hardship on the developer, in which case the council will address alternative methods of disposal. 
(e)  In the case of one-family and two-family residential structures, stormwater may be discharged onto flat areas such as streets or lawns if drainage is provided so that the stormwater will flow away from the building and if the requirements of the city drainage standards are met. 
(f)  The owner/developer shall provide for the construction, operation and perpetual maintenance of stormwater detention systems acceptable to the city, except as provided in section 50-168(2). No conveyance of the responsibility for the detention system is allowed or implied by the issuance of building permits. Stormwater detention systems shall be considered a priority during construction. All stormwater drainage systems, erosion control and sedimentation control shall be constructed as one of the first items of a development, and shall be constructed prior to any change in the stormwater runoff of the development. 
(Code 1977, § 13.14.040)  
Sec. 50-167. - Development standards. 
(a)  In any development or improvement of property, the developer/owner may be required to provide, at his own expense, a preliminary drainage study for the total area to be ultimately developed. It shall be the responsibility of the city engineer to determine whether the need exists for a preliminary drainage study, and, if required, the study shall be submitted to the city engineer for review prior to his acceptance of any preliminary plat or construction plans for the development or any increment thereof. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to require improvements to preclude any backup of tailwater inundating any areas outside of the development as a result of the base flood. 
(c)  All developments shall be designed, constructed and completed in a manner which minimizes the removal of vegetation and existing tree cover. 
(d)  Development activities shall begin and continue only if appropriate sedimentation facilities are installed and maintained throughout the construction period. 
(e)  The building pad for all proposed buildings shall be a minimum of one foot above the base flood or 100-year flood elevation. 
(Code 1977, § 13.14.050)  
Sec. 50-168. - Ownership and maintenance of drainage facilities. 
Ownership and maintenance of stormwater detention storage facilities shall remain with the private sector unless such areas are in a development that has no neighborhood or homeowners' association or the like to regulate such facilities. Other drainage facilities provided for in this division may be dedicated to the public and maintained by the public unless such facilities are an integral usable part of the development, in which case the ownership and maintenance of the facilities shall remain with the private sector. Prior to the acceptance of any drainage or detention facility for maintenance by the city, the developer shall be in compliance with the following: 
(1)  The developer shall have completed construction of all required facilities and erosion controls in accordance with approved plans, and this shall be certified by the community development director, or shall provide a sufficient surety bond, cash escrow or letter of credit approved by the city council and city attorney guaranteeing the construction of all required facilities and erosion controls as approved by the city engineer and community development director within one year. 
(2)  In the case of public ownership, the developer shall pay a sum to the city as set forth in section 42-50, multiplied by the number of acres dedicated for the detention facility, multiplied by seven years, to cover the cost of maintenance. All funds received shall be maintained in a separate account to be used for the maintenance of detention ponds. 
(Code 1977, § 13.14.060)  
Sec. 50-169. - Submission of runoff calculations; prerequisites for issuance of building and occupancy permits. 
Prior to approval of any plat or plan, the developer's consulting engineer shall submit backwater profiles and stream flow and runoff calculations as may be required by the city engineer under the terms of this division. A building permit or occupancy permit shall not be issued for any structure in the subject area until: 
(1)  The required improvements have been completed and accepted by the city engineer and community development director, with approved maintenance bonds on file; or 
(2)  A development bond or irrevocable letter of credit approved by the city attorney and accepted by the city council, guaranteeing the required improvements, is on file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 13.14.070)  
Sec. 50-170. - Changes to improperly functioning systems. 
The owner/developer understands and agrees by his submitting of a drainage system plan that approval by the city does not relieve him or his successors or assigns of an obligation to revise, improve and/or change any or all of the drainage system if the original proposal does not function as intended by the approved site or development plan. 
(Code 1977, § 13.14.080)  
Chapter 52 - FOOD SERVICES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 52-1—52-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE FOOD SERVICE LICENSE 
 
Sec. 52-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director shall mean the director of community development, or his designee. 
Food or food products means any article used for food, drink, confectionery, or condiment by man or animal, whether the same be simple, mixed or compound. 
Prepackaged means bottled, canned, cartoned, securely bagged, or securely wrapped, whether packaged in a food service establishment or a food processing plant. It does not include a wrapper, carryout box, or other non-durable container used to facilitate food protection during service and receipt of the food by the consumer. 
Public right-of-way means any street or highway and property adjacent to streets and highways which is dedicated to public use and over which the federal, state or municipal government, or any agency, department or subdivision thereof, exercises control and dominion; or any bridge, alley, sidewalk, pedestrian way, stairs or elevator which is dedicated to public use and over which the federal, state or municipal government, or any agency, department or subdivision thereof, exercises control and dominion. 
Vehicle means any wagon, cart, automobile, truck, pushcart, or any other mobile equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 2, 11-4-2014)  
Sec. 52-102. - License, fee and penalty. 
(a)  No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale or have in his possession with intent to sell directly from a vehicle to the consumer any food product unless a license has first been obtained from the director. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to this section may, at the option of the applicant, include special event licensing. 
(c)  Persons required to obtain a license pursuant to the provisions of this article shall pay a fee to the city in the amount set forth in section 42-52. 
(d)  The format of such license will be approved by the director, and such license shall be prominently displayed at the applicant's selling location. 
(e)  Any person who shall manufacture, sell or distribute food or food products without the license required by this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day's continued violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be chargeable as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 3, 11-4-2014)  
Sec. 52-103. - Application procedure for mobile food service license. 
(a)  Contents of application. Applicants for a mobile food service license under this article must file with the city a (verified) sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  The name and residence of the applicant if an individual; 
(2)  The names and residences of the partners if a partnership; 
(3)  The names and residences of the principal officers if a corporation; 
(4)  A description in detail of the vehicle proposed to be used for which the license is desired; 
(5)  The kind, type and quantities of food products proposed to be kept at, served, or sold from such vehicle; 
(6)  If prepackaged and prepared food products are to be sold, the source of such food products; 
(7)  The location desired for mobile food sales; 
(8)  Time period for which applicant wishes to do business; 
(9)  Verification that the applicant is bonded as a group II vendor by the state tax commission or other proof that sales tax has been or is being paid on the merchandise sold or to be sold, if applicable; 
(10)  Proof that a county health permit has been obtained; and 
(11)  Whether the applicant desires licensing for special events. 
(b)  At time of filing, fee as provided in section 42-52 shall be paid to the city. 
(c)  Each applicant, if the applicant does not operate a fixed, permanent restaurant within the City of Mustang, shall file with the application a certificate of insurance from the appropriate insurer that the applicant has general liability and vehicular insurance in the amount required by the State of Oklahoma. 
(d)  Each applicant shall file with the application the written permission of the property owner(s) giving the applicant the authority to use the location desired. 
(e)  Review of application. 
(1)  The city shall review the application to ensure: 
a.  That applicant is aware of his responsibility to collect and pay sales tax and that applicant is properly registered with the Oklahoma Tax Commission. If applicant is not properly registered with the Oklahoma Tax Commission, the permit will not be issued. 
b.  That the chosen location for issuance of a mobile food service license is commercially zoned and does not extend onto the public right-of-way. 
c.  That the applicant's business operation will not obstruct a safe line of sight from any street or private drive used to exit the subject property, or cause other sight-distance related problems. 
d.  That chapter 94, "signs," is to be properly complied with during applicant's business activity. 
e.  That a valid county health permit is obtained. 
(2)  Within seven days after receipt of the application, the city shall either approve or disapprove of the application. 
a.  If the application is approved, the city shall issue the permit within three days after the approval. 
b.  If the application is not approved, the city must state with specificity the reason(s) for nonapproval and the city shall notify the applicant within three days after nonapproval. Proper mailing to the address shown on the application shall be adequate notification to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 4, 11-4-2014)  
Sec. 52-104. - Conditions of license issuance. 
(a)  A permit must be issued not less than 24 hours prior to any actual selling activity by the applicant. 
(b)  All mobile food vendors must have the permission of the property owner prior to operating a mobile food service unit on the subject property. 
(c)  No mobile food vendor may stop for longer than 12 hours at a single location or address in a twenty-four-hour period. A single location or address shall include a single parking lot shared by multiple businesses. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 5, 11-4-2014)  
Sec. 52-105. - License term. 
A license issued pursuant to section 52-102 shall expire one year from its date of issue. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 6, 11-4-2014)  
Sec. 52-106. - Restrictions on food sales from vehicles. 
(a)  All operators of vehicles from which food is sold under the provisions of this article shall comply with all traffic regulations. 
(b)  All food sales vehicle vendors shall be permitted to stop temporarily to sell food or beverages on the public right-of-way, other than on state highways, on arterial streets or within public parks, but such stops must not impede the normal flow of traffic nor constitute a traffic hazard. 
(c)  All vehicles which are used for food sales and which are equipped with any device designed for sound production, amplification or reproduction shall comply with the provisions of section 78-214 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 7, 11-4-2014)  
Sec. 52-107. - Vehicular sanitation. 
Every vehicle used for the sale or distribution of food products to a consumer shall be well constructed and enclosed with top and sides. The interior walls and ceiling of the vehicle shall be of smooth, durable material capable of withstanding repeated washing and scrubbing. Each vehicle shall be kept well painted and in good repair, and in good sanitary condition, and shall not be used for any other purpose. Surfaces of all floors, walls and tops of compartments where foods are kept shall be smooth, nonabsorbent, washable and clean. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 8, 11-4-2014)  
Sec. 52-108. - Special event food license. 
(a)  A special event mobile food service license may be issued to any person whose facilities pass a health inspection performed by the Canadian County Health Department. 
(b)  An application for a special event mobile food service license shall be accompanied by the license fee set forth in section 42-52 of this Code. 
(c)  The holder of a special event mobile food service license is authorized to sell or distribute to the public food or food products for consumption only [on] the premises for which the license is issued. 
(d)  A special event food license shall be valid for a period not to exceed seven consecutive days. 
(e)  The holder of a special event food license shall be required to comply with section 52-106 of this article. 
(f)  Mobile food service licensees holding an annual license, with special events included, will not be required to obtain a special event mobile food service license to participate in events held within the Mustang city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 9, 11-4-2014)  
Sec. 52-109. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  Suspension of license. 
(1)  The director may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article if upon inspection there appears a reasonable likelihood that food products presently being stored, offered for sale, prepared or sold may be contaminated such as to be hazardous to the consumer or are subject to extreme rodent or insect infestation, or interruption of electric or water supply, or improper disposal of sewage. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice as set forth hereinafter, and operations shall immediately cease thereafter. 
(2)  The holder of the license shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing before the director within ten days of receipt of request for hearing. The holder of the license or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the license is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended, the specific reasons therefor, and that an opportunity for hearing will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the director by the holder of the license within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The director may end the suspension at any time if the reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(b)  Revocation of license. 
(1)  The director may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke a license for serious violations of this chapter or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of duty. "Serious violations of this chapter" shall mean violations of sufficient gravity to pose a hazard to public health. The hearing allowed herein shall be conducted before a three-member panel composed of one representative from the Canadian County Health Department (selected by that agency), one representative nominated by the mayor, and one person selected and agreed upon by the two chosen representatives. 
(2)  Prior to revocation, the director shall notify, in writing, the holder of the license or the person in charge, of the specific reasons for which the license shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed with the director by the holder of the license within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the license becomes final. 
(c)  The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the director, in the case of a suspension hearing, or the three-member panel, in the case of a revocation hearing, at a time and place designated by him or it. Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be recorded, and the director shall make provision for sufficient copies of the transcript. The director shall make a final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the license. 
(d)  Any holder of a license, the suspension or revocation of which has been sustained, by the director in the case of a suspension hearing, or the three-member panel in the case of a revocation hearing, may appeal from such action to the district court having jurisdiction. Upon such appeal, the matter shall be tried de novo. 
(e)  A notice provided for in this section is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the license, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the license. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(f)  Whenever a revocation has become final, the holder of the revoked license may make written application for a new license. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 10, 11-4-2014)  
Sec. 52-110. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. Each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 11, 11-4-2014)  
Sec. 52-111. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The acts of merchants having a permanent place of business or their employees, in taking orders at the homes of their customers for goods held by such merchants in stock at their places of business; nor to the acts of such merchants or their employees in handling goods so ordered at the homes of their customers; 
(2)  Food sales at events that are not open to the general public or are sponsored, catered, or hosted by a business or group; 
(3)  Farmers or truck gardeners who offer for sale or sell, or who peddle and sell from house to house, fresh fruits, vegetables, butter, eggs and farm products produced and raised by such farmers and gardeners from lands owned and cultivated or controlled by them; 
(4)  Any hawker, huckster or peddler engaged in the business or occupation of selling, or offering for sale, from house to house, any fresh fruits or vegetables; 
(5)  Licensed milkmen. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 12, 11-4-2014)  
Chapter 54 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; rabies control, § 14-111 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 50; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 98; utilities, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Public Health Code, 63 O.S. § 1-101 et seq.; municipal public health powers, 11 O.S. § 22-120. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROHIBITION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES IN CERTAIN PLACES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1200, §§ 1-6, adopted Dec. 3, 2019, repealed art. II., §§ 54-31—54-37 in its entirety and enacted a new art. II, §§ 54-31—54-35 as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1108, §§ 3-9, adopted Oct. 21, 2014. 
State Law reference— Smoking in certain public places, 21 O.S. § 1247; Smoking in Public Places Act, 63 O.S. § 1-1521 et seq. 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Indoor area means any enclosed area used or visited by employees or the public, at all times, regardless of whether work is being performed. Indoor area includes work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or visited by employees, as well as all space between a floor and ceiling that is predominantly or totally enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed windows, stairways, or the like. 
Municipal property means all buildings, indoor areas, and outdoor areas, including but not limited to recreational areas, and other property, or portions thereof, owned or operated by the city, including but not limited to vehicles and equipment owned by the city. 
Outdoor area means any area that is not an indoor area, and includes outdoor recreational areas. 
Smoking means the carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking device. 
Tobacco product means any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption. Tobacco Product does not include any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product. 
Vapor product means any noncombustible product, that may or may not contain nicotine, that employs a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce a vapor in a solution or other form. Vapor product shall include any vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any vapor cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic device. 
(Ord. No. 1200, § 2, 12-3-2019)  
Sec. 54-32. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Smoking tobacco products is prohibited in all places in which smoking tobacco products is prohibited by Oklahoma state law. 
(b)  Using tobacco products and vapor products is prohibited on all municipal property, indoor and outdoor, including parks and recreational areas. 
(c)  Nothing in this article prohibits any person or entity from prohibiting the use of tobacco products or vapor products on their property, even if the use of tobacco products or vapor products is not otherwise prohibited in that area. 
(d)  No person or entity shall knowingly permit the use of tobacco products or vapor products in an area that is under the control of that person or entity and in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by law. 
(e)  No person or entity shall permit the placement of ash receptacles, such as ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the control of that person or entity and in which smoking is prohibited by law. The presence of ash receptacles shall not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco products or vapor products in violation of any provision of this article. 
(f)  No person or entity shall intimidate, threaten, or otherwise retaliate against another person or entity that seeks to attain compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1200, § 3, 12-3-2019)  
Sec. 54-33. - Required signs. 
(a)  The person or entity that has legal or de facto control of an area in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by this article shall post a clear, conspicuous, and unambiguous sign at each point of entry to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous point within the area. 
(b)  For restrictions on the use of tobacco products or vapor products in indoor areas, the sign or decal shall be at least 4 inches by 2 inches in size and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is provided. 
(c)  For restrictions on the use of tobacco products or vapor products in outdoor areas, signs shall be weather-resistant, at least 15 inches by 15 inches in size, with lettering of at least one inch, and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is provided. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the city manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for the posting of signs on municipal property, both indoor and outdoor. 
(e)  Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco products or vapor products in violation of any other provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1200, § 4, 12-3-2019)  
Sec. 54-34. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who knowingly violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $20.00 nor more than $100.00, plus applicable court costs. 
(b)  Each instance of tobacco product or vapor product use in violation of this article shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Any peace officer or code enforcement official may enforce this chapter. 
(d)  The city finds that the possession of a lighted tobacco product in violation of this article is a nuisance. 
(e)  The city finds that the use of a vapor product in violation of this article is a nuisance. 
(f)  The remedies provided by this article are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. In addition to other remedies provided by this article or by other law, any violation of this article regarding tobacco product or vapor product use may be remedied through administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, criminal code enforcement proceedings, and actions at law for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 1200, § 5, 12-3-2019)  
Sec. 54-35. - Statutory construction and severability. 
It is the intent of the city council of the City of Mustang to supplement applicable state and federal law and not to duplicate or contradict such law. The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and the invalidity of any provision of this ordinance shall not affect other provisions of the ordinance, which can be given effect without the invalid provision. 
(Ord. No. 1200, § 6, 12-3-2019)  
Chapter 58 - HUMAN RELATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fair housing, 25 O.S. § 1451 et seq.; local fair housing ordinances, 25 O.S. § 1702. 
 
Sec. 58-31. - Purpose of article. 
The general purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Secure for all people equal access to housing in all neighborhoods. 
(2)  Preserve the public safety, health and welfare. 
(Code 1977, § 8.36.010)  
Sec. 58-32. - Violation of state law. 
No person shall violate any of the provisions of 25 O.S. ch. 21, art. 4A (25 O.S. § 1451 et seq.), which provisions are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1977, §§ 8.36.020, 8.36.030)  
Sec. 58-33. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Filing of complaint. Any person aggrieved by a discriminatory practice prohibited by this article may file with the clerk of the municipal court a complaint in writing under oath. The complaint shall be signed by the person claiming to be aggrieved, and shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have violated the provisions of this article, and shall further set forth the particulars of the violation, and may include such other information as may be required by the court. Complaints filed under this section must be filed within 30 days after the alleged violation, and failure to file within such time shall be considered a waiver of the application of this article. The court may issue a complaint on its own initiative at any time it is within the knowledge of the court that a person has violated any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Investigation of complaint. The court shall investigate such complaint filed with the court, and shall attempt an adjustment of the complaint by means of conference and conciliation. Sixty days shall be allowed for the purpose of investigation, conference and conciliation. Upon determination that a complaint is not well founded, the court shall dismiss the complaint and notify the complainant and respondent in writing of the dismissal. If the court takes no action within 90 days of the filing of the complaint, it shall be considered as dismissed. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. If conference or conciliation does not result in compliance with this article, the court shall cause to be issued and served in the name of the city a written notice, together with a copy of the complaint, requiring the person named in the complaint, referred to in this section as the respondent, to answer charges of the complaint at a hearing before the court at a time and place to be specified in the notice. 
(d)  Conduct of hearing; finding by court. At the hearing provided for in subsection (c) of this section, the complaint shall be heard by the court. At the hearing, the complainant or person aggrieved may appear in person and/or by counsel, and the respondent may file a written answer to the complaint and may appear in person or by legal counsel. The court, when conducting any hearing pursuant to this section, may permit amendments to any complaint or answer, and the testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath and shall be transcribed at the request of either party if made in writing at least 48 hours before the hearing, or at the direction of the court. If the court finds at the hearing that the respondent has engaged in any discriminatory practice prohibited by this article, it shall state its findings of fact, and shall so render a judgment and fine. If the court, upon hearing, finds that the respondent has not engaged in any discriminatory practice, it shall state its findings of fact, and shall issue and file an order dismissing the complaint. 
(e)  Administrative rules. The court shall establish rules and regulations to govern and expedite and effectuate the procedure described in this section, and shall maintain the files provided for in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 8.36.040)  
Sec. 58-34. - Service of notices. 
Any and all notices required under the provisions of this article to be served upon any person may be served personally on such person, or by mailing a copy thereof by certified or registered mail, with return receipt requested, to the most current business or residence address of such person. 
(Code 1977, § 8.36.050)  
Chapter 62 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 26; emergency services, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 114. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal police departments, 11 O.S. § 34-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 62-31. - Established; supervision. 
There shall be a police department, the head of which is the chief of police, or police chief, appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the manager. The chief of police is an officer of the city, and has supervision and control of the police department. All police officers are officers of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2.32.010)  
Sec. 62-32. - Duties. 
It is the duty of the police department to apprehend and arrest on view or on warrant and bring to justice all violators of the ordinances of the city; to suppress all riots, affrays and unlawful assemblies which may come to its knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve all warrants, writs, executions and other processes properly directed and delivered to it; to apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state laws as provided by law, and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all duties pertaining to the offices of police officer. The police department has charge of and operates the city jail. 
(Code 1977, § 2.32.020)  
Sec. 62-33. - Chief of police. 
(a)  The chief of police of the city shall be in charge of the police department, and he shall formulate whatever general rules and regulations concerning the organization and duties of the department as he deems advisable and necessary. 
(b)  The chief of police shall make an annual report to the city manager and to the city council within one month after the close of the fiscal year, reporting upon the activities and effectiveness of this department. 
(Code 1977, §§ 2.32.030, 2.32.040)  
Sec. 62-34. - Reserve police officers. 
(a)  Appointment and dismissal; employment status. The chief of police is authorized to appoint and dismiss reserve police officers, who shall serve solely at the discretion of the chief of police subject to the approval of the city manager, whose decision shall be final. Reserve police officers shall have no rights of appeal, nor shall they be afforded the benefits or other conditions or terms of employment available to other employees, except as may be specifically authorized and provided. 
(b)  Powers and duties; hours. Reserve municipal police officers shall have the powers, duties and functions as set forth in law or ordinance for regular full-time municipal police officers, including serving as police officers in another municipality requesting assistance pursuant to 11 O.S. § 34-103. A reserve municipal police office shall serve on a part-time basis and shall perform duties only while on authorized duty. A reserve officer shall serve not more than 110 hours per calendar month. 
(c)  Applicability of state law. Reserve police officers must meet the minimum requirements of 70 O.S. § 3311 and will be subject to all other provisions of state law, including, without limitation, 21 O.S. § 1289.23, 11 O.S. § 34-101 and 19 O.S. § 547. 
(Ord. No. 690, § I, 7-7-1998)  
Sec. 62-35. - Abandoned or unclaimed property. 
(a)  Record. All personal property which comes into the possession of any police officer, which has been found, stolen, taken off the person or out of possession of any prisoner or person suspected of, or charged with, an offense, and which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto shall be, by the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge of the chief of police. The chief shall, in a permanent record book kept for that purpose, make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and circumstances of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from whom it was taken, and the place where it was found, and the record shall also disclose the subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the purchaser and the amount for which it was sold. 
(b)  Disposition. 
(1)  The chief of police is authorized to sell personal property other than money or legal tender of the United States, which has come into his possession in any manner if the: 
a.  Owner of the personal property is unknown or has not claimed the property; 
b.  Property has been in the custody of the chief of police for at least six months; and 
c.  The property or any part thereof is no longer needed to be held as evidence or for any other purpose in connection with any litigation. 
(2)  The chief of police shall file an application in the district court of the county requesting the authority of the court to conduct a sale of the personal property. The chief of police shall attach to his application a list describing the property, including any identifying numbers and marks, the date the property came into his possession and the name of the owner and his address, if known. The court shall set the application for hearing not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after filing of the application. 
(3)  At least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be sent by certified mail to each owner at his address as listed in the application. The notice shall contain a brief description of the property of the owner and the place and date of the hearing. The notice shall be posted at city hall and at two other public places in the city. 
(4)  If no owner appears and establishes ownership to the property at the hearing, the court shall enter an order authorizing the chief of police to sell the personal property for cash to the highest bidder, after at least five days' notice of the sale has been published. The chief of police shall make a return of the sale, and the order of the court confirming the sale shall vest title to the property in the purchaser. After payment of court costs and other expenses, the remainder of money received from the sale of the personal property shall be deposited in the municipal general fund. 
(5)  All money or legal tender of the United States which has come into the possession of the chief of police pursuant to the circumstances provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be transferred by the chief of police to the municipal clerk for deposit in the municipal general fund. Prior to any such transfer the chief of police shall file an application in the district court of the county requesting the court to enter an order authorizing him to transfer the money for deposit in the municipal general fund. The application shall describe the money or legal tender, any serial numbers, the date the money or legal tender came into his possession, and the name of the owner and his address, if known. Upon filing the application which may be joined with an application as described in subsection (b)(2) of this section, a hearing shall be set not less than ten days, nor more than 20 days from the filing of the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided for in subsection (b)(3) of this section. The notice shall state that upon failure of anyone to appear to prove ownership to the money or legal tender, the court shall order such money or legal tender to be deposited in the municipal general fund. The notice may be combined with a notice to sell personal property as provided for in subsection (b)(2) of this section. If no one appears to claim and prove ownership to the money or legal tender at the hearing, the court shall order the money or legal tender to be transferred to the municipal general fund as provided in this subsection. 
(c)  Nonapplicability. The provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any dangerous or deadly weapons, narcotics or poisonous drugs, explosives or any property of any kind or character, which the possession of is prohibited by law. By order of the trial court, any such property filed as an exhibit or held by the municipality shall be destroyed, sold or disposed of pursuant to the conditions prescribed in such order. 
(2)  Animals impounded under the animal control ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1977, §§ 3.08.010, 3.08.020) 
State Law reference— Abandoned or unclaimed property 11 O.S. § 34-104.  
Chapter 66 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Municipal public libraries, 11 O.S. § 31-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Intent. 
It is the desire and intent of the city council to provide free public library service to the residents of the city, for the benefit of the city, the state and the nation. 
(Code 1977, § 2.68.010)  
Sec. 66-2. - Municipal library established. 
The Mustang municipal library is established. 
(Code 1977, § 2.68.020) 
State Law reference— Library authorized, 11 O.S. § 31-101.  
Sec. 66-3. - Funding. 
The mayor and city council shall annually appropriate to the municipal library from funds available to the city such moneys as are deemed necessary to operate and maintain the municipal library for the education and cultural enrichment of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2.68.090)  
Secs. 66-4—66-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authority, § 2-221 et seq. 
 
Sec. 66-31. - Created—Membership; appointment and term of members; compensation of members; removal of members. 
(a)  The municipal library shall be governed by a board of seven members appointed by the governing body. Library board members must be residents of the Mustang School District. Appointments to the library board shall be made on the basis of ability, understanding of the total responsibilities and objectives of municipal libraries, and an active interest in the attainment of these goals. All library board members shall serve thereon without compensation. 
(b)  The board members shall hold office for three-year terms, except in the case of an appointment to fill a vacancy, which appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term which is vacant. Members may be reappointed for succeeding terms. All terms of initial and succeeding appointees shall expire on June 30 of the designated year. 
(c)  Any board member may be removed by the appointing authority for misconduct, failure to attend board meetings, or other neglect of duty. 
(Code 1977, §§ 2.68.030—2.68.050; Ord. No. 794, § 1, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 795, § 1, 2-19-2002; Ord. No. 910, § 1, 7-20-2004; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 1089, § 1, 7-16-2013) 
State Law reference— Library board of directors, 11 O.S. § 31-102.  
Sec. 66-32. - Organization; officers; rules. 
Immediately after the initial appointments and annually thereafter, the library board members shall meet and organize by an election of one of their number as chairperson, and by the election of such other officers as they deem necessary. Rules for the transaction of business shall be that the library board keeps a record of its regulations, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 2.68.060)  
Sec. 66-33. - Duties. 
The library board shall recommend to the mayor and city council policies of the library and shall recommend the acceptance or declination of gifts and grants. The library board shall recommend to the mayor and city council contracting for funds available to it for library purposes from the United States, the state, and any agency or instrumentality of these entities. 
(Code 1977, § 2.68.070)  
Sec. 66-34. - Annual report. 
The library board shall submit a statistical report to the mayor and city council for each fiscal year ending June 30. The report shall include such statistics about the library use, collections and staff which may be deemed necessary to account for its trust. 
(Code 1977, § 2.68.080)  
Chapter 70 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 54; planning, ch. 90; solid waste, ch. 98; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102; subdivisions, ch. 106; utilities, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122; R-MH-1 manufactured housing district, § 122-411 et seq.; R-MH-2 mobile home park district, § 122-441 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS 
 
Sec. 70-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dependent mobile home means a mobile home which does not have a flush toilet and a bath or shower. For purposes of regulation under this article, a dependent mobile home is considered to be the same as a travel trailer, unless otherwise specified. 
Freestanding mobile home or travel trailer means any mobile home or travel trailer not located in a mobile home park or travel trailer park, respectively, licensed by the city or in an approved mobile home subdivision. 
Health officer means the legally designated health authority of the city or his authorized representative. 
Independent mobile home means a mobile home which meets the minimum gross floor area or habitable space requirement as provided in section 70-49 and which has a flush toilet and a bath or shower. Unless otherwise indicated in the text of this article, the term "mobile home" means an independent mobile home. 
Inspection officer means the building official of the city or his authorized agent. 
Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this article. 
Mobile home means a single-family dwelling designed for transportation on streets and highways on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other trailers, both highway and rail, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or permanent foundations, connection to utilities and similar operations. Unless otherwise indicated in the text of this article, the term "mobile home" refers to an independent mobile home as defined in this section. 
Mobile home park means any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
Mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of open mobile home, and not located on a mobile home sales lot. 
Mobile home subdivision means a subdivision designed and intended for residential use where residence is in mobile homes exclusively, and mobile home lots are sold for occupancy. 
Nonresidential mobile trailer means any vehicle having the basic characteristics of either a mobile home or travel trailer, but which is used for purposes other than residential and is not being offered for sale as indicated by a clearly displayed sign on or near the trailer. 
Park means a mobile home and/or travel trailer park. 
Permittee means any person to whom a temporary permit is issued to maintain or operate a mobile home park under the provisions of this article. 
Person means a natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation. 
Public water system or public sewer system means any such system built and owned by, or dedicated to and accepted by, the city; all other such systems are private. 
Rural means any area shown on the city area general plan for suburban or rural development and which is zoned agricultural. 
Service building means a building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men and/or women, and may also include buildings containing laundry facilities and other facilities as required by this article or desired by the park operator. 
Subdivision means a mobile home subdivision, unless otherwise indicated. 
Travel trailer means all vehicles and portable structures built on a chassis, designed as a temporary or permanent dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use not included in the definition of independent mobile homes. For purposes of regulation under this article, a dependent mobile home shall be considered to be the same as a travel trailer, unless otherwise specified. 
Travel trailer park means any plot of ground upon which two or more travel trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
Travel trailer space means a plot of ground within a travel trailer park designed for accommodation of one travel trailer. 
Urban means any area shown on the city area general plan for urban intensity development. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-32. - License and temporary permit. 
(a)  (1)  It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or operate any mobile home park or travel trailer park within the limits of the city, unless he holds a valid license issued annually and jointly by the inspection officer and health officer of the city in the name of such person for the specific mobile home park or travel trailer park in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Such construction, maintenance or operation may be continued under a temporary permit for such period of time and under such conditions as are described in this section. 
(2)  Application shall be made to the inspection officer, who acting jointly with the health officer, shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with all pertinent provisions of this article and other ordinances and regulations of the city. Every person holding such a license shall notify the health officer in writing within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home park. The notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such mobile home park or travel trailer park. 
(b)  (1)  Application for original licenses shall be in writing signed by the applicant, and accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application, and shall contain the following: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant; 
b.  The interest of the applicant in and the location and legal description of the park; 
c.  A complete plan of the park showing compliance with all applicable provisions of this article and regulations promulgated under this article; 
d.  Such further information as may be requested by the health and/or inspection officer. 
(2)  Applications for renewal of licenses shall be made in writing by the holder of the license and shall contain the following: 
a.  Any change in the information submitted since the time the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted. 
b.  Other information requested by the health and/or inspection officer. 
(c)  A complete plan, for the purpose of obtaining a license to be issued, shall show: 
(1)  The area and dimensions of the tract of land; 
(2)  The number, location and size of all mobile home or travel trailer spaces; 
(3)  The location and width of roadways, walkways, buffer strips and recreational areas; 
(4)  The location of service buildings and other proposed structures; 
(5)  The location and size of utility lines and treatment facilities; 
(6)  Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the park. 
(d)  Whenever the health and/or inspection officer finds conditions existing in violation of this article, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the license was issued that, unless such conditions or practices be corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice, the license will be suspended. At the end of such period, not to exceed 90 days, the health and/or inspection officer shall reinspect such park, and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the license was issued. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such person shall cease operation of such park except as provided in section 70-35. 
(e)  Any person whose permit has been denied, suspended or who has received notice from the health and inspection officers that his permit will be suspended unless certain conditions or practices at the park are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city commission, provided, that, when no petition for such hearing has been filed within ten days following the day on which notice of suspension was served, such license shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked at the expiration of such ten-day period. 
(f)  (1)  A temporary permit, upon written request therefor, shall be issued by the health and inspection officers for every mobile home park or travel trailer park in existence upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, permitting the park to be maintained and operated during the period ending one year after the effective date of this article, without being subject to the provisions of this article, except such of the provisions as are made expressly applicable to permittees. 
(2)  The term of the temporary permit may be extended, upon written request, for not to exceed one additional period of up to 180 days, if the permittee has filed application for a license in conformity with this article within one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the park plans and specifications accompanying the application for license comply with all provisions of this article, and all other applicable ordinances and statutes, and the permittee has diligently endeavored to make the existing park conform fully to other plans and specifications submitted with the application, but has failed to do so due to circumstances beyond his control. 
(3)  Mobile home and travel trailer parks in existence upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived which have concrete pads indicating the location of mobile home or travel trailer spaces need not comply with those sections of this article which would require the moving of concrete pads. They must, however, comply with all other requirements in accordance with subsection (f)(1) and (2) of this section. In addition, any park expansion shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.020)  
Sec. 70-33. - License fees and temporary permits. 
The city clerk shall charge and collect for each mobile home and/or travel trailer park an initial license fee or temporary permit shall be as set forth in section 42-63(a). The initial license or temporary permit shall expire one year from the date of issue, unless renewed upon such conditions as the city council may by ordinance direct. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.030)  
Sec. 70-34. - Inspection of mobile home and travel trailer parks. 
(a)  The health and inspection officers are authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of mobile home and travel trailer parks located within the city, in order to perform their duty of safeguarding the health and safety of occupants of mobile home and travel trailer parks and of the general public. 
(b)  The health officer shall have the power to inspect the outside premises of private or public property for the purposes of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this article or of regulations promulgated under this article. 
(c)  The health and inspection officers shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all mobile homes and occupants using the park. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of every occupant of a park to give the owner or his agent or employee access to any part of such mobile home or travel trailer park of their premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this article, or with any lawful regulations adopted under this article, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.040)  
Sec. 70-35. - Notices, hearing and orders. 
(a)  Whenever the health and/or inspection officer determines violations of pertinent regulations exist, he shall notify the licensee or permittee of such alleged violation. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)  Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will affect compliance with provisions of this article and other pertinent regulations; 
(4)  Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days, for the performance of any act it requires; 
(5)  Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require, provided, that such notice or order shall be deemed as properly served upon the owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by certified mail to his last known address. 
(b)  Any person affected by any notice issued under this article or resulting regulations, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the housing appeals board, provided, that such person shall file with the inspection officer a written request for such hearing and setting forth briefly the grounds for such request within ten days after the day the notice was served. The filing of such request shall stay the notice of suspension under subsection (e) of this section. The hearing shall be held at the next housing appeals board meeting for which the agenda has not been completed, or at a later meeting if so requested by the petitioner, should the inspection officer determine sufficient cause for such delay exists. 
(c)  After such hearing, the health or inspection officer shall compile the findings of the housing appeals board as to compliance with this article and pursuant regulations and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the prior notice which shall be served as provided in subsection (d) of this section. Upon failure to comply with such order, the permit of the mobile home or travel trailer park shall be revoked. 
(d)  Appeals from decisions of the housing appeals board shall be to the city commission. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may seek relief in district court. 
(e)  Whenever the health and/or inspection officer finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the city council, shall be afforded a hearing at the next regular meeting, even if the agenda has been completed. The provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.050)  
Sec. 70-36. - Freestanding mobile home. 
(a)  No freestanding mobile home or travel trailer shall be permitted in the city urban area, unless it is being offered for sale or parked for storage. Except for mobile homes or travel trailers within regular commercial mobile home or travel trailer sales lots, each freestanding mobile home or travel trailer offered for sale must be clearly marked as such, shall not be occupied for either living or sleeping purposes and must be either removed from the premises if not sold within 120 days or stored as provided herein with any for sale sign removed. Not more than one mobile home or travel trailer may be offered for sale on a residential lot during a calendar year. Freestanding mobile homes or travel trailers located within regular commercial mobile home or travel trailer sales lots need be neither individually marked for sale nor removed within 120 days if not sold. A property owner shall not store, nor permit to be stored, more than one mobile home or travel trailer on a residential lot. Such mobile home or travel trailer shall be stored in the manner and location required by section 122-844. 
(b)  Freestanding mobile homes shall be permitted in the city rural area, but only in agricultural zoning districts. Permits for such freestanding mobile homes shall be issued by the inspection officer, but only when the applicant agrees in writing to remove such mobile home within 120 days after either the mobile home site is rezoned to a district other than agricultural or is abutted within 660 feet by districts other than agricultural. Such freestanding mobile homes must comply with all normal city regulations, except the specific qualifications to the housing code outlined for mobile homes in section 70-49. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.060; Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 11-18-2008)  
Sec. 70-37. - Nonresidential mobile trailers. 
(a)  No nonresidential mobile trailer shall be permitted in the city unless a license for its operation is issued by the inspection officer. The license shall specify the permitted use of the nonresidential mobile trailer, the location of the operation and the termination date of the permit. No license shall be issued for a use which would violate any city, state or federal ordinance, law or regulation. 
(b)  An annual fee as set forth in section 42-63 shall be charged for each nonresidential mobile trailer license, provided, that no governmental or nonprofit agency shall be charged such a fee. 
(c)  Operation of nonresidential trailers by contractors on construction projects for which building permits have been issued or which are otherwise approved by governmental units is permitted during the term of such construction project without issuance of a license. 
(d)  This section is not to be construed as permitting or authorizing the permanent location of any nonresidential mobile trailer in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.070)  
Sec. 70-38. - Location, space and general layout of parks. 
(a)  Parks shall be of three types: Mobile home parks, travel trailer parks and mixed mobile home and travel trailer parks. No travel trailer shall be located in a mobile home park. No mobile home shall be located in a travel trailer park. In a mixed park, separate areas shall be reserved for mobile homes and for travel trailers; no mobile home shall be permitted in the travel trailer sector; no travel trailer shall be permitted in the mobile home sector. 
(b)  All mobile home parks shall be located on a well drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. Drainage shall not endanger any water supply. 
(c)  The minimum area of any park shall be ten acres. However, parks in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived can continue to operate with less than five acres area; but, if the park is to be expanded, it must at that time have a minimum area of five acres and expansion requirements are as set out for new developments. 
(d)  Intensity of development shall be limited to no more than nine mobile homes per gross acre for a mobile home park, and no more than 13 travel trailers per gross acre for a travel trailer park. Areas used for sewerage treatment facilities shall not be included in density computations. Mobile home spaces shall be at least 30 feet wide where pads are closest to driveways. Travel trailer spaces shall be at least 25 feet wide where travel trailers are located closest to the driveway. 
(e)  Every mobile home space and travel trailer space shall be clearly defined. Mobile homes and travel trailers shall be parked in such spaces so that, at the nearest point, they shall be ten feet from the service road, five feet from the rear lot line and at least ten feet from any other mobile home or travel trailer. 
(f)  It is unlawful to locate a mobile home or travel trailer less than 25 feet from any public street or highway right-of-way or so that any part of such mobile home or travel trailer will obstruct any roadway or walkway of such park. 
(g)  It is unlawful to permit a mobile home to occupy a travel trailer space, a travel trailer to occupy a mobile home space and for any mobile home or travel trailer to be located in a park unless in a designated mobile home or travel trailer space. 
(h)  All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a sealed-surface driveway of not less than 20 feet in width if on-street parking is prohibited and 26 feet in width if on-street parking is permitted on one side of the street only. Driveways must have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(i)  (1)  In mobile home or travel trailer parks existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, parking on or adjacent to the street within the park is permissible as long as it does not obstruct free movement of traffic. Whether or not a safety hazard exists is a question to be determined by the city building official with final appeal to the city council. If, upon final appeal before the city council, it is determined by the council that a safety hazard does in fact exist, the mobile home or travel trailer park concerned will be required to comply with subsection (i)(2) of this section. 
(2)  In new mobile home parks at least two clearly defined parking spaces will be provided for each space either on or adjacent to the space. In new travel trailer parks at least one parking space shall be provided for each space either on or adjacent to the space. 
(j)  Outside drying spaces, or other clothes drying facilities, shall be provided in every mobile home or travel trailer park. Mobile home parks shall have at least 100 linear feet of clothes drying line or one mechanical clothes drying unit in good condition; mechanical units shall be located in a service building. Travel trailer parks and mixed parks shall have at least 25 linear feet of outdoor clothes drying line for each travel trailer space, or one mechanical clothes drying unit for the first ten travel trailer spaces, or any fraction thereof, and an additional unit for each ten additional travel trailer spaces, or any fraction thereof. 
(k)  All driveways and walkways within a park shall have at least four inches of concrete with roadway having curbing and proper drainage. 
(l)  In the city urban area, new mobile home parks should abut, and have their major means of ingress and egress on, at least a secondary thoroughfare. Travel trailer parks and mixed parks in the city urban area shall abut, and have their major means of ingress and egress on, at least a primary thoroughfare. 
(m)  All mobile home parks shall have and maintain a buffer planting strip, not less than three feet in width, along all park boundaries not bordering a street. Such strip shall consist of not less than one row of shrubs, spaced not more than eight feet apart, which grow to a height of five feet or more after one full growing season, and which will eventually grow to a height of not less than 12 feet. 
(n)  In all mobile home parks, at least ten percent of the gross area shall be developed into an acceptable recreation and playground area, and such area shall be adequately enclosed. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.080)  
Sec. 70-39. - Service buildings for travel trailer parks. 
(a)  (1)  Each travel trailer park shall be provided with at least one service building adequately equipped with flush-type toilet fixtures and other sanitary facilities as required in this article. No service building shall contain less than one toilet for females, one toilet for males, one lavatory and shower or bathtub for each sex and one laundry tray. 
(2)  All sanitary facilities required by section 70-40 shall be located in service buildings. 
(b)  Each park accommodating travel trailers shall provide the following: 
(1)  Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than two flush toilets and one urinal for the first ten travel trailers or fraction thereof, and for travel trailers in excess of ten, not less than one additional flush toilet and one additional urinal for every ten additional travel trailers or fractional number thereof. 
(2)  Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than two flush toilets for the first six travel trailer spaces or any less number thereof, and for travel trailer spaces in excess of six, not less than one additional flush toilet for every ten additional travel trailer spaces in excess of six, not less than one additional travel trailer space or fractional number thereof. 
(3)  Each sex shall be provided with not less than two lavatories and two showers or bathtubs with individual dressing accommodations for the first ten travel trailer spaces or any less number thereof, and for travel trailer spaces in excess of ten, not less than one additional lavatory and one additional shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for every ten additional travel trailer spaces or fractional number thereof. 
(4)  Each toilet for females and each shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for females shall be in a private compartment or stall. 
(5)  The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall either be in separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall. 
(6)  There shall be provided in a separate compartment or stall not less than one flush toilet bowl receptacle for emptying bed pans and other containers of human excreta or slop sink with at least a three-inch trap and an adequate supply of hot running water for cleansing such bed pans or containers. 
(c)  Travel trailer spaces shall not be more than 200 feet from a service building. 
(d)  Service buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Located 25 feet or more from any travel trailer space; 
(2)  Be of permanent construction, and be adequately lighted; 
(3)  Be of moisture-resistant material, to permit frequent washing and cleansing; 
(4)  Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of 75 degrees Fahrenheit during cold weather and to supply adequate hot water during time of peak demand; and 
(5)  Have all rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively screened. 
(e)  Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one laundry unit to every 30 travel trailer spaces, and shall be in a separate soundproof room of a service building or in a laundry, and one clothes washing machine. 
(f)  All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition, and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a menace. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.090)  
Sec. 70-40. - Sewage disposal for mobile home parks. 
(a)  Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop sinks and laundries in service buildings and other buildings within the park shall be discharged into a public sewer and disposal plant, septic tank system or private sewer and lagoon system of such construction and in such manner as approved by the state health department and in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Each mobile home space shall be provided with at least a four-inch sewer connection at least four inches above the surface of the ground. The sewer connection should be protected by a concrete collar at least four inches thick and have a minimum outside diameter of 24 inches. The sewer connection shall be fitted with a standard ferrule and close nipple and provided with a screw cap. Connection between the mobile home drain and the sewer must be watertight and self-draining. Mobile homes with fixtures from which backsiphonage may occur shall not be connected to the park's water system until the defect has been corrected. 
(c)  If a public sewer system is or becomes available within 300 feet of a mobile home or travel trailer park, connection must be made to the public system within 180 days. 
(d)  The design of private sewage treatment facilities shall be based on the maximum capacity of the park. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any watershed or into any waters of the state. The disposal facilities shall be located where they will not create a nuisance or health hazard to the mobile home park or to the owner or occupants of any adjacent property. The state health department must approve the type of treatment proposed and the design of any disposal facilities and sewer systems prior to construction. 
(e)  Every mobile home occupying a mobile home park space shall tie into the park sewerage system and shall dump any accumulated waste into the system. Every travel trailer shall dump all accumulated waste into a receptacle provided in the travel trailer park upon entering and upon leaving the park. Such receptacles must be approved by the state health department. Any other dumping of accumulated waste within the city is prohibited. 
(f)  The monthly sewerage charge shall be based on the maximum mobile home or travel trailer capacity of the park. The park operator shall, by the tenth of each month, notify the city clerk of the maximum number of mobile home spaces in use at any one time during the previous month. The city clerk shall then adjust the sewerage fee to the actual use of the park. Should the park operator fail to notify the city clerk of the prior month's actual usage of travel trailer or mobile home spaces, the sewerage fee shall be levied on the maximum capacity of the park. 
(g)  Sewer connections shall be watertight. Park licenses shall maintain travel trailer and mobile home connections to sewer and water systems in good condition and be responsible that there is no sewerage or water leakage on park premises. 
(h)  No sewer connections shall be made to travel trailer spaces. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.100)  
Sec. 70-41. - Water supply for mobile home parks. 
(a)  An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each park, capable of furnishing a minimum of 250 gallons per day per mobile home space. Where a public supply of water of such quality is available within 300 feet or becomes available within 300 feet, connection shall be made thereto and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where private water supplies must be developed, the health officer must approve the location, construction and development of both the water well and pipe system and connections. No private source other than a water well shall be used. 
(b)  The water system of the mobile home park shall be connected by pipes to all buildings and all mobile home spaces. Each mobile home shall be provided with a cold water tap at least four inches above the ground. An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in the service building for all bathing, washing, cleansing and laundry facilities. 
(c)  All water piping shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local law. The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or questionable water supplies, and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow or backsiphonage. All water connections shall be weathertight. 
(d)  Where drinking fountains are provided for public use, they shall be of a type and in locations approved by the health officer. 
(e)  Individual water service connections which are provided for direct use by mobile homes or travel trailers shall be of such construction so that they will not be damaged by the parking of such mobile homes or travel trailers. The park system shall be adequate to provide 20 pounds per square inch of pressure at all mobile home or travel trailer connections. 
(f)  Provisions shall be made within 150 feet of each travel trailer space to supply water for travel trailer reservoirs. 
(g)  No well casing, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be located in any pit, room or space extending below ground level, nor in any room or space aboveground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether above or below ground, have free drainage by gravity to the surface. All floors shall be watertight, and sloped from the pump pedestal to the drain, and floors shall extend at least two feet from the well in all directions. The pedestal shall not be less than 12 inches above the floor. This shall not be construed as prohibiting submersible pumps. 
(h)  All water storage reservoirs shall be watertight, and constructed of impervious material; all overflows and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs are prohibited. Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers, so as to prevent the entrance of contaminated material. Overflow pipes from a reservoir shall not connect to any pipe in which sewage or polluted water may back up. 
(i)  Underground stop cocks and waste cocks shall not be installed on any connection. 
(j)  No water well shall draw water from any sands reserved to the city for its use, except as may be otherwise permitted by ordinances of the city. 
(k)  No water connections shall be made to travel trailer spaces. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.110)  
Sec. 70-42. - Refuse disposal for mobile home parks. 
(a)  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect-breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. 
(b)  All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers, which shall be located within 150 feet of any mobile home or travel trailer space. Containers shall be provided in sufficient numbers and capacity to properly store all refuse. 
(c)  Racks or holders shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container racks or holders shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. Lids for containers shall be permanently connected to racks or holders with chains or other flexible materials. 
(d)  All refuse shall be collected at least once weekly, or as otherwise required by the health officer. Where municipal garbage collection is not available, the mobile home park operator shall either employ a private agency or provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers. 
(e)  Where municipal or other private disposal service is not available, the mobile home park operator shall dispose of the refuse by burial or transporting to an approved disposal site, as directed by the health officer. Refuse shall be buried only at locations and by methods approved by the health officer, and in accordance with the ordinances of the city. 
(f)  When municipal refuse disposal service is available, it must be used. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.120)  
Sec. 70-43. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)  Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard public health as required by the health officer, shall be applied in the park. 
(b)  Effective larvicidal solutions may be required by the health officer for fly-breeding or mosquito-breeding areas which cannot be controlled by other, more permanent measures. 
(c)  The health officer may require the park operator to take suitable measures to control other insects and obnoxious weeds. 
(d)  Accumulations of debris which may provide harborage for rodents shall not be permitted in the mobile home park. 
(e)  When rats or other objectionable rodents are known to be in the park, the park operator shall take definite action, as directed by the health officer, to exterminate them. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.130)  
Sec. 70-44. - Electricity and exterior lighting. 
(a)  An electrical outlet supplying at least 60 amperes shall be provided for each mobile home space. The installation shall comply with all applicable state and local electrical codes and ordinances. Such electrical outlets and extension lines shall be grounded and weatherproofed. Plug receptacles shall also be grounded and weatherproofed. All power supply lines shall be underground. 
(b)  Streets and driveways within mobile home and travel trailer parks shall be lighted with streetlights meeting the current standards of Illuminating Engineering Society or one-half candlepower, whichever is higher. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.140)  
Sec. 70-45. - Fuel. 
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall be of acceptable material as determined by the inspection officer and shall be permanently installed and securely fastened in place. All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath the mobile home or less than five feet from any mobile home exit. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.150)  
Sec. 70-46. - Fire protection. 
(a)  Park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
(b)  Where the water supply system does not provide at least six-inch water mains, there shall be provided a two-inch frost-protected water riser within 300 feet of each mobile home or building. 
(c)  Fires shall be made only in stoves and other cooking and/or heating equipment intended for such purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.160)  
Sec. 70-47. - Alterations and additions. 
(a)  All plumbing and electrical alterations or repairs in the park shall be made in accordance with applicable local regulations. 
(b)  Skirting of mobile homes is permissible but areas enclosed by such skirting shall be maintained so as not to provide a harborage for rodents, or create a fire hazard. 
(c)  A permit issued by the inspecting officer shall be required before any construction on a mobile home space or any structural addition or alteration to the exterior of a mobile home takes place. No construction, addition or alteration to the exterior of a mobile home located in a mobile home park shall be permitted unless of the same type of construction or materials as the mobile home affected. All such construction, additions or alterations shall be in compliance with applicable local and state laws. No permit shall be required for the addition of steps, canopies, awnings or antennas. 
(d)  No structure other than a mobile home shall be permitted on a mobile home space, except for one structure of not to exceed 175 cubic feet to be used for storage on each such space. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.170)  
Sec. 70-48. - Registration of owners and occupants. 
(a)  Each licensee or permittee shall keep a register containing a record of all mobile home and travel trailer owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or occupant of each mobile home and motor vehicle by which it is towed; 
(2)  The make, model, year and license of each mobile home and motor vehicle; 
(3)  The state, territory or country issuing such license; 
(4)  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home; 
(5)  Whether or not each mobile home is a dependent or independent mobile home. 
(b)  The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record of each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of one year following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.180)  
Sec. 70-49. - Minimum housing regulations for mobile homes. 
(a)  Every mobile home located in either a mobile home park, a mobile home subdivision or as a freestanding mobile home, shall meet the provisions of the housing code of the city, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  Every mobile home shall contain the following minimum gross floor area of habitable space: 
(1)  One hundred fifty square feet for one or two occupants; 
(2)  One hundred additional square feet for third occupants; 
(3)  Seventy-five square feet additional for each additional occupant thereafter. 
(c)  Habitable space in a mobile home shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet over 50 percent of the floor area; and the floor area where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered in computing minimum gross floor area. 
(d)  A mobile home shall have a safe and unobstructed primary exit and an emergency exit located remotely from the primary exit. 
(e)  Rooms occupied for sleeping purposes must contain at least 60 square feet of floor space if used by more than one person, and at least 40 square feet if used by one person. 
(f)  Dependent mobile homes shall not be required to have a flush toilet or a bath or shower. 
(g)  The housing code shall not apply to travel trailers insofar as floor area, flush toilet, bath or shower and ceiling height is concerned. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.190)  
Sec. 70-50. - Supervision. 
The licensee or permittee, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee or permittee, for the violation of any provision of this article to which the licensee or permittee is subject. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.200)  
Sec. 70-51. - Posting of license and temporary permit. 
The license certificate or temporary permit shall be conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the mobile home park or the travel trailer park at all times. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.210)  
Sec. 70-52. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in section 1-8 of this Code; and each day such violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense, in addition to the other remedies provided in this article. The city may institute any proper action or proceedings to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 15.40.220)  
Chapter 74 - NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 50; planning, ch. 90; solid waste, ch. 98; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102; subdivisions, ch. 106; utilities, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 74-1—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OIL AND GAS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1158, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 3, 2018, repealed Art. II, §§ 74-31—74-34, 74-51—74-58, 74-71—74-77, 74-101—74-106, 74-131—74-145, and 74-161—74-164 and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, without regard to whether the defined terms are capitalized when used, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used in this article and not specifically defined in this section shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. Except as otherwise provided, these definitions shall be applicable only to this article. 
City means the City of Mustang, Oklahoma. 
Commercial disposal well means a well where the owner/operator receives and disposes of produced water or any other deleterious substance from multiple well owners/operators and receives compensation for these services and where the owner/operator's primary business objective is to provide these services. This definition does not include those private wells established for on-site disposal of produced water from wells within a common unit established by the Oklahoma Corporation Commission. 
Completion operations or completion means that portion of the drilling activities that includes the work that is performed after initial drilling activities and prior to production activities for the purpose of optimizing the production of a well. 
Deleterious substance means any chemical, saltwater, oilfield brine, waste oil, waste emulsified oil, basic sediment, mud or injurious substances produced or used in the drilling, development, producing, transportation, refining and processing of oil, gas or condensate. 
Drilling means the process by which the earth is bored to create a pathway to formations containing hydrocarbons to allow for their production to the surface. 
Drilling activities means those activities commonly performed at the drilling and production site necessary or incidental to getting hydrocarbons to market, including completion, re-drilling, re-completion or re-working operations, but not including production activities or establishment of a commercial disposal well as defined in this article. 
Drilling and production site means the area dedicated to all gas well drilling or production activities, or both, including the drilling and production area, all structures, dehydrators, parking areas, security cameras, lighting, tanks, tank battery (or any other tank grouping area), drilling rigs, separators, compressors as associated with gathering lines, perimeter walls, utilities, and all other features or objects contemplated for use during and after gas well drilling or production activities. Excluded from this definition are gathering and transmission lines and compressor stations and commercial disposal wells as defined in this article. 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or successor agency. 
Gas means gas or natural gas, as such terms are used in the rules, regulations, or forms of the Oklahoma Corporation Commission. Typically, a naturally-occurring gaseous substance primarily composed of methane and other light, gaseous hydrocarbons. 
Gas production means the phase that occurs after successful exploration, drilling and development involving operations including, but not limited to, gas wells, tanks, dehydrators, separators, mud pits, ponds, tank batteries or associated mechanical equipment, and during which hydrocarbons are extracted from the gas field, but does not include the operation of a commercial disposal well as defined in this article. 
Gas well means any well drilled for the production of gas or classified as a gas well under Oklahoma Statutes or Oklahoma Corporation Commission Regulations. 
Hazardous materials management plan means the hazardous materials management plan and hazardous materials inventory statements required by the fire code. 
OCC means "Oklahoma Corporation Commission" or successor agency. 
ODEQ means "Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality" or successor agency. 
Oil means oil or crude oil as such terms are used in the rules, regulations, or forms of the Oklahoma Corporation Commission. 
Oil and gas inspector or inspector means an inspector designated by the city that is responsible for primary enforcement of this article. 
Oil production means the phase that occurs after successful exploration, drilling and development involving operations including, but not limited to, oil wells, tanks, dehydrators, separators, mud pits, ponds, tank batteries or associated mechanical equipment, and during which hydrocarbons are extracted from the oil field, but does not include the operation of a commercial disposal well as defined in this article. 
Operator means the person(s) in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping, or controlling any well or pipeline including, without limitation, a unit operator. 
Pit means a temporary or permanent containment for circulated fluids and drilling products or waste. 
Plugging and abandonment means "plugging" as defined by the Oklahoma Corporation Commission and includes the plugging of the well, abandoned, orphaned or otherwise, and restoration of the drilling and production site as required by this article. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any natural waters of the city, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any water of the city as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other beneficial uses, or to livestock, animals or aquatic life. 
Producing well means a well that has been completed and is presently capable of yielding oil or gas. 
Production activities or production means the extraction of hydrocarbons from a well after drilling and completion, but does not include the operation of a commercial disposal well as defined in this article. 
Production site means that area of the drilling and production site utilized for production activities after well completion. 
Protected use means any dwelling, church, public park, public library, medical facility, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten or elementary, middle or high school, public pool, senior center, public recreation center or licensed business. 
Separation boundary means the location of the property line of the nearest protected use, nearest lot line of a previously platted residential subdivision, or closest property line of an adjoining use that is not defined as a protected use, as measured from the drilling and production site. 
Tank means a natural or manmade container, covered or uncovered, in which to store, contain or mix liquids or hydrocarbons used or produced in conjunction with the drilling, stimulation or production operations of an oil or gas well. 
Well, unless specifically qualified, means any hole or bore drilled to any depth for the purpose of producing oil, gas or liquefied petroleum matter or for the injection or disposal of any of such materials. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-32. - Findings, purpose, intent and authority. 
(a)  Findings. The regulations contained in this article are supported by the following findings of fact: 
(1)  Oil and gas drilling and production is an important component of the Mustang area economy. 
(2)  Oil and gas well drilling and production activities create conditions that potentially threaten the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing or working on property in proximity to such operations. 
(3)  Oil and gas well drilling and production activities, in the absence of local regulatory controls, may generate noxious aerial emissions, introduce contaminants into groundwater, emit high noise or light levels, produce large volumes of dust, congest local streets, present fire or chemical spill hazards and produce other deleterious effects, all of which fall disproportionately on adjacent land uses, and which can result individually or cumulatively in injury to persons or damage to property and inhibit the quiet peace and enjoyment of the surface uses of real property in the vicinity of such operations. 
(4)  The proliferation of oil and gas well pad sites within the city creates conflicts between such development and other existing and future surface uses of real property within the city. To assure the compatibility of residential, commercial, industrial and agricultural uses with oil and gas well development, it is necessary for the city to regulate the location of oil and gas well operations relative to other surface uses of real property within the city consistent with the right of mineral owners to reasonably access subsurface resources. 
(5)  The city recognizes that the State of Oklahoma regulates oil and gas well drilling and production activities. The regulations in this article are intended to supplement such standards and additionally implement compatible local measures that assure the health, safety and general welfare of the city's residents and businesses. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. In order to protect the public health, peace, safety and welfare of the city and its residents, this article is created to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and controls for the drilling and operation of wells and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances within the corporate limits of the city, and to provide that this land use may be conducted in harmony with other uses within the city. The provisions set forth in this article shall be considered as minimum requirements and shall not relieve any person from any duty imposed by law to use reasonable care and take reasonable precautions for the safeguarding of people and the protection of and noninterference with property rights. 
(c)  Authority. This article is adopted pursuant to authority vested under the constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma and the Mustang City Charter. Each authorization identified in this article shall be construed as an exercise of the city's police, nuisance, and zoning powers pursuant to the Charter and Oklahoma Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-33. - Applicability of article to existing operations. 
This article shall not apply to any producing oil or gas well located within the boundaries of the city on the effective date of this article. Such wells shall remain subject to the requirements of any ordinance that was in effect at the time of drilling. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-34. - Violations; penalties. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply with any provision of this article, irrespective of whether or not the verbiage of each section of this article contains the specific language that such violation or neglect is unlawful and is an offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or any of the provisions of a drilling and operating permit issued pursuant to this article, or any condition in a conditional use permit, or any condition of the bond filed by the permittee pursuant to this article, or who shall neglect to comply with the terms of this article, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each violation of each separate provision of this article, or of the permit, or of the bond, shall be considered a separate offense, and each day's violation of each separate provision thereof shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to such penalties, it is further provided that the city council, at any regular or special session or meeting thereof, may, provided ten days' notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any permit issued under this article and under which drilling or producing operations are being conducted if the permittee thereof has violated any provisions of the permit or the bond or this article. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Secs. 74-35—74-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 74-51. - Oil and gas inspector. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint a qualified person whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to issue such orders or directives as are required to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure to abide by any such order or directive shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to go upon and inspect any premises covered by the terms of this article to ascertain whether this article and the applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state are being complied with. Failure to permit access to the appointed inspector shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(d)  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records specified in this article relating to the status or condition of any well or project or the appurtenances thereof within the city. Failure to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-52. - Annual inspection of wells required; reports to city manager. 
All oil and gas wells shall be inspected annually, or within 60 days of completion, whichever is first. The oil and gas inspector shall annually prepare a report to the city manager on the condition of each drill site for compliance with this article and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-53. - Annual inspection fee. 
There is levied an annual police regulation and inspection fee upon each well operated or maintained for the purpose of producing oil and/or gas therefrom within the corporate limits of the city in the amount set forth in section 42-74 to cover the expenses of enforcing the provisions contained in this article. This annual license fee is in addition to the permit fee required in section 74-73, and shall be paid to the city treasurer before the issuance of any permit for the drilling or putting down of any oil or gas well, and shall be paid before January 10 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-54. - Order to cease operations. 
(a)  If the city manager or his designee finds that, in his judgment, a hazard to life exists, he shall order immediate rectification of the cause. If the permittee takes no immediate measure to reduce the hazard, or the situation is so perilous as to constitute an imminent threat to safety, then in either of these events he may order the prompt cessation of activity, and if necessary the clearance of the premises. 
(b)  The appointed inspector shall apply to the city manager for a hearing upon such order, which hearing shall be held not longer than 24 hours after the issuance of the order by the inspector. The city manager shall determine if proper cause existed, and, if not, shall order the permittee's activity to resume without delay. If the city manager determines that proper cause did exist for the order to cease activity to be issued, then he shall make whatever ruling is proper to ensure rectification of the cause of the peril. Such ruling and compliance with it by the permittee shall not be construed to absolve the permittee of any liability for any violation of this article or for any damage or injury caused thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-55. - Appeals. 
Any permittee under this article aggrieved by any order, directive or ruling issued by the appointed inspector, or by any ruling by the city manager, may appeal the order, directive or ruling to the city council, which shall hear the matter at its next scheduled meeting. The lodging of such appeal shall not stay the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article. The council, upon hearing the matter, may issue whatever ruling or order is appropriate, provided that such ruling or order is in keeping with the spirit and purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Secs. 74-56—74-70. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Permit 
 
Sec. 74-71. - Permits required; application; conditional use permit; additional submittals. 
(a)  It is unlawful and an offense for any person, either for himself or acting as agent, employee or servant of any other person, to open any well or to permit to flow therefrom any oil or gas, or to engage in any work or to erect any structures, tanks, machinery, pipelines or other appurtenances incident to the production of petroleum or natural gas, or to operate, maintain or permit to exist any equipment, structures or appurtenances incident to such production or to use or maintain any property or premises for such production within the city, unless a drilling permit for the drilling and operation of the well has been first obtained as provided by the terms of this subdivision, and a conditional use permit has been obtained as provided by sections 122-212 and 122-57 of the Code. 
(b)  Before any permit for the drilling of any oil or gas well is issued, in addition to the application requirements for a conditional use permit as set forth in section 122-57, a written application, signed by the applicant or an authorized designee, shall be filed with the city, and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The location, by metes and bounds description, and dimensions of the drilling and production site. 
(2)  A plat, drawn to scale, showing the correct dimensions and location of the proposed well, together with tanks, pits, pipelines, embankments, fences, drilling and production site ingress and egress points, measured distance from the well site to buildings and structures, temporary and permanent fencing and landscaping, and other details of the proposed use of the property necessary and incidental to the drilling of the well. 
(3)  A map or aerial photo showing the location of the proposed drill site, access roads, traffic routes to the site, all affected floodways and floodplains, the location of any protected use within 960 feet of the drilling and production site, the location of any permanent structure not defined as a protected use within 700 feet of the drilling and production site, distances between the proposed drilling and production site and adjoining property lines, and the location of existing and proposed underground pipelines. 
(4)  A statement regarding the provision of water to the drill site during the drilling of the well. 
(5)  A written plan for the disposal and/or removal of deleterious substances produced. 
(6)  A copy of the intent to drill as approved by the OCC. 
(7)  The name, address and emergency phone number of the operator and driller. 
(8)  The name, address and phone number of the surface owner of the proposed drill site. 
(9)  The name and address of an official company service agent who resides within the State of Oklahoma. 
(10)  A description of how all on-site standards set forth in this article will be achieved. All conditions set forth in any prior conditional use permit approved for the drilling and production site shall be included in the application submittal. 
(11)  The applicant shall also submit the following plans with the application for a conditional use permit: 
a.  Drilling/completion and production mitigation plans prepared in accordance with section 74-106; 
b.  A site reclamation plan prepared in accordance with section 74-106; 
c.  An erosion and sediment control plan prepared in accordance with chapter 50 of the Code; 
d.  Certified copy of all permits required by the OCC and ODEQ; and 
e.  Certificates of insurance coverage and security as required by sections 74-75 and 74-76. 
(c)  Before an oil or gas drilling application is accepted, the applicant must pay an application and processing fee in the sum set forth in section 42-74, which shall be nonrefundable, and which shall be in addition to the fees provided for in sections 74-73 and 74-53. 
(d)  The applicant shall submit a certified list of the names and addresses, with legal descriptions, of all property owners of record within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed drill site. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-72. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Required. Before a permit for the drilling of an oil or gas well shall become effective, a public hearing shall be held in relation thereto before the planning commission, at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(b)  Notice. The clerk of the planning commission shall cause notice of the public hearing to be mailed to any property owners on the certified list provided pursuant to section 74-71 at least ten days before hearing before the planning commission. Notice of the public hearing before the planning commission shall be published in a paper of general circulation at least 15 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date, time and place of the hearing. 
(2)  Legal description and approximate address of the drill site. 
(c)  Authority of planning commission. The planning commission shall have the following jurisdiction and authority: 
(1)  Receive applications and make recommendations to the city council as to the manner in which a particular application will affect the land usage of the city, taking into consideration the health, general welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the city. 
(2)  Review and make recommendations to the city council on approved permits when changes or deviations from the approved permit are requested. 
(d)  Review by city council. 
(1)  An application recommended by the planning commission for approval, or approval subject to modifications, shall be transmitted to the city council with the report and recommendations of the planning commission within 30 days of the planning commission action for hearing before and city council action thereon. 
(2)  An application recommended for denial by the planning commission shall not be considered further unless the applicant, within 15 days of the action by the planning commission, shall file with the city clerk and the recording secretary of the planning commission a written request for a public hearing before the city council. If no such request is filed, then $50.00 of the original permit fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Upon notice of a request for a public hearing before the city council, the planning commission shall transmit to the city council the application, its report and recommendations, and a copy of its minutes of the hearing. The recording secretary of the planning commission shall notify all interested parties of the time and place of the city council meeting pursuant to subpart (b) herein. 
(e)  Permits to be approved by council. No permit for the drilling of an oil or gas well shall be issued without approval by the city council, after a hearing by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018; Ord. No. 1174, § 3, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 74-73. - Amount of fee. 
Upon approval by the city council, the fee for the drilling or putting down of each well for the purpose of producing oil and/or gas shall be as set forth in section 42-74. Before the issuance of any permit for the drilling or putting down of any such oil and/or gas well, such sum shall be paid to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-74. - Time limit for payment of fee; expiration of permit. 
The permit fee provided for in section 74-73 shall be paid not later than 90 days after approval by the city council of the drilling application, or prior to commencement of any drilling operation, whichever event occurs first. If the permit fee is not paid within such time, the permit shall not be issued, and approval shall be automatically cancelled and a new drilling application shall be required. The city council may extend the time for payment beyond 90 days for good cause shown. The drilling permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, and if drilling is not commenced within that time the permit shall be rescinded and a new application required. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-75. - Bond or other surety. 
Before an oil or gas drilling permit may be issued by the city council, the permittee shall file with the city, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the following guarantees, conditioned that the permittee shall comply with the terms and conditions of this article in the operation of the well for either natural or artificial production or injection; and conditioned that the permittee will promptly pay fines, penalties and other assessments imposed upon the permittee by reason of breach of any of these terms, provisions and conditions, and that the permittee will promptly restore to their former condition the streets, sidewalks and other public property of the city which may be disturbed or damaged in the permittee's operation, and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste and other substances, and will, after abandonment, grade, level and restore the property to the same surface condition, as practicable as is possible, as existed prior to commencing operations; and further that the permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability attributable to granting the permit. Said bond, deposit or letter of credit shall become effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city and remain in full force and effect for at least 12 months subsequent to the expiration of the conditional use permit or well abandonment, whichever occurs later. The bond or letter of credit submitted shall cover all wells drilled or operated by operator within the city. The guarantee shall be in one of the following forms, and shall remain in full force and effect, and be maintained in such amount, for the life of the well: 
(1)  The applicant shall provide a bond in the principal sum of $25,000.00. The bond shall be executed by a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, with the applicant as principal, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned. 
(2)  The applicant shall deposit cash or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the city or in escrow with a bank or savings and loan institution, in the amount of $25,000.00. In the case of any escrow account, the applicant shall file with the city council an agreement between the financial institution and himself guaranteeing the following: 
a.  That the funds of the escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the city council and may not be used or pledged by the applicant as security in any other matter during that period; and 
b.  That in the case of a failure on the part of the applicant to comply with the provisions of this article as stated in this article, the financial institution shall immediately move the funds in the account so as to be available to the city to use in the correction of violations of this article. 
(3)  The applicant shall provide an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution, certifying the following: 
a.  That the creditor does guarantee funds of not less than $25,000.00 for a term not less than one year; 
b.  That, in the case of failure on the part of the applicant to comply with the provisions stated in this article, the creditor shall pay to the city immediately and without further action such funds as are necessary to finance the correction of the violations, up to the stated limit of credit; and 
c.  That this letter of credit may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount until approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-76. - Insurance. 
In addition to the bond required in section 74-75, the applicant for a permit under this subdivision shall file with the city, subject to the approval of the city council, the following certificates of insurance, to remain in full force and effect for the life of the well, except as provided in this section: 
(1)  Composite extra expense coverage. 
a.  The applicant shall obtain composite operator's extra expense coverage providing a minimum of $2,000,000.00 applicable to: 
1.  Control of the well. 
2.  Cleanup and containment. 
3.  Seepage, pollution and contamination. 
b.  It is further conditioned that this coverage will insure 100 percent of the interest in the wells required to be covered under this section. The insurance shall remain in force for the life of the well, and until such time as it is plugged and abandoned in accordance with state corporation commission rules and regulations governing such matters. The city shall be named as an additional insured on such insurance policy, and the permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability, including loss of use, resulting from the pollution of city water. 
(2)  General liability insurance. 
a.  In addition to the bond and insurance otherwise required in this article, the applicant shall carry a policy of comprehensive general liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured, issued by an insurer authorized to do business within the state. The policy shall include coverage for independent contractors, contractual liability, broad form property damage, underground resources property damage, and blowout and cratering property damage. No exclusion shall be applicable limiting coverage for operations within the city limits. The policy shall provide the following minimum coverage, including the items set forth in this subsection: 
1.  Bodily injury: $2,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
2.  Property damage: $1,000,000.00. 
b.  The permittee shall file with the city clerk certificates of the insurance as stated in this subsection at the time of application for approval by the city council. 
c.  If, after completion of a producing well, the permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this article, such as removing derricks, clearing premises and the like, he may apply to the city council to have the insurance policy reduced as follows: 
1.  Bodily injury: $1,000,000.00. 
2.  Property damage: $500,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-77. - Transfer of conditional use permit. 
A conditional use permit for oil or gas drilling or production may be transferred by the operator if the transfer is in writing signed by both parties, if the transferee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of the transferred permit, if all information previously provided to the city as part of the application for the transferred permit is updated to reflect any changes, and if the transferee provides the insurance and security required by section 74-75 and 74-76. The current operator shall provide 30 days' notice to the city prior to the effective date of such transfer. The insurance and security provided by the transferor shall be released if a copy of the written transfer is provided to the city and all other requirements provided in this subsection are satisfied and the insurance and security are approved by the community development director. The transfer shall not relieve the transferor from any liability to the city arising out of any activities conducted prior to the transfer. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-78. - Operator's agent. 
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the State of Oklahoma, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so designating such agent shall within ten days notify the development director in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Secs. 74-79—74-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRILLING RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 74-101. - Number of wells per permit area. 
(a)  It is unlawful and an offense for any person to drill or put down one or more oil or gas wells upon any one permit area unless a permit therefor shall have been first approved by the city council for each individual well. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for any subsequent well to be placed on a previously approved drilling and production site unless approved by the city council according to the procedures set forth in section 74-71, except that no ownership list shall be required or application fee paid. 
(c)  No public notice shall be required for additional wells on an approved drilling and production site. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-102. - Compliance with applicable regulations. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to drill or put down any oil or gas well or to erect, maintain, operate or permit to exist any such well, structures, equipment, pipelines, machinery, tanks or other appurtenances in violation of any of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state, or in violation of any of the regulations, rules or orders of the OCC. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-103. - Wells prohibited in certain locations. 
In order to preserve and safeguard the life, property, public peace, safety and general welfare of the city and the citizens thereof, there are established certain non-drilling territories in which no well shall be drilled or put down for the production of oil and/or gas, which territories are particularly described as follows: 
(1)  No well shall be drilled or put down for the production of oil and/or gas or injection of produced fluids at any point less than a distance of 660 feet from the separation boundary of any protected use or any lot located within a previously platted residential subdivision. 
(2)  No oil or gas wells shall be permitted to be drilled in any city park or publicly held property. 
(3)  No well shall be drilled or put down for the production of oil and/or gas or injection of produced fluids at any point less than a distance of 400 from the nearest outside wall of any structure not defined as a protected use. 
(4)  All drilling and completion operations proposed within a FEMA 100-year designated floodplain shall comply with the adopted flood hazard regulations and shall be fully floodproofed. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-104. - Environmental requirements and performance standards. 
Any drilling of oil and gas wells or production shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  All oil operations, drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to exploration for, drilling for and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances. Proven technological improvements in exploration, drilling and production methods shall be adopted as they become from time to time available, if capable of reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance. 
(2)  All engines shall be equipped with adequate mufflers. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless equipped with a muffler or equivalent control device constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-105. - Mitigation and restoration plans. 
(a)  Drilling/completion mitigation plan. The drilling/completion mitigation plan shall describe all temporary measures and controls to be established by the operator to minimize the effects of noise, dust, odors, chemicals, and other negative impacts of oil and gas drilling on adjoining properties emanating from the drilling and production site during the drilling and completion of the well. 
The drilling/completion mitigation plan shall include a noise abatement study which shall articulate how compliance with section 74-106 shall be accomplished during drilling and production operations. The study shall: 
(1)  Identify operation noise impacts; 
(2)  Provide documentation establishing the ambient noise level prior to construction of any wellhead, compressor or compression facility, said ambient level being based upon a continuous 72-hour period that includes one 24-hour period over a Saturday or Sunday; and 
(3)  Detail how the impacts will be mitigated, based upon consideration of specific area characteristics, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Nature and proximity of adjacent development, location and type; 
b.  Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions; 
c.  Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site; and 
d.  Topography. 
The drilling/completion mitigation plan may be submitted in the form of a site diagram, provided sufficient description of the mitigation and control measures are provided, including references to applicable OCC regulations and/or this article. 
No conditional use permit shall be issued until a drilling/completion mitigation plan is approved by the planning commission and no drilling activities shall commence until said plan is fully implemented by the operator at the drilling and production site. 
(b)  Production mitigation plan. The production mitigation plan shall describe the location, by metes and bounds description, and dimensions of the production site. Said plan shall additionally describe all permanent measures and controls to be established by the operator to minimize the effects of noise, dust, odors, chemicals, and other negative impacts of oil and gas production on adjoining properties emanating from the production site during the production life of the well. The plan may be submitted in the form of a site diagram, provided sufficient description of the mitigation and control measures are provided, including references to applicable OCC regulations and/or this article. 
The production mitigation plan shall be filed with the application for a conditional use permit. It shall be fully implemented by the operator within 30 days of completion. The plan may be amended upon application of the operator and approval by the planning commission after notice and hearing in accordance with section 74-72. 
(c)  Site reclamation plan. The site reclamation plan shall describe both closure and post-closure measures and controls, including plugging or abandonment, specifically setting forth how the final site closure will be achieved, a detailed description of the closure methods, and any subsequent activities necessary to minimize the need for drilling and production site care after closure. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-106. - Standards for oil and gas well drilling and completion. 
(a)  No operation conducted on the drilling and production site shall create any noise which causes an exterior noise level greater than 75 dB measured at the location of a protected use. 
(1)  If a complaint is received by either the operator or the city from the occupant of any protected use, the operator shall, within 24 hours of notice of the complaint, continuously monitor for a 72-hour period the exterior noise level generated by operations at the location of the protected use that is the source of the complaint. 
(2)  Acoustical blankets, sound walls, mufflers, landscaping or other alternative methods may be used to ensure compliance. All soundproofing shall comply with accepted industry standards and applicable fire codes. 
(3)  The sound level meter used in conducting noise evaluations shall meet the American National Standard Institute's Standard for sound meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
(4)  A citation may be immediately issued for failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection, and the operator shall immediately bring the noise level into compliance. However, if the operator is in compliance with the approved drilling/completion mitigation plan, and a violation still occurs, the operator will be given 24 hours from notice of noncompliance to correct the violation from an identified source before a citation is issued. Additional extensions of the 24-hour grace period may be granted in the event that the source of the violation cannot be identified after reasonable diligence by the operator. 
(b)  A sound wall that is 16 feet in height with a rating of STC-25 shall be installed on each side of the drilling and production site that is 1,000 feet or less from a protected use. 
(c)  Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless equipped with a muffler or equivalent control device constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot. 
(d)  The operator shall minimize the escape of toxic, noxious or offensive odors, fumes, and emissions from the drilling and production site during drilling and completion operations. Gas emissions shall be shielded from the direction of any protected use located adjacent to the drilling and production site. Air quality at the separation boundary of an adjoining protected use shall meet applicable EPA or ODEQ standards during such operations. The oil and gas inspector may require the installation of air quality monitoring devices at the separation boundary upon receipt of a complaint or whenever conditions warrant such action. The cost of monitoring may be assessed against the operator. 
(e)  The operator shall minimize the escape of dust from the drilling and production site during drilling and completion operations. Clean water shall be applied to the drilling and production Site and all unpaved points of access to said site to prevent dust migration to adjoining properties, as necessary. The operator may utilize a chip seal or equivalent best management practice approved by the city in lieu of watering for dust mitigation. 
(f)  All electric lines to drilling and production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those already installed in the surrounding area. 
(g)  No operator shall excavate or construct any lines for the conveyance of fuel, water, or minerals on, under, or through the streets or alleys or other land of the city without an easement or right-of-way agreement from the city. 
(h)  The operator shall utilize secondary containment measures in accordance with OCC regulations. In the absence of such regulations, outside storage areas shall be equipped with a secondary containment system designed to fully contain a spill quantity equal to the aggregate rated capacity of all tanks and vessels located on the drilling and production site. Secondary containment shall be designed to include the volume of a 24-hour rainfall as determined by a 25-year storm and provision shall be made to drain accumulations of ground water and rainfall. 
(i)  The city council may in a conditional use permit designate specific routes to and from the drilling and production site for trucks and other vehicles used in conjunction with drilling and completion operations to minimize excessive wear and tear or damage to city streets. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-107. - Standards for oil and gas well production. 
(a)  All production operations proposed within the FEMA 100-year designated floodplain shall comply with the adopted flood hazard regulations and shall be fully floodproofed. 
(b)  The production site shall be of sufficient size and dimension to permit the entry and safe movement of emergency and fire vehicles. 
(c)  No operation conducted on the production site shall create any noise which causes an exterior noise level greater than 75 dB when measured at the location of a protected use. 
(1)  The exterior noise level generated by operations at the production site may be monitored by the city for compliance. If a complaint is received by either the operator or the city from the occupant of any protected use, the operator shall, within 24 hours of notice of the complaint, continuously monitor for a 72-hour period the exterior noise level generated by operations at the production site at the protected use that is the source of the complaint. 
(2)  Acoustical blankets, sound walls, mufflers, landscaping or other permanent methods may be used to mitigate noise emanating from the production site. All soundproofing shall comply with accepted industry standards and applicable fire codes. 
(3)  The sound level meter used in conducting noise evaluations shall meet the American National Standard Institute's standard for sound meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
(4)  A citation may be immediately issued for failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection, and the operator shall immediately bring the noise level into compliance. However, if the operator is in compliance with the approved production mitigation plan, and a violation still occurs, the operator will be given 24 hours from notice of noncompliance to correct the violation from an identified source before a citation is issued. Additional extensions of the 24-hour grace period may be granted in the event that the source of the violation cannot be identified after reasonable diligence by the operator. 
(d)  The motive power for all well pumping equipment shall be electricity. No diesel-powered equipment shall be used. Motive power for all production operations shall be by utility-provided electricity. All electric lines to drilling and production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those already installed in the surrounding area. 
(e)  The operator shall minimize the escape of toxic, noxious, or offensive odors, fumes, and emissions from the production site during production operations. Gas emissions shall be shielded from the direction of any protected use located adjacent to the production site. Air quality at the separation boundary of an adjoining protected use shall meet applicable EPA or ODEQ standards during production operations. The oil and gas inspector may require the installation of air quality monitoring devices at the separation boundary upon receipt of a complaint or whenever conditions warrant such action. The cost of monitoring may be assessed against the operator. 
(f)  The operator shall minimize the escape of dust from the production site during production operations. Clean water shall be applied to the production site and all unpaved points of access to said site to prevent dust migration to adjoining properties, as necessary. The operator may utilize a chip seal or equivalent best management practice approved by the city in lieu of watering for dust mitigation. 
(g)  The operator shall utilize secondary containment measures in accordance with OCC regulations. In the absence of such regulations, the operator shall construct a secondary containment system at the production site designed to fully contain a spill quantity equal to 150 percent the aggregate rated capacity of all tanks and vessels located on the production site. Secondary containment shall be designed to include the volume of a 24-hour rainfall as determined by a 25-year storm and provision shall be made to drain accumulations of groundwater and rainfall. 
(h)  The production site shall remain free of all weeds, rubbish, brush, trash or debris at all times. 
(i)  The operator shall remove or cause to be removed all contamination and associated waste materials after any spill, leak or discharge. Clean-up operations shall begin immediately. 
(j)  The operator shall close the production site in a manner that minimizes the need for care after closure. To achieve this requirement, the site shall be reclaimed to the condition identified on the site reclamation plan, as nearly as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Secs. 74-108—74-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WELL OPERATION 
 
Sec. 74-131. - Deposit or drainage of deleterious substances. 
No person shall deposit, drain or divert into or upon any public highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon any oil or oil liquid with petroleum content or any mud, rotary mud, sand, water or saltwater, or in any manner permit, by seepage, overflow, deliberate release or otherwise, the escape of any of such substances from any property owned, leased or controlled by such person. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-132. - Fencing and/or screening around well sites. 
Within 90 days of completion of the drill site or erection of storage tanks, whichever occurs first, the production site and all related equipment and storage facilities shall be screened with an opaque permanent fencing sufficient to secure the area where production activities are conducted and to protect adjoining uses from the deleterious effects of noise, light, dust, and other nuisances associated with production activities, consistent with the standards set forth in this Code. The presumptive minimum height of such fencing shall be eight feet. Provided, however, the minimum height may be reduced to not less than six feet if trees or similar vegetation are planted in the separation area between the production site and any adjoining protected use. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 74-133. - Lights. 
No person shall permit any lights located on any site to be directed in such a manner so that they shine directly on roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the site. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within 300 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1158, § 2, 4-3-2018)  
Chapter 78 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 114. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Violation of state criminal code (21 O.S.). 
It is unlawful to violate any of the provisions of 21 O.S. and all such provisions are adopted by reference. This section shall not be construed to adopt or punish that which is a felony under state law.  
Sec. 78-2. - Assault and battery. 
(a)  An assault is any willful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence to do a corporal hurt to another. 
(b)  A battery is any willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another. 
(c)  It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery within the city, and any person committing an assault and battery within the city is guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 9.14.010) 
State Law reference— Assault and battery, 21 O.S. § 641 et seq.  
Sec. 78-3. - Removal of barricades. 
It is unlawful for any person, except by proper authority, to remove any barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area. 
(Code 1977, § 9.04.030)  
Sec. 78-4. - Following emergency vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow any emergency vehicle or to purposely drive to any location on or near a highway where a disaster area exists. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1211.  
Sec. 78-5. - Dumping, etc., of trash. 
(a)  Any person who deliberately places, throws, drops, dumps, deposits or discards any garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, refuse, debris or other deleterious substance on any public property or on any private property of another without consent of the property owner shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty prescribed by section 1-8 of this Code, the court may direct the person to make restitution to the property owner affected; to remove and properly dispose of the garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, refuse or debris from the property; to pick up, remove and properly dispose of garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, refuse, debris and other nonhazardous deleterious substances from public property; or perform community service or any combination of the foregoing which the court, in its discretion, deems appropriate. The dates, times and locations of such activities shall be scheduled by the police department pursuant to the order of the court in such a manner as not to interfere with the employment or family responsibilities of the person. 
(c)  The discovery of three or more items which have been dropped, dumped, deposited, discarded, placed or thrown at one location and which bear a common address in a form which tends to identify the latest owner of the items shall create a rebuttable presumption that any competent person residing at such address committed the unlawful act. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1761.1.  
Sec. 78-6. - Throwing or shooting at persons or property. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot or other object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he is likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to throw or shoot any stone, shot or other object at any person, vehicle, structure, electric light or other property of another, whether public or private, except in the case where such is done in defense of oneself, of another person or of property. 
(Code 1977, § 9.50.030) 
State Law reference— Assault and battery, 21 O.S. § 641 et seq.; malicious mischief, 21 O.S. § 1751 et seq.  
Sec. 78-7. - Proceeding to or remaining at dis-aster area unlawful; removal of objects. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except an authorized person, to proceed to or to remain at a disaster area for the purpose of being a bystander, spectator, sightseer or souvenir hunter; or for any such person to take or remove from the disaster area, or disturb or move any material objects, equipment or thing, either directly or indirectly, relating or pertaining to the disaster. Upon conviction, such person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 752, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1212.  
Secs. 78-8—78-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses involving public justice, 21 O.S. § 380 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-31. - Escape of prisoners. 
It is unlawful for any person confined in the city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or working upon the streets or other public places of the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by authority of the city, to escape or attempt to escape from any such jail, prison or custody. 
(Code 1977, § 9.08.020) 
State Law reference— Escapes, 21 O.S. § 431 et seq.  
Sec. 78-32. - False representation to an officer. 
It is unlawful for any person or any agent or employee thereof, knowingly to make any material misrepresentation to any officer, employee or agency of the city government in any official application to, or official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or agency. 
(Code 1977, § 9.04.020)  
Sec. 78-33. - Impersonating public officer. 
It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the city, falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the city, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to do so. 
(Code 1977, § 9.20.010) 
State Law reference— Impersonating public officer, 21 O.S. §§ 263, 264.  
Sec. 78-34. - Resisting or opposing city officers or city employees. 
It is unlawful for any person, knowingly or willfully, to resist, oppose or obstruct the chief of police, any other policeman, the municipal judge or other officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his official duties; or by threat or violence or physical resistance, or to intimidate or attempt to intimidate by threat or use of force or violence any such officer or employee from the discharge of his official duties, or to assault any such officer or employee while such officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties. 
(Code 1977, § 9.04.010; Ord. No. 676, § 1, 11-4-1997) 
State Law reference— Resisting, opposing or intimidating public officers or public employees, 21 O.S. §§ 540, 543.  
Sec. 78-35. - Refusing or failing to assist an officer. 
(a)  An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest, or executing or about to execute a warrant or other process, in accordance with the ordinances of the city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about to suppress a riot, affray or unlawful assembly, may call upon a person to assist him in making such arrest, executing such process or suppressing such riot, affray or unlawful assembly. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon thus to assist an officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so. 
(Code 1977, § 9.06.010) 
State Law reference— Refusal to assist officer, 21 O.S. § 537.  
Sec. 78-36. - Rescuing or assisting prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, in any unlawful manner, to set at liberty or rescue or attempt to set at liberty or rescue, any prisoner, from any officer or employee of the city having legal custody of the prisoner or from the city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or to assist such prisoner in any manner to escape from such prison or custody, or to give such prisoner any weapon or object which might be used as a weapon or instrument to assist him in escape, or to give such prisoner any alcoholic beverage or narcotics. 
(Code 1977, § 9.08.010) 
State Law reference— Rescuing or assisting prisoners, 21 O.S. § 437 et seq.  
Sec. 78-37. - Eluding a peace officer. 
(a)  Any operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual and audible signal, a red light and a siren from a peace officer driving a motor vehicle showing him to be an official police, sheriff, highway patrol or state game ranger vehicle directing the operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, and who willfully increases his speed or extinguishes his lights in an attempt to elude such peace officer, or willfully attempts in any other manner to elude the peace officer, or who does elude such peace officer, shall, upon conviction, be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(b)  The peace officer, while attempting to stop a violator of this section, may communicate a request for the assistance of other peace officers from any office, department or agency. 
(c)  Any peace officer within this state having knowledge of such request is authorized to render such assistance in stopping the violator and may effect an arrest under this section upon probable cause. 
(d)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(e)  This section shall only apply to first offenses in which great bodily injury has not occurred as set forth in 21 O.S. § 540A. 
(Code 1977, § 10.40.050; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Eluding a police officer, 21 O.S. § 540A.  
Secs. 78-38—78-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses involving property rights, 21 O.S. § 1381 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-61. - Placing signs on property of another. 
It is unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint, mark, write or print any sign, poster, picture, announcement, advertisement, bill, placard, device or inscription upon any public or private building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or other property of another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 9.50.020)  
Sec. 78-62. - Fraud; harmful deception. 
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by impersonation, misrepresentation or otherwise, when such deception results in or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver. 
(Code 1977, § 9.48.010) 
State Law reference— Fraud generally, 21 O.S. § 1501 et seq.  
Sec. 78-63. - False or bogus checks. 
It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain or attempt to obtain from any person any money, property or valuable thing of the value of $50.00 or less by means of any false or bogus check or by any other written, printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin. The term "false or bogus check" includes checks or orders given for money or property which are not honored on account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay such check or order, as against the maker or drawer thereof. The making, drawing, issuing or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and the knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with the protest fees, within five days from the date such check or order is presented for payment; and provided further, that the check or order is presented for payment within 30 days after such check or order is delivered and accepted. 
(Code 1977, § 9.48.020) 
State Law reference— Bad checks, 21 O.S. § 1541.3 et seq.  
Secs. 78-64—78-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Larceny, 21 O.S. § 1701 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-76. - Petit larceny defined. 
(a)  Petit larceny is the taking of personal property of value of not to exceed $50.00, accomplished by fraud or stealth and with intent to deprive another thereof, when the property is not taken from the person of another. 
(b)  Petit larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits petit larceny is guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 9.52.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-77. - Library theft. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
Demand means either actual notice to the possessor of any library materials or the mailing of written notice to the possessor at the last address of record which the library facility has for such person, demanding the return of designated library materials. If demand is made by mail it shall be deemed to have been given as of the date the notice is mailed by the library facility. 
Library facility means any of the following: 
(1)  Public library; 
(2)  Library of an educational, historical or eleemosynary institution, organization or society; 
(3)  Museum; or 
(4)  Repository of public or institutional records. 
Library material means any book, plate, picture, photograph, engraving, painting, drawing, map, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, broadside, manuscript, document, letter, record, microform, sound recording, audiovisual materials in any format, magnetic or other tapes, catalog cards or catalog records, electronic data processing records, computer software, artifacts or other documentary, written or printed materials regardless of physical form or characteristics, belonging to or on loan to, or otherwise in the custody of a library facility. 
(b)  Any person shall be guilty, upon conviction, of library theft who willfully: 
(1)  Removes or attempts to remove any library material from the premises of a library facility without authority; 
(2)  Mutilates, destroys, alters or otherwise damages, in whole or in part, any library materials; or 
(3)  Fails to return any library materials which have been lent to such person by the library facility, within seven days after demand has been made for the return of the library materials. 
(c)  A person convicted of library theft shall be guilty of a misdemeanor but shall not be subject to imprisonment. The punishment for conviction of library theft shall be: 
(1)  If the aggregate value of the library material is $200.00 or less, by fine not exceeding $200.00, or the offender shall make restitution to the library facility, including payment of all related expenses incurred by the library facility as a result of the actions of the offender, or both such fine and restitution; or 
(2)  If the aggregate value of the library material is greater than $200.00, the matter may not be prosecuted in the municipal court. 
(d)  Copies of the provisions of this section shall be posted on the premises of each library facility. 
(Ord. No. 737, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1739.  
Sec. 78-78. - Shoplifting. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "merchant" means an owner or operator of any mercantile establishment, and includes the merchant's employees, servants, security agents or other agents; the term "mercantile establishment" means any place where merchandise is displayed, held or offered for sale, either at retail or wholesale; the term "unemancipated minor" means any unmarried person under 18 years of age under direct supervision and care of the parent or legal guardian of the minor; and the term "emancipated minor" means any person under 18 who is married and/or not under direct supervision and care of the parent or legal guardian of the minor. 
(b)  An adult or emancipated minor who takes possession of any goods, wares or merchandise displayed or offered for sale by any wholesale or retail store or other mercantile establishment without the consent of the owner, seller or merchant and with the intention of converting such goods, wares or merchandise to his own use without having paid the purchase price thereof, shall be liable in a civil action for the retail price of the merchandise if it is unsalable or the percentage of the diminished value of the merchandise due to the conversion together with attorney fees and court costs. 
(c)  The parent or legal guardian having custody of an unemancipated minor who takes possession of any goods, wares or merchandise displayed or offered for sale by any wholesale or retail store or other mercantile establishment without the consent of the owner, seller or merchant, and with the intention of converting such goods, wares or merchandise to his own use without having paid the purchase price thereof shall be liable in a civil action for the retail price of the merchandise if it is unsalable or the percentage of the diminished value of the merchandise due to the conversion together with attorney fees and court costs. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1731.1.  
Sec. 78-79. - Larceny of merchandise from retailer or wholesaler; punishment. 
Larceny of merchandise held for sale in retail or wholesale establishments shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  For the first conviction, if the value of the goods, edible meat or other corporeal property which has been taken is less than $50.00, punishment shall be by imprisonment not exceeding ten days, and by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00, provided, for the first conviction, if more than one item of goods, edible meat or other corporeal property has been taken, punishment shall be by imprisonment not to exceed ten days, and by a fine not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(2)  Any person having a prior conviction under this section or 21 O.S. § 1731 shall not be prosecuted in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 749, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1731.  
Sec. 78-80. - Pump pirating. 
Any person who pumps gasoline into the gasoline tank of a vehicle and leaves the premises where the gasoline was pumped without making payment for the gasoline shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or imprisonment of not more than ten days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1740.  
Sec. 78-81. - Defrauding hotels, inns, restaurants, etc. 
(a)  Any person who shall obtain food, lodging, services or other accommodations at any hotel, inn, restaurant, boardinghouse, roominghouse, motel or auto camp, with intent to defraud the owner or keeper thereof, if the value of such food, lodging, services or other accommodations is $20.00 or less, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not exceeding $100.00, or be imprisoned for not more than ten days, or punished by both such fine and imprisonment. Any person who shall obtain shelter, lodging or any other services at any apartment house, apartment, rental unit, rental house or trailer camp, with intent to defraud the owner or keeper, upon conviction, shall be fined not exceeding $100.00, or be imprisoned not exceeding ten days, or be punished by both fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Proof that such lodging, food, services or other accommodations were obtained by false pretense or by false or fictitious show or pretense of any baggage or other property, or that he gave a check, on which payment was refused, or that he left the hotel, inn, restaurant, boardinghouse, roominghouse, motel, apartment house, apartment, rental unit or rental house, trailer camp or auto camp, without payment or offering to pay for such food, lodging, services or other accommodation, or that he surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove his baggage, or that he registered under a fictitious name, shall be prima facie proof of the intent to defraud mentioned in this section; but this section shall not apply where there has been an agreement in writing for delay in payment. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1503.  
Sec. 78-82. - Failure to return certain leased or rented property; penalties. 
Any person having any item of personal property in his possession or under his control by virtue of a lease, rental agreement or rental-purchase agreement who willfully and fraudulently fails to return such item of personal property within ten days after the lease, rental agreement or rental-purchase agreement has expired, or who fraudulently secretes or appropriates such property to any use or purpose not within the due and lawful execution of his lease or rental agreement shall be guilty of embezzlement and subject to the penalties of section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 742, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1464.  
Sec. 78-83. - Unauthorized use of trains. 
It is unlawful for any person to climb upon, hold to or in any manner attach himself to any railway train, locomotive or railway car, while such is in motion within the city, unless such person is acting in the line of duty; or to board any train or railroad car (passenger, freight or other) except with a proper ticket or the permission of the person in charge of the train or car, or in the line of duty. 
(Code 1977, § 9.56.010)  
Secs. 78-84—78-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TRESPASS AND RELATED OFFENSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Trespass, 21 O.S. § 1835. 
 
Sec. 78-101. - Trespass on private property. 
"Trespass" means each and every actual entry upon a premises without the express or the implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. "Trespass" also means remaining upon the premises of an owner or refusing to leave the premises after being directed to leave by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises. "Trespass" also means the act of remaining on private property at any time, other than during posted hours of business operation, after having been directed to vacate such premises by a police officer, provided, that the provisions of this sentence shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such premises; nor shall the provisions of this sentence apply unless hours of business operation are posted upon such premises. "Trespass" also means the act of returning to private property before the posted time of opening for business operation on such premises under the terms of this section. It is a violation of this section for any person to commit a trespass as defined in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 9.54.030)  
Sec. 78-102. - Unlawful intrusion upon land. 
Every person who intrudes or squats upon any lot or piece of land within the city without a license or authority from the owner thereof, or who erects or occupies thereon any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure without such license or authority, and every person who places, erects or occupies within the bounds of any street, alley or avenue of the city any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure whatever, is guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 9.54.010) 
State Law reference— Intrusion onto land, 21 O.S. § 1353.  
Sec. 78-103. - Unlawful entry. 
It is unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of another or into an area or structure on such property whether such property, area or structure is public or private, when such entrance is plainly forbidden by signs or otherwise, or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except when such entry is in the line of duty or with the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 9.54.020)  
Sec. 78-104. - Orders to leave school buildings and grounds. 
The superintendent or principal of any secondary, middle or elementary school shall have the authority to order any person out of the school buildings and off the school property when it appears that the presence of such person is a threat to the peaceful conduct of school business and school classes. Any person who refuses to leave the school buildings or grounds after being ordered to do so by the superintendent or principal, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 747, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 70 O.S. § 24-131.  
Secs. 78-105—78-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND PROPERTY DAMAGE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, 21 O.S. § 1751 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-116. - Destroying, injuring or molesting buildings and other property. 
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear or molest any structure, building, outbuilding, fence or any other property, real or personal, public or private, belonging to another; or to use any such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use; or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or any other person entitled to its use. 
(Code 1977, § 9.50.010) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, 21 O.S. § 1751 et seq.  
Sec. 78-117. - Tampering with or damaging public utilities. 
It is unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of pipe, wire or other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire or other conductor carrying gas, water or electricity and belonging to a public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, in such a manner as to enable him to consume or use the gas, water or electricity without its passing through the meter or in any other way so as to evade payment therefor. It is also unlawful for any person to damage, molest, tamper with or destroy any pipe, line, wire, meter or other part of any public utility, including telegraph and telephone systems. 
(Code 1977, § 9.50.040)  
Sec. 78-118. - Injury to cemetery or tomb. 
Every person who shall willfully or with malicious intent destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument or gravestone, or other structure placed in any cemetery or private burying ground, or any fence, railing or other work for the protection or ornament of any such cemetery or place of burial of any human being, or tomb, monument or gravestone, memento or memorial, or other structure aforesaid, or of any lot within a cemetery, or shall willfully or with malicious intent destroy, cut, break or injure any tree, shrub or plant, within the limits thereof, shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1167.  
Sec. 78-119. - Molesting automobiles and other vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any person to crank, start, otherwise meddle with, molest, enter, occupy, loiter in, take or drive away any automobile or other vehicle belonging to another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 9.52.030) 
State Law reference— Unauthorized use of motor vehicle, 47 O.S. § 4-102.  
Secs. 78-120—78-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes against public health and safety, 21 O.S. § 1190 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 78-151—78-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Firearms, 21 O.S. § 1289.1 et seq.; preemption of local ordinances regulating firearms, 21 O.S. § 1289.24. 
 
Sec. 78-166. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Offensive weapon means a weapon primarily meant and adapted for attack and the infliction of injury, but practically the term includes anything that would come within the description of a deadly or dangerous weapon. 
Pistol means any firearm capable of discharging a projectile composed of any material which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury, with a barrel or barrels less than 16 inches in length, and using either gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include flare guns, underwater fishing guns or blank pistols. 
Reckless conduct means an act which creates a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great bodily harm to another, or which demonstrates a conscious disregard for the safety of another. 
Rifle means any firearm capable of discharging a projectile composed of any material which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury, with a barrel or barrels more than 16 inches in length, and using either gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include archery equipment, flare guns or underwater fishing guns. In addition, any rifle capable of firing a shot but primarily designed to fire single projectiles will be regarded as a rifle. 
Shotgun means any firearm capable of discharging a series of projectiles of any material which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury, with a barrel or barrels more than 18 inches in length, and using either gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include any weapon so designed with a barrel less than 18 inches in length. In addition, any shotgun capable of firing single projectiles but primarily designed to fire multiple projectiles such as a shot will be regarded as a shotgun. 
(Code 1977, § 9.72.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-167. - Conditions under which firearms may be carried. 
A person shall be permitted to carry shotguns, rifles or pistols, open and not concealed, under the following conditions: 
(1)  When going to, during participation in or when coming from hunting animals or fowl, including moving from place to place by vehicle. However, a rifle or shotgun may be carried in a landborne motor vehicle over a public highway or roadway when clip-loaded or magazine-loaded and not chamber-loaded when carried in a locked compartment of the vehicle, such as the trunk of an automobile; 
(2)  When going to, during competition in or practicing or coming from a safety or hunter safety class, target shooting, skeet, trap or other recognized sporting events; 
(3)  When unloaded, going to or coming from a gunsmith; 
(4)  When unloaded, going to or coming from a store for purposes of repair, trade, barter or sale; 
(5)  Going to or coming from a military function of the state military forces to be defined as the Oklahoma Army or Air National Guard, Federal Military Reserve and active military forces; 
(6)  Going to or coming from a recognized police function of either a municipal, county or state government as functioning police officials; 
(7)  When unloaded, going to or coming from a place of publicly recognized firearms display such as a gun show where the public is invited; 
(8)  When unloaded, going to or coming from a point of private trade for purposes of transferring a firearm to another private citizen in exchange for moneys, payment for services or trade; 
(9)  When going to, coming from and during a performance for entertainment purposes; or 
(10)  For any legitimate purpose not in violation of this Code or any legislative enactment regarding the use, ownership and control of firearms. 
(Code 1977, § 9.72.040) 
State Law reference— Conditions under which firearms may be carried, 21 O.S. § 1289.6.  
Sec. 78-168. - Carrying of weapons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry upon or about his person, or in a purse or other container belonging to the person, any pistol, revolver, shotgun or rifle, whether loaded or unloaded, or any dagger, bowie knife, dirk knife, switchblade knife, spring-type knife, or sword cane knife having a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife, blackjack, loaded cane, billy, hand chain, metal knuckles or any other offensive weapon, whether such weapon can be concealed or unconcealed, except this section shall not prohibit: 
(1)  The proper use of guns and knives for hunting, fishing, educational or recreational purposes; 
(2)  The carrying or use of weapons in a manner otherwise permitted by statute or authorized by the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act (21 O.S. § 1290.1 et seq.); 
(3)  The carrying, possession and use of any weapon by a peace officer in the performance of official duties and in compliance with the rules of the employing agency. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 9.72.020; Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1272.  
Sec. 78-169. - Carrying weapons in public buildings and gatherings. 
It is unlawful for any person, except a peace officer, to carry into any church or religious assembly, any schoolroom or other place where persons are assembled for public worship, for amusement or for education or scientific purposes, or into any circus, show or public exhibition of any kind, or into any ballroom, or to any social party or social gathering, or to any election, or to any political convention, or to any other public assembly, any of the weapons designated in section 78-168. 
(Code 1977, § 9.72.030) 
State Law reference— Firearms prohibited in certain places, 21 O.S. § 1277.  
Sec. 78-170. - Carrying concealed weapons. 
It is unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer, a registered security officer or a person employed by an armored car firm licensed by the corporation commission, to carry a concealed weapon other than permitted by this division. 
(Code 1977, § 19.72.050) 
State Law reference— When concealed weapons may be carried, 21 O.S. § 1289.8.  
Sec. 78-171. - Transporting loaded firearms in motor vehicles. 
Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful to transport a loaded firearm in a landborne motor vehicle over a public highway or roadway. However, a rifle or shotgun may be transported when clip-loaded or magazine-loaded and not chamber-loaded when transported in a locked compartment of the vehicle, such as the trunk of an automobile. 
(Code 1977, § 9.72.060) 
State Law reference— Firearms in vehicles, 21 O.S. § 1289.7.  
Sec. 78-172. - Carrying or using firearms while under influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs. 
It is unlawful to carry or use shotguns, rifles or pistols under any circumstances while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or any hallucinogenic, unlawful or unprescribed drug, nor shall any person be permitted to carry or use shotguns, rifles or pistols when under the influence of any drug prescribed by a licensed physician if the aftereffects of such consumption affect mental, emotional or physical processes to a degree that would result in abnormal behavior. 
(Code 1977, § 9.72.070) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1289.9.  
Sec. 78-173. - Reckless conduct. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in reckless conduct while having in his possession any shotgun, rifle or pistol, such actions consisting of creating a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great bodily harm to another, or demonstrating a conscious disregard for the safety of another person. 
(Code 1977, § 9.72.090) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1289.11.  
Sec. 78-174. - Discharging of firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in the city except when doing so in the line of duty, when lawfully doing so in defense of oneself, another person, property or when otherwise authorized by law or ordinance. It is unlawful to discharge an air rifle or BB gun in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm for hunting purposes within the city limits. 
(Code 1977, § 9.72.080.1) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit discharge of firearms preserved, 21 O.S. § 1289.24; discharging firearm in public place, 21 O.S. § 1364.  
Sec. 78-175. - Discharge of weapons permitted for certain events. 
(a)  The discharge of weapons may be authorized by the city council upon proper application by duly organized city social, civic, charitable, educational, religious or fraternal organizations principally operating in and based in the city for a single or continuing event for such time period as the council may prescribe subject to the conditions contained in this section and the applicable zoning ordinances which must be met prior to the application as set forth in this section. The judgment of the city council concerning whether such organization is a proper city organization shall be final. Additionally, the city council may set forth any other standards concerning safety at such events. 
(1)  Application. The application shall be made upon forms furnished by the city clerk. 
(2)  Insurance. Applicants shall furnish, as a condition to securing permission from the city council for the event, a public liability or standard general liability policy or spectator liability or special events policy as deemed appropriate by the city in an amount not less than $500,000.00, combined single limit, to include both property damage and bodily injury, with the city as an additional insured. 
(3)  Safety officer. A safety officer provided by the organization shall be required to be present during all hours of operation of the event. Such officer shall be designated by the organization and approved by the city manager. 
(4)  Gun rest requirements. The organization must provide a safe gun rest that accommodates the total number of participants. 
(5)  Authority to discontinue or order changes. The city manager or his designee is authorized to order the event discontinued immediately or to order such other arrangements for safety as he deems necessary if he finds that the event is not operated or supervised in a manner so as not to endanger the lives of persons and property, including those participating in the event. In those instances when the event is ordered discontinued, the organization must seek permission from the council before subsequent events may be held. 
(b)  The discharge of shotguns for the purpose of dove hunting may be authorized by the city manager upon proper application by an individual, for a single or continuing event during the first seven days of dove season subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Application. The applications shall be made by the owner of the land, or a person with the legal rights to the property, upon forms furnished by the city clerk. 
(2)  Hunting may only be conducted on 100 acres or more of land that is contiguous and zoned agricultural. 
(3)  The chief of police or his designate shall inspect each place for which a permit is requested for dove hunting, and a permit shall be issued if the chief or his designate finds that there is sufficient land in accordance with this section. 
(4)  All decisions of the city manager in issuing a permit shall be final. 
(c)  In addition to the regulations listed in subsection (b) of this section, dove hunting shall be conducted in accordance with the following rules and regulations. 
(1)  The applicant shall be responsible for conducting the event so as not to endanger the lives and property of others, including those participating in the hunt. 
(2)  The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring all hunting is conducted in accordance with state and federal law. 
(3)  No person may hunt, pursue game or discharge firearms within 440 yards of any church, schoolhouse, or other public place where people may assemble, so as to disturb such assemblage. 
(4)  No firearm may be discharged within 500 feet of any property line and/or 600 feet from any residence or place of business in which persons reside, or engage in business or congregate. 
(5)  No person may shoot from or across a public road or highway or right-of-way thereof, or railroad right-of-way. 
(6)  Dove hunting shall be limited to the discharge of shotguns using shells containing projectiles no larger than No. 6 shot. 
(7)  While dove hunting no individual shall carry upon his or her person any shotgun ammunition not approved by this section. 
(d)  Authority to discontinue or order changes. The city manager, his designate or any peace officer is authorized to order the hunting event discontinued immediately if it is found that the hunting event is being conducted in a manner so as to endanger the lives or property of others. Noise from firearms shall not be a valid reason for discontinuing an event. In those instances when the event is ordered discontinued the applicant must correct the problem and obtain another permit from the city manager. All decisions of the city manager in relation to any changes, or revocation of the permit, shall be final. 
(e)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300.00, or by imprisonment in the city jail for ten days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1977, § 9.72.080.2; Ord. No. 872, § 1, 11-4-2003)  
Sec. 78-176. - Use of archery equipment. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, it is unlawful to use archery equipment for hunting purposes of all wildlife, including, but not limited to, wild or non-domesticated animals, birds, and waterfowl, within the city limits. 
(b)  The use of archery equipment is forbidden within the city limits except as follows: 
(1)  For hunting under the following conditions: 
a.  On 20 acres or more contiguous area zoned agricultural. 
b.  With the permission of the owner of such property. 
c.  Provided no hunting is permitted within 300 feet of any structure. 
d.  Provided no hunting is permitted within 300 feet of any adjacent property line. 
e.  Provided also that all hunting is performed in accordance with state and federal law. 
f.  No hunting shall not be permitted on any public property. 
(2)  For target practice on 20 acres or more contiguous area zoned agricultural under the following provisions and restrictions: 
a.  In accordance with the regulations established for hunting in subsections a. through d. of subsection (1); or 
b.  In accordance with subsection (3) of this section; 
c.  Provided that no arrow may have a tip other than a target point. Use of broadheads or other heads with cutting blades for target practice is prohibited. 
(3)  For target practice on property with less than 20 acres contiguous area under the following provisions and restrictions: 
a.  Arrows must be discharged toward a target backed by an impenetrable, vertical backstop at least eight feet wide and six feet tall directly behind the target butt, and at least 100 feet from the property line of the adjacent property behind the backstop. 
b.  Archery equipment must be used within a confined space. If the area is not fenced, the target area and sidelanes must be conspicuously surrounded with rope or brightly colored tape placed three feet above the ground and placed in such a way as to exclude persons from walking into the path of the arrow. 
c.  No arrow may have a tip other than a target point. Use of broadheads or other heads with cutting blades for target practice is prohibited. 
d.  No child under the age of 14 years may engage in target practice unless supervised by an adult. 
(4)  For instruction, training, target practice and exhibition shooting in nonresidential areas only, under the supervision and sponsorship of a school, business, recreational association, trade association, governmental agency, or archery association. In such instances, subsections b. and d. of subsection (3) shall apply. In addition, a backstop made of at least three-fourths-inch exterior grade plywood eight feet square must be erected 12 to 18 inches behind the target butt. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 1, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 867, § 1, 10-7-2003)  
Sec. 78-177. - Trapping, hunting, shooting, molesting wildlife, or attempts prohibited; exceptions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, it is unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot, molest, or attempt to trap, hunt, shoot, or molest, in any manner, any and all wildlife, including, but not limited to, wild or nondomesticated animals, birds, and waterfowl, and excluding fish and rodents, within the city limits. This prohibition includes the use of any stone, shot, arrow, firearm, knife, or laser beam. Provided, however, if any birds, wild fowl, or wildlife become a public nuisance or a menace to health or property, then in that event, the animals, birds, or wild fowl may be destroyed under the control and supervision of the city. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 1, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 1-7-2003)  
Secs. 78-178—78-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes against public peace, 21 O.S. § 1261 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-201. - Unlawful assembly. 
(a)  Wherever three or more persons assemble with intent or with means and preparations to do an unlawful act which would be a riot if actually committed, but do not act toward the commission thereof, or whenever such persons assemble without authority of law, and in such a manner as is adapted to disturb the public peace, or excite public alarm, such assembly is an unlawful assembly and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(b)  It is unlawful for two or more persons to assemble together or being assembled together, to act in concert to do any unlawful act against the peace, or to the terror of others, or to make any movement thereto or any preparation therefor, or otherwise to assemble together unlawfully or riotously. 
(Code 1977, § 9.38.010; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. §§ 1314, 1315.  
Sec. 78-202. - Obscene, threatening or harassing telephone calls. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person who, by means of a telephone, willfully either: 
(1)  Makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent; 
(2)  Makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with intent to put the party called in fear of physical harm or death; 
(3)  Makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without disclosing his identity and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number; 
(4)  Knowingly permits any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section; and 
(5)  In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, makes repeated calls or simultaneous calls solely to harass any person at the called number. 
(b)  Use of a telephone facility under this section shall include all use made of such a facility between the points of origin and reception. Any offense under this section is a continuing offense and shall be deemed to have been committed at either the place of origin or the place of reception. 
(c)  Any person who is convicted of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. It is specifically provided that this entire section shall only apply to first offenses. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 11-5-1996; Ord. No. 738, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1172.  
Sec. 78-203. - Disorderly conduct. 
It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace of another or others by violent, obstreperous or improper conduct or carriage, by loud or unusual noise or by unseemly, obscene, offensive or abusive language; or to insult another or others by such conduct or language; or to conduct himself in a disorderly manner. 
(Code 1977, § 9.40.010)  
Sec. 78-204. - Disturbing religious worship. 
It is unlawful for any person to disturb any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language or in any other manner, either within the place of worship or within hearing distance thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 9.40.020) 
State Law reference— Disturbing religious worship, 21 O.S. § 915.  
Sec. 78-205. - Disturbing public assembly. 
It is unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful public gathering or assembly by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language or in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing distance thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 9.40.030) 
State Law reference— Disturbing public assembly, 21 O.S. § 1361.  
Sec. 78-206. - Disturbing lawful meeting. 
Every person who, without authority of law, willfully disturbs or breaks up any assembly or meeting, not unlawful in its character, other than a religious meeting, public meeting of electors or funeral, shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Disturbing public assembly, 21 O.S. § 1361.  
Sec. 78-207. - Displaying insulting signs. 
It is unlawful for any person to display any sign, emblem, badge, flag or device which in its common acceptance is insulting, profane or abusive to the citizens of the city, and which is calculated, or of which the natural consequence is, to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. 
(Code 1977, § 9.40.050)  
Sec. 78-208. - Literature or language ridiculing deity. 
It is unlawful for any person to circulate any literature or use any language within the corporate limits of the city that casts profane ridicule on any deity or religion, which in its common acceptance is calculated to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. 
(Code 1977, § 9.40.060) 
State Law reference— Blasphemy, 21 O.S. § 901.  
Sec. 78-209. - Loud noise or music prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any part of the city by operating, having operated or permitting to be operated, any contrivance, whether electric or not, with or without a loudspeaker, in such a manner as to emit loud music, noise or words. However, this shall not prohibit religious bodies from playing chimes, bells, carillons or other religious music. 
(Code 1977, § 9.40.040) 
State Law reference— Disturbing the peace, 21 O.S. § 1361 et seq.  
Sec. 78-210. - Loitering and sleeping on streets or public places. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, without lawful reason, between the hours of midnight and sunrise, to loiter or wander aimlessly within the city on the streets, in other public places or on property of another; or during such time to sleep on any street, in any other public place or on any property of another without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge of such place. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a person to loiter on or about the premises of a public or private school, or in or about any other public building, or in or about a depot of a public carrier. 
(Code 1977, § 9.36.010)  
Sec. 78-211. - Loitering on railroad property. 
It is unlawful for any person not acting within his line of duty, not having any proper business or not being on any proper mission requiring his presence there, to loiter within a railroad building, upon a railroad station platform or anywhere upon a railroad yard or other railroad premises. 
(Code 1977, § 9.36.020)  
Sec. 78-212. - Begging prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to beg alms from any person, organization or agency except an organization or agency, public or private, whose purpose, or one of whose purposes, is to aid persons in need. 
(Code 1977, § 9.34.010)  
Sec. 78-213. - Peeping Toms. 
(a)  Every person who hides, waits or otherwise loiters in the vicinity of any private dwelling house, apartment building or any other place of residence with the unlawful and willful intent to watch, gaze or look upon the occupants therein in a clandestine manner, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to hide or loiter in the vicinity of any private dwelling house, apartment or building and watch, gaze or look at occupants therein in a clandestine manner. 
(Code 1977, § 9.22.010; Ord. No. 736, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1171.  
Sec. 78-214. - Noise disturbances from radios, television, equipment, electronic audio equipment, musical instruments, and similar devices. 
(a)  Certain noise disturbances prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued the use or operation of any device designed for sound production, amplification, or reproduction, including but not limited to any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, tape recorder, loudspeaker, or other similar device such as to produce a noise disturbance: 
(1)  If plainly audible within any dwelling unit that is not the source of the sound; or 
(2)  On public property or on a public right of way so as to be plainly audible 50 feet or more from such device, except as authorized by permit. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Noise disturbance as used in this section means any plainly audible sound which: 
a.  Injures or endangers the safety or health of a human; or 
b.  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or 
c.  Endangers or injures personal or real property. 
(2)  Plainly audible as used in this section means where the listener clearly can hear the content of the sound produced by the noise source. Sounds that may be clearly audible include, but are not limited to, musical rhythms, spoken words, and vocal sounds. 
(c)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Noise created or to be created as the result of provisions of the use or operation of any device designed for sound production, amplification, or reproduction, including but not limited to any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, tape recorder, loudspeaker, or other similar device such that a permit shall be issued beforehand by the city manager, and such event shall be conducted in accord with provisions of such permit. 
(2)  Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right-of-way. 
(d)  Permits. Upon written application, the city manager or designee may issue a permit for the use or operation of any device designed for sound production, amplification, or reproduction, including but not limited to any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, tape recorder, loudspeaker, or other similar device which sound may meet or exceed that otherwise prohibited by this section when the applicant can show that such use or operation is related to a special event; that the applicant has taken or will take reasonable steps to minimize the disruption to others not involved in the event; that the special event is of a temporary or transient nature limited in time. The decision of the city manager shall be final. The permit shall be specific in scope reciting the time(s) and date(s) of the event. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an offense against the city and be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00 per violation. 
(2)  Each day of violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a single offense if the disturbance is continuous. If the disturbance is not continuous, each violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense, although committed on the same day. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 1, 5-15-2001)  
Sec. 78-215. - Noise disturbances from motorized vehicles. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "noise disturbance" means any sound which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals, or annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or endangers or injures personal or real property, or unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property. 
(b)  No person shall create, or allow the creation of, a frequent, repetitive or continuous noise disturbance in connection with the use or operation of any motor vehicle, off-road recreational vehicle, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, minibike or other vehicle. 
(c)  No owner, possessor, lessor or lessee of real property shall knowingly allow any motor vehicle, off-road recreational vehicle, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, minibike or other vehicle which creates a noise disturbance to be driven across his property. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. 
(2)  Each day of violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a single offense if the disturbance is continuous. If the disturbance is not continuous, each violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense, although committed on the same day. 
(Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 12-17-2013)  
Secs. 78-216—78-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes against decency and morality, 21 O.S. § 851 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 78-251—78-275. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GAMBLING[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Gambling, 21 O.S. § 941 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-276. - Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or agent or employee thereof, to play, to open or cause to be opened, or to operate, carry on or conduct, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, poker, roulette, craps, any banking, percentage or other game played with dice, cards or any device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other thing of value; to set up, operate or permit to be operated, any slot machine or other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit or any other thing of value are played, when the act of playing such game results in a gain or loss to the party playing; or to gamble knowingly in any other manner; or knowingly to permit his or its premises, houses, lot or other property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 9.20.010)  
Sec. 78-277. - Loitering about gambling area. 
It is unlawful for any person to loiter about in the immediate vicinity where a person is gambling, whether by playing games, operating a slot machine or other device, or otherwise, with intent to engage in or aid or abet illegal gambling. 
(Code 1977, § 9.20.020)  
Secs. 78-278—78-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PROSTITUTION AND RELATED OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 78-291. - Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to offer, submit or give themselves to a lewd or immoral use, such asillicit sexual intercourse, or to engage in any lewd or immoral act, for money or any other thing of value. 
(Code 1977, § 9.28.020)  
Sec. 78-292. - Immoral conduct, consorting, loitering. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in illicit sexual intercourse or any other immoral act, or knowingly to consort with a prostitute or other person of immoral vocation, or to consort with another for an immoral purpose, or to occupy any room for an immoral purpose, whether in a public or private place in the city, or to loiter about a house or place of prostitution or a house or place devoted to lewd or immoral acts. 
(Code 1977, § 9.28.030)  
Sec. 78-293. - Keeping a house of prostitution. 
It is unlawful for any person or any agent or employee thereof to keep or assist in keeping a house of prostitution or a house or place in the city where persons meet or assemble for illicit sexual intercourse or for any other lewd or immoral purpose; or knowingly to permit a prostitute or other person of an immoral vocation to become or remain a guest in a hotel or roominghouse. 
(Code 1977, § 9.28.040)  
Sec. 78-294. - Residing in a house of prostitution. 
It is unlawful for any person to be an inmate or resident of a house of prostitution or of a house or place devoted to lewd or immoral acts. 
(Code 1977, § 9.28.050)  
Sec. 78-295. - Pimps and procurers. 
It is unlawful for any person to act as a pimp or procurer for any house or place of prostitution, or for any prostitute or other person engaged in an immoral vocation, or to procure, assist in procuring or attempt to procure any person for another for illicit sexual intercourse or for any other immoral purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 9.28.060)  
Secs. 78-296—78-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DRUGS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Drug offenses, 63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-311. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  No person shall use tincture of opium, tincture of opium camphorated or any derivative thereof, by the hypodermic method, either with or without a medical prescription therefor. 
(b)  No person shall use or possess drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled dangerous substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act (63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.), except those persons holding an unrevoked license in the professions of podiatry, dentistry, medicine, nursing, optometry, osteopathy, veterinary medicine or pharmacy. 
(c)  No person shall deliver, possess or manufacture drug paraphernalia knowing it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled dangerous substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substance Act (63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.). 
(d)  Any person 18 years of age or over who violates subsection (c) of this section by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least three years younger than that person, shall not be prosecuted in the municipal court. 
(e)  Any person who violates subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 1, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 63 O.S. § 2-405.  
Sec. 78-312. - Possession of marijuana or controlled dangerous substances. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  "Controlled dangerous substance" means a drug, substance or immediate precursor in Schedules I through V as identified in 63 O.S. §§ 2-204, 2-206, 2-208, 2-210 and 2-212, as they may be amended or subsequently recodified. 
(2)  "Marijuana" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, but shall not include: 
a.  The mature stalks of such plant or fiber produced from such stalks, 
b.  Oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, including cannabidiol derived from the seeds of the marijuana plant, 
c.  Any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), including cannabidiol derived from mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake, 
d.  The sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination, 
e.  For any person participating in a clinical trial to administer cannabidiol for the treatment of severe forms of epilepsy pursuant to section 2-802 of this title [Code], a drug or substance approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration for use by those participants, 
f.  For any person or the parents, legal guardians or caretakers of the person who have received a written certification from a physician licensed in this state that the person has been diagnosed by a physician as having Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome, Dravet Syndrome, also known as Severe Myoclonic Epilepsy of Infancy, or any other severe form of epilepsy that is not adequately treated by traditional medical therapies, spasticity due to multiple sclerosis or due to paraplegia, intractable nausea and vomiting, appetite stimulation with chronic wasting diseases, the substance cannabidiol, a nonpsychoactive cannabinoid, found in the plant Cannabis sativa L. or any other preparation thereof, that has a tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more than three-tenths of one percent (0.3%) and that is delivered to the patient in the form of a liquid, 
g.  Any federal Food and Drug Administration-approved cannabidiol drug or substance, or 
h.  Industrial hemp, from the plant Cannabis sativa L. and any part of such plant, whether growing or not, with a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more than three-tenths of one percent (0.3%) on a dry weight basis which shall not be grown anywhere in the State of Oklahoma but may be shipped to Oklahoma pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph e or f of this paragraph; 
(3)  "Practitioner" means: 
a.  1.  A medical doctor or osteopathic physician, 
2.  A dentist, 
3.  A podiatrist, 
4.  An optometrist, 
5.  A veterinarian, 
6.  A physician assistant under the supervision of a licensed medical doctor or osteopathic physician, 
7.  A scientific investigator, or 
8.  Any other person, licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to prescribe, distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to, use for scientific purposes or administer a controlled dangerous substance in the course of professional practice or research in this state, or 
b.  A pharmacy, hospital, laboratory or other institution licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to, use for scientific purposes or administer a controlled dangerous substance in the course of professional practice or research in this state; 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, knowingly or intentionally, to possess marijuana within the city, unless pursuant to a valid prescription or order issued to them by a practitioner while acting in the course of a professional practice. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person, knowingly or intentionally, to possess a controlled dangerous substance, unless pursuant to a valid prescription or order issued to them by a practitioner while acting in the course of a professional practice. 
(Code 1977, § 9.26.020; Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1161, § 1, adopted April 3, 2018, changed the title of § 78-312 from "Possession of marijuana" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 78-313. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates section 78-312 shall, upon conviction, a plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere, be punished by a fine or imprisonment, or both, in accordance with section 1-8 of this Code, plus costs, and such punishment may be run consecutively for each separate offense. Provided, possession of up to 1.5 ounces of marijuana by persons who can state a medical condition, but not in possession of a state issued medical marijuana license, shall constitute a misdemeanor offense with a fine not to exceed $400.00. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided under subsection (a) of this section, any person who violates section 78-312 of this Code shall also pay a drug analysis fee of $100.00 for each offense. The municipal court clerk shall cause to be deposited the amount of $100.00 as collected for every conviction as described in this subsection, and shall remit monies collected pursuant to this subsection on a monthly basis to the police narcotics enforcement fund. Monies from said fund shall be utilized for: 
(1)  The purchase and maintenance of equipment and drug testing kits for use by the Mustang Police Department; and 
(2)  Education, training, and scientific development of police personnel and canine development. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 2, 4-3-2018; Ord. No. 1177, § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Secs. 78-314—78-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-351. - Curfew. 
(a)  Findings; purpose. The city council has determined that there has been an increase in juvenile violence, juvenile gang activity, and crime by persons under the age of 18 in the city. Persons under the age of 18 are particularly susceptible, by their lack of maturity and experience, to participate in unlawful and gang-related activities and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime. The city has an obligation to provide for the protection of minors from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control over and responsibility for children, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities. The city council has determined that a curfew for those under the age of 18 will be in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare and will help to attain the objectives set out in this subsection and to diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of the city. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this subsection: 
Curfew hours means from 12:01 p.m. (midnight) until 6:00 a.m. on Monday though Friday, and from 1:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to a fire, a natural disaster or an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Minor means any person under the age of 18. 
Parent and guardian mean any person having legal custody of a minor as a: 
(1)  Natural, step or adoptive parent; 
(2)  Legal guardian; 
(3)  Person who stands in loco parentis; 
(4)  Person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court; or 
(5)  Person at least 18 years of age and authorized by the parent or guardian to have the custody and care of a minor. 
Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public or a substantial group of the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include but not be limited to any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drugstore, pool room or shopping center, and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the immediate area of such places, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
Remain means to leave or stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home; or to fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
Street means a way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel, or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal right-of-way, including but not limited to the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. 
Year of age continues from one birthday, such as the 17th birthday, to but not including the day of the next, such as the 18th birthday, making it clear that the phrase "17 or less years of age" is treated in this section as equivalent to the phrase "under 18 years of age." 
(c)  Violations by minors. It shall be unlawful for any person 17 or less years of age (under 18) to be or remain in or upon the streets or public places within the city at night during the curfew hours. 
(d)  Violations by parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for a parent or other person having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow such a minor to be or remain upon any city street or public place or on the premises of any establishment under circumstances not constituting an exception or defense to or otherwise beyond the scope of this section. For purposes of this subsection, the term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent or legal guardian should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's or person's legal custody. 
(e)  Violations by operators of public places. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator or person otherwise in charge of a public place to knowingly allow or permit a minor to remain on the premises of the public place during the curfew hours in violation of this section. 
(f)  Defenses. 
(1)  The following shall constitute defenses to violations of this section: 
a.  The minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
b.  The minor is accompanied by an adult, authorized by a parent of such minor to take the parent's place, accompanying the minor for a designated period of time, date and purpose within a specified area. A written communication containing this information, and signed by the minor and by the parent or legal guardian of such minor, which includes the minor's home address and telephone number and which is in the possession of the authorized adult shall constitute prima facie proof of such authorization. 
c.  The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona fides of such exercise by possessing a written communication, signed by such minor and countersigned by a parent or legal guardian of such minor with their home address and telephone number, specifying the times and dates when, and where, and in what manner, the minor will be on the streets and other public places during the curfew hours in the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such communication. 
d.  The minor is on an errand, specific business or activity directed or permitted by his parent without detour or stop, and the minor has in his possession a written communication signed by the minor, countersigned by a parent or legal guardian of such minor, evidencing their home address and telephone number, and establishing such reason relating to a direct route for a designated time for a described purpose, including points of origin and destination. Each communication will also note the date and time limits the reason will encompass. 
e.  The minor is on the residence of the place where such minor resides, or on the residence of either next-door neighbor not communicating an objection to the police officer. 
f.  The minor is attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor. 
g.  The minor is within the scope of his employment and carries a certified card or some other form of communication indicating employment, briefly identifying the minor, the addresses and telephone numbers of his home and his place of employment, and his hours of employment, or other valid proof of employment. 
h.  The minor is engaged in interstate vehicular travel with the consent of his parent or legal guardian. This contemplates normal travel and clearly exempts bona fide interstate movement through the city, particularly on normal routes. 
i.  The minor is within the scope of the temporary modification of this section by the city council as set forth in this section. 
j.  The minor is married or has otherwise had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with state law. 
k.  The minor is acting in an emergency situation. 
(2)  It is a defense for the owner or operator of a public place wherein or whereon minors are remaining during curfew hours that he has posted in public view a sign at least 8½ inches by 11 inches, which states that minors on the premises during curfew hours in violation of this section will not be tolerated, and/or the owner or operator has promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(g)  Temporary modification of curfew hours. The city council may authorize a temporary relaxation of the curfew hours in matters of reasonable necessity and matters determined to be consistent with the public interest and the purposes of this section. Such determination and modification of the curfew hours by the city council shall define the activity or purpose, the scope of the use of the streets and/or public places permitted, the period of time involved, and any other information necessary or pertinent to inform the public of the terms of the relaxation of this section. Such action by the city council may be by motion or resolution. 
(h)  Enforcement; discretionary authority of police officers. A police officer of the city, upon finding or having attention called to any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of this section, normally shall take the minor to the city police station or other place designated by the chief of police, where a parent or legal guardian will immediately be notified to come for such minor. It is specifically provided that a police officer is given the discretionary authority to return the minor to his residence if the officer determines such act to be in the best interest of the minor. 
(i)  Court jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the municipal court over a minor who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to 10 O.S. § 7303-1.2. Absent an interlocal agreement with the district court for the municipal court to exercise jurisdiction over minors under 18 years of age, the municipal court shall refer all alleged juvenile violations to the juvenile bureau of the district attorney's office. 
(j)  Determination of age. In the absence of convincing evidence of age, such as a birth certificate or valid driver's license, a police officer on the street shall in the first instance use his best judgment in determining age. 
(k)  Notice to parent or guardian in lieu of full enforcement. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the municipal court may, at the discretion of the court, cause to be delivered by certified mail, sent to the minor's parent or legal guardian, written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation may result in full enforcement of this section. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9.64.010—9.64.016)  
Sec. 78-352. - School attendance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person having custody of a child who is over the age of five years and under the age of 18 years to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such child to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private or other school. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any child who is over the age of 16 years and under the age of 18 years, and who has not finished four years of high school work or the equivalent, to neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private or other school, or receive an education by other means for the full term the schools of the district are in session; provided that this section shall not apply if any such child: 
(1)  Is prevented from attending school by reason of mental or physical ability, to be determined by the board of education of the district upon a certificate of the school physician or public health physician, or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and practicing physician. 
(2)  Is excused from attendance at school, due to any emergency, by the principal teacher of the school in which the child is enrolled, at the request of the parent, guardian, custodian or other person having control of such child. 
(3)  Has attained his 16th birthday and is excused from attending school by the school administrator of the school district where the child attends school and the parent, guardian or custodian of the child. No such child shall be excused from attending school by such joint agreement between a school administrator and the parent, guardian or custodian of the child unless and until it has been determined that such action is for the best interest of the child and/or the community, and that such child shall thereafter be under the supervision of the parent, guardian or custodian until the child reaches the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9.68.010, 9.68.020) 
State Law reference— School attendance required, 70 O.S. § 10-105.  
Secs. 78-353—78-365. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TOBACCO[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Youth Access to Tobacco Act, 37 O.S. § 600.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-366. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Proof of age means a driver's license, license for identification only, or other generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as 18 years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness of the individual and appears on its face to be valid. 
Sample means a tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost for the purpose of promoting the product. 
Sampling means the distribution of samples to members of the public. 
Tobacco product means any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 1(9.68.010), 1-6-1997) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 600.2.  
Sec. 78-367. - Distribution or sale to minors prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell or furnish in any manner any tobacco product to another person who is under 18 years of age, or to purchase in any manner a tobacco product on behalf of any such person. 
(b)  It shall not be unlawful for an employee under 18 years of age to handle tobacco products when required in the performance of the employee's duties. 
(c)  A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser may be under 18 years of age. 
(d)  If an individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products has demanded proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient who is not under 18 years of age, the failure to subsequently require proof of age shall not constitute a violation of this section. 
(e)  If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a store at which tobacco products are sold at retail, the employee shall be guilty of the violation and shall be subject to the fine. 
(f)  Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon proof of age shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to this section. 
(g)  For purposes of determining the liability of a person controlling franchises or business operations in multiple locations for any violation of subsection (a) or (c) of this section, each individual franchise or business location shall be deemed a separate entity. 
(h)  Any person who shall violate subsection (a) or (c) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and may be assessed a fine of not more than $100.00 for the first offense within a one-year period and $200.00 for the second offense or subsequent offense within a one-year period. 
(i)  Upon failure of any person to pay any fine authorized by this section within 90 days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the court clerk or his designee shall notify the state department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a driver's license to the person until proof of payment has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 1(9.68.020), 1-6-1997) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 600.3.  
Sec. 78-368. - Distribution of samples. 
(a)  No person shall distribute tobacco product samples in or on any public street, sidewalk or park that is within 300 feet of any playground, school or other facility when the facility is being used primarily by persons under 18 years of age. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and may be assessed a fine of not more than $100.00 for the first offense within a one-year period and $200.00 for the second offense or subsequent offense within a one-year period. 
(c)  Upon failure of any person to pay any fine authorized by this section within 90 days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the court clerk or his designee shall notify the state department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a driver's license to the person until proof of payment has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 1(9.68.030), 1-6-1997) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 600.8.  
Sec. 78-369. - Sale of cigarettes except in original sealed package prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the original sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and may be assessed a fine of not more than $200.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 1(9.68.040), 1-6-1997) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 600.9.  
Sec. 78-370. - Purchase or possession by minors. 
(a)  Except as provided under section 78-202(b), it is unlawful for a person who is under 18 years of age to purchase, receive or have in his possession a tobacco product, or to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age which is false or fraudulent for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco product. 
(b)  On conviction of an individual for an offense under subsection (a) of this section, the court shall suspend execution of sentence and shall require the defendant to attend a tobacco education program. The court shall require the parent or guardian of the defendant to attend the tobacco education program with the defendant. 
(c)  If access to the tobacco education program is not readily available, the court shall require the defendant to perform eight to 12 hours of tobacco-related community service instead of attending a tobacco education program. 
(d)  The tobacco education program and the tobacco-related community service are remedial and are not punishment. 
(e)  No later than the 90th day after the date of conviction under subsection (a) of this section, the defendant shall present to the court, in a manner required by the court, evidence of satisfactory completion of the tobacco education program or the tobacco-related community service. 
(f)  On receipt of the evidence required under subsection (e) of this section, the court shall: 
(1)  If the defendant has been convicted of a previous offense under subsection (a) of this section, which offense occurred within one year prior to the offense for which the defendant is currently charged, execute the sentence, and, at the discretion of the court, assess a fine of not less than $10.00 and not more than $200.00. 
(2)  If the defendant has not been convicted of a previous offense under subsection (a) of this section, which offense occurred within one year prior to the offense for which the defendant is currently charged, dismiss the complaint and discharge the defendant. 
(g)  If the court dismisses the complaint under subsection (f)(2) of this section, the defendant is released from all penalties and disabilities resulting from the offense except that the defendant is considered to have been convicted of the offense if the defendant is subsequently convicted of the same charge if such a repeat offense occurs within one year of the dismissed offense. 
(h)  Any person convicted of an offense under subsection (a) of this section may apply to the court to have the conviction expunged. If the court finds that the individual satisfactorily completed the tobacco education program or tobacco-related community service ordered by the court and that there has been no subsequent offense for a period of at least one year after the date of the offense for which the person was convicted, the court shall order the conviction and any complaint, verdict, sentence or other document relating to the offense to be expunged from the individual's record, and the conviction may not be shown or made known for any purpose. 
(i)  If the defendant does not provide the evidence required under subsection (e) of this section within the period specified by that subsection, or upon failure of the defendant to pay any fine authorized by this section within 90 days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the court clerk or his designee shall notify the state department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a driver's license to the person until the required evidence or proof of payment has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 1(9.68.050), 1-6-1997) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 600.4.  
Sec. 78-371. - Reports to state. 
The city clerk or his designee shall furnish any information or reports required or requested by the state alcoholic beverages laws enforcement (ABLE) commission in the form, manner and time as may be determined by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 1(9.68.060), 1-6-1997) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 600.11a.  
Sec. 78-372. - Retaliation against person reporting violation. 
No person shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment or customer because such employee, applicant or customer reported violations of any provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 1(9.68.070), 1-6-1997)  
Chapter 82 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1044, adopted Aug. 3, 2010, repealed the former ch. 82, §§ 82-31—82-34, 82-51—82-53, and enacted a new ch. 82 as set out herein. The former ch. 82 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1977 Code, §§ 5.20.010—5.20.050. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Transient Merchant Licensing Act, 19 O.S. § 1601 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 82-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddle means to travel on foot or by any type of conveyance from place to place, house to house, street to street, or upon any street or public place, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, foodstuffs, products, wares, merchandise, or other thing of value for the purpose of offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales of such articles to purchasers. 
Peddler means any person who peddles. 
Solicit means and includes (a) to travel on foot or by any type of conveyance from place to place, house to house, street to street, or upon any street or public place, selling or offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, foodstuffs, products, wares, merchandise, services, magazines, periodicals, insurance, or other thing of value for future delivery or for services to be performed or furnished in the future, (b) requesting, directly or indirectly, contributions of funds on the plea or representation that such contributions will be used for a charitable purpose, and (c) peddling, as defined in this section. 
Solicitor means any person who solicits. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 1135, § 1, 12-15-2015)  
Sec. 82-2. - Hours of permitted soliciting or peddling; hours for application. 
No solicitor or peddler, whether registered under this chapter or not, shall take orders for or sell any goods, foodstuffs, products, wares, merchandise, services, magazines, periodicals, insurance, or other thing of value except during the hours from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Applications for a solicitor's registration card shall be made only between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010)  
Sec. 82-3. - Orders to be in duplicate. 
All orders taken by solicitors wherein payment or deposit is made in advance of delivery shall be in writing in duplicate, stating the terms thereof, and the amount paid in advance. One copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time of the solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010)  
Sec. 82-4. - Exemptions from chapter. 
This chapter shall not apply to persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such property, nor to the sale or delivery of newspapers, nor to persons who offer for sale or sell, or who peddle and sell from house to house, vegetables, butter, eggs and farm products produced and raised on lands owned or controlled by them. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010)  
Sec. 82-5. - Soliciting or peddling in roadway and public right-of-way prohibited; exceptions. 
Soliciting or peddling in roadways and public right-of-ways is prohibited; provided, however, the community development director may issue a special permit for soliciting in roadways and public rights-of-way upon written application; and, further provided that proper safety devices and measures be implemented as directed in the special permit. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010)  
Sec. 82-6. - No knock list. 
The community development director shall prepare and maintain a list of all residents within the city who desire to prevent soliciting at their residence which shall be known as the no knock list. Residents of the city who desire to have their addresses placed on the no knock list may do so by contacting the community development director's office. 
Solicitors must obtain a copy of the no knock list from the community development director's office at the time they obtain a license, and are expressly prohibited from soliciting at any residence listed on the no knock list. Contacting residents in disregard of the no knock list may result in revocation of a solicitor's license and/or assessment of a fine. 
(Ord. No. 1135, § 2, 12-15-2015)  
Secs. 82-7—82-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 82-21. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as a principal, officer, agent, servant or employee, to solicit within the city without having first applied for and obtained a solicitor's permit for that purpose from the community development director or his designee. 
All persons issued a license under this section shall at all times display the license prominently on their person, shall carry at least one form of photo identification, and shall produce the license and photo identification for inspection and review at any time upon request by any city official, law enforcement officer or person to whom the solicitor is attempting to solicit or peddle or on whose property the solicitor is present. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 1135, § 3, 12-15-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 1135, adopted Dec. 15, 2015, changed the title of § 82-21 from "required" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 82-22. - Application; applicant's photograph and fingerprints. 
An applicant for a solicitor's permit under the terms of this chapter shall be required to: 
(1)  Complete and submit an application in a form provided by the community development director or his designees which shall include no less than the following information: 
a.  Show the name of the person, firm or corporation in whose behalf the applicant proposes to solicit; 
b.  The current address of said person, firm or corporation, and their phone and email contact information; 
c.  The kind of products, merchandise or service to be solicited and/or sold; 
d.  The current, valid license number and description, including make, model, year and copy of current insurance verification, of any vehicle to be used (if applicable); 
e.  Detailed personal information and physical description of solicitor(s); 
f.  Social security number, current, valid driver's license number or state issued identification card of solicitor(s); 
g.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past five years; and 
h.  Any other pertinent facts or information required by the community development director, including sufficient information to investigate the application. 
(2)  File a photograph and fingerprints of the solicitor(s) with the police department. 
No license shall be issued under this article to any person under the age of 16 years except those persons and organizations exempted under subsection 82-42(1). 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 1135, § 4, 12-15-2015)  
Sec. 82-23. - Applicant's bond. 
Every applicant for a solicitor's permit required by this article who shall require, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery of any goods, wares, or merchandise, shall file a surety bond, in the amount of $500.00, conditioned upon making final delivery of the goods ordered in accordance with the terms of such order, or failing therein that the advance payment be refunded. Any person aggrieved by the action of the solicitor or peddler shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery of the money or damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 60 days after the expiration of any permit issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 1135, § 5, 12-15-2015)  
Sec. 82-24. - Fee. 
(a)  A registration fee is hereby levied for the purpose of defraying the cost of registration on each person applying for registration as a solicitor or peddler. Such fee shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fifty dollars per day. 
(2)  Three hundred dollars per week. 
(3)  One thousand dollars per year. 
(b)  Any veteran who qualifies under 72 O.S. § 5, and those persons representing charitable associations or groups which have tax-exempt status shall be exempt from the payment of any registration fee under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010)  
Sec. 82-25. - Issuance, denial or revocation. 
(a)  The community development director or his designee is hereby authorized to issue a solicitor's permit when the applicant has complied with this article. Registration may be denied any applicant for a solicitor's permit if he is not of good moral character; if he has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has such criminal charges pending; if the proposed sales proposition shall include some element of trickery, fraud or deceit, in which case, in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, the applicant shall not be registered. 
(b)  The city clerk's office shall give notice either in person, by telephone, mail or email to the licensee of the denial or revocation of their license. If mailed, the notice shall be sent to the address listed on the application or license. The license shall stand revoked or denied from the time notice is made to the licensee either in person or by telephone or is received by mail by the licensee. 
(c)  Any applicant or licensee may appeal a denial or revocation to the city manager within ten days after delivery or receipt of the notice by filing a written request with the community development director for a hearing. The hearing shall be held by the city manager or his or her designee. The appealing applicant or licensee may be represented by counsel. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner, but no license shall be revoked or denied except upon a preponderance of the evidence. The city manager or his or her designee may affirm, modify or vacate the order of revocation or denial and such decision shall constitute the final decision on behalf of the city. Any appeal from a city manager's decision shall be in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 1135, § 6, 12-15-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 1135, adopted Dec. 15, 2015, changed the title of § 82-25 from "Issuance or denial" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 82-26. - Revocation. 
Upon good cause any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked. Revocation may be based upon the following, among other causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the application for a permit; 
(2)  Violation of any federal, state or municipal law, rule or regulation; 
(3)  A finding that the permit holder has conducted business for which the permit was issued in an unlawful manner or in such manner at to constitute a breach of the peace; or 
(4)  Complaints by citizens. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010)  
Sec. 82-27. - Transfer of permits prohibited. 
Permits issued under this article may not be transferred to or used by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010)  
Secs. 82-28—82-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENTERING POSTED PREMISES 
 
Sec. 82-41. - Invitation required to enter on posted premises. 
It shall be unlawful for a solicitor to ring the bell, or knock on the door, or otherwise attempt to gain admittance for the purpose of soliciting at a residence or dwelling which is list on the no knock list or upon which a sign stating "no solicitors," "no trespassers" or words of similar import indicating such persons are not wanted on the premises is painted, affixed or otherwise plainly displayed to public view either on or near the primary entrance of the residence. Any such entrance or attempt to solicit shall constitute a trespass upon private property and a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 1135, § 7, 12-15-2015)  
Sec. 82-42. - Exemptions. 
Persons exempt from the provisions of this article are: 
(1)  Those person representing charitable associations or groups which have tax-exempt status. 
(2)  Those peddlers or solicitors invited on the premises by the owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010)  
Secs. 82-43—82-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PENALTY 
 
Sec. 82-51. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to solicit or peddle without having first obtained a permit, or to violate any provision of this chapter. Upon conviction thereof, each violation shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 8-3-2010)  
Chapter 86 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 86-1. - Authority of council to regulate number, classes and compensation of positions. 
The council, by motion, resolution or ordinance, may regulate the number and classes of offices and positions of employment in the various departments, offices and agencies of the city government, and may determine or regulate the compensation to be paid to officers and employees. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.010)  
Sec. 86-2. - Bonds. 
(a)  Before entering upon their official duties, the following personnel of the city government shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their official duties, payable to the city, with a surety company authorized to operate within the state, in the amounts and form determined by the council by motion or resolution: 
(1)  City manager; 
(2)  City clerk; 
(3)  City treasurer. 
(b)  The council, by motion or resolution, may require other officers and employees in such positions as it may designate to be bonded; and also by motion or resolution may increase the amount of the bonds for the personnel listed in subsection (a) of this section. The city may also provide for a blanket bond to cover any or all of its officers and employees. 
(c)  The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.020)  
Secs. 86-3—86-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LAYOFF, SUSPENSION, DEMOTION AND REMOVAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall prevail when interpreting the personnel board sections of this article and when interpreting section 2-4(e) of the Charter: 
Board means the personnel board, and it shall not be construed to mean any other board, commission or committee. 
Classified service personnel includes all permanent full-time employees of the city, but shall not include the following: 
(1)  Part-time employees. 
(2)  Temporary employees. 
(3)  Department heads. 
(4)  Council appointees. 
Demotion means the act of reducing an employee to a lower step or grade in the city's position classification pay plan. 
Discharge means the release or dismissal by the city manager, for cause, of any employee of the city. 
Employee includes only the classified service personnel, as defined in this section, who are regularly employed by the city. 
For cause means the judgment of the city manager in evaluating the work efficiency or in evaluating a particular issue involving any city employee when it is necessary and justified for the good of the city that the city manager dismiss or reduce in step or grade that employee because of that employee's work record and/or his misconduct. 
Personnel board affected personnel includes all those employees who are classified service personnel as prescribed in this section, and except for certain supervisory personnel with special provisions as described in this article, and except for the city manager, it shall include all those classified service personnel who come under the jurisdiction of the Charter. 
Reduction in grade means the demotion of any employee by decreasing his salary or wage in the position classification pay plan by reclassifying him to a lower position in another classification and/or lower step in the classification pay plan. 
Suspension means that in the judgment of the city manager, when evaluating the work efficiency or when evaluating a particular issue involving any city employee, it is deemed necessary and justified for the good of the city that the city manager temporarily separate that employee without pay for a fixed period of time as may be more specifically outlined in the personnel rules and regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.005) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-32. - Notice to employee. 
(a)  The layoff, suspension without pay for more than ten days, or demotion or removal after serving a probationary period of six months, by the city manager, of any classified service personnel shall not become effective until a notice of action taken has first been served and a written statement of the reasons has been delivered or mailed by registered, certified or similar special mail to the employee. 
(b)  Such notice shall contain one or more reasons for the action and shall be written in such a manner that it can be clearly understood by the employee. 
(c)  Such notice shall also contain specifications of facts which will place the employee fairly upon his defense as to the reasons for the action. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.110)  
Sec. 86-33. - Request for appeal. 
(a)  Filing. Classified service personnel may appeal the actions contemplated in section 86-32 by filing a request for appeal, in writing, with the city clerk. The request must contain the explanation for the appeal. 
(1)  The appeal must be made within ten days from the time the employee was served with the written notice of action taken. His appeal must be made in writing and be accompanied with a copy of his notice of action taken. 
(2)  If no written appeal is received within the specified time limit, the action and decision of the city manager shall be final and binding. 
(3)  No subsequent appeal on the action shall be made or recognized by the board. 
(b)  Withdrawal. Any time after the appellant has submitted a written request for appeal, but prior to the hearing of his appeal, he may withdraw his request for appeal by a written statement declaring such withdrawal. 
(1)  By submission of such a statement of withdrawal, the employee waives his right of further appeal and the action and decision of the city manager shall be final and binding. 
(2)  No subsequent appeal on the action may be made or shall be recognized by the board. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.120)  
Sec. 86-34. - Department heads. 
Department heads shall have no right of appeal under this article inasmuch as department head personnel represent the city manager and hold top-level responsibility directly under the control of the city manager. The actual final disposition of these supervisory personnel shall rest solely with the city manager and may not be overruled by the board. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.130)  
Secs. 86-35—86-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERSONNEL BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authority, § 2-221 et seq. 
 
Sec. 86-51. - Established. 
Pursuant to the Charter, there is created a personnel board with the duties, rights and powers set forth in this article. 
(Code 1977, §§ 2.52.030, 2.52.040)  
Sec. 86-52. - Membership; officers. 
(a)  Composition; appointment and term of members; alternate member. As provided by section 2-4(e) of the Charter, the board shall be composed of five members appointed by the governing body for overlapping three-year terms, and members shall serve until their successor is appointed and qualified. The terms shall expire on May 1. A citizen of the city shall be appointed by the governing body to serve for a term of three years as an alternate member of the personnel board. The alternate member shall act as a replacement in the absence of disqualification of any of the regular members, and in so doing shall have all the powers and duties of a regular personnel board member. 
(b)  Restrictions on membership. No member shall hold any office or position in the city government, nor shall any member be a relative of any city employee, following the same formula as described for nepotism in section 8-2 of the Charter. 
(c)  Removal of members. The council, by a vote of a majority of the city council, may remove members of the personnel board for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, or inability or incapacity to serve and the vote on such removal shall be by roll call and shall be entered in the minutes of the city council, and the council shall thereafter appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired term of the removed board member. 
(d)  Nomination for appointment. Nomination for appointment can be made by any councilmember so long as a majority vote of the council is achieved when a personnel board member is selected. 
(e)  Compensation of members. All board members shall serve without compensation unless the council provides otherwise. However, funds will be provided for reasonable and necessary expenses as authorized by the city council or city manager. 
(f)  Officers. At the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of a newly appointed member, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the board shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary. The secretary need not be a member of the board. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.060; Ord. No. 913, § 1, 7-20-2004)  
Sec. 86-53. - Qualifications of members. 
Qualifications for board members and board member candidates are as follows: 
(1)  Board members and board member candidates shall not be elected officials of the city, county, state or national government. 
(2)  Board members and board member candidates shall not be a candidate for any elective city, county, state or national office. 
(3)  Board members and board member candidates shall not be an officer of any partisan political committee or an officer of any such political organization. 
(4)  Board members and board member candidates shall not be an officer or shop steward of any labor organization. 
(5)  Board member candidates shall be qualified electors of the city. 
(6)  Board member candidates shall be chosen for their knowledge of or good judgment in the employment practices of a public or private organization similar in size or scope of operation to that of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.070)  
Sec. 86-54. - Disqualification for membership. 
(a)  The board member or board candidate must either resign from that office which he holds and which places him in violation of section 86-53, or he must resign as a board member or a board candidate. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the provisions of section 86-53(1) shall result in that board member being automatically recalled by the city council without special action by the council, or it shall result in that board candidate being disqualified from being appointed to a board position as long as the board candidate remains in violation. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.080)  
Sec. 86-55. - Quorum. 
The composition of board members necessary to hold a meeting is as provided in this section. A quorum of four seated board members is necessary for a hearing. If less than four board members are seated for a scheduled hearing, the board shall reschedule the hearing at a time and place when four members can be present. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.090)  
Sec. 86-56. - Meetings. 
(a)  Meetings to be public. The board shall conduct open meetings, except for executive sessions where authorized by the Open Meeting Law. 
(b)  Regular and special meetings. 
(1)  The personnel board shall hold at least one regular organizational meeting annually at a time and place determined by the personnel officer. 
(2)  The board may hold such additional meetings as may be called by the chairperson; provided, however, that each member of the board shall be given at least 24 hours' written notice. 
(3)  Special meetings may also be called by the written authority of two board members or by the authority of the city manager in the manner designated in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(c)  Annual organizational meeting. 
(1)  At the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of a newly appointed member, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the personnel officer shall designate the time and place of an organizational meeting. 
(2)  The personnel officer shall aid the board in its efforts to elect a chairperson. 
(3)  The board shall also elect a vice-chairperson and a secretary. The secretary need not be a member of the board. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.100)  
Sec. 86-57. - Purpose. 
(a)  The personnel board will allow all employees, as defined in this article, who have been laid off, suspended without pay for more than ten days, demoted or removed after a probationary period of six months an opportunity for such action to be more clearly defined to them; or, if such action is understood by them but is felt to be unjust, it will allow those employees recourse to appeal the decision to an impartial board. 
(b)  The personnel board shall, therefore, be created for the employees of the city in order to provide the employees with an appellate review board to hear the evidence and the specifications of charges made by the city manager. The procedures described in this article shall apply when such charges have been filed for review with the board by any employee who has been suspended, discharged, or reduced in step or grade by the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.040)  
Sec. 86-58. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The board shall hear appeals only under the following conditions: 
(1)  Employees who have been suspended without pay for more than ten days, and only after the employee has served a probationary period of six months. 
(2)  Employees who have been demoted, removed or laid off, but only after the employee has served a probationary period of six months. 
(b)  Under the following conditions the board shall not hear appeals: 
(1)  Employees who are not classified as classified service personnel. 
(2)  Employees who have been laid off because their position was abolished by the city council by appropriate action corresponding with the authority provided by the Charter. The layoff may also be extended to include action by the city council for staff reductions due to economic reasons. 
(c)  Board members shall serve as arbitrators and must render a decision on all hearings. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.050)  
Secs. 86-59—86-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - APPEAL HEARING 
 
Sec. 86-81. - Scheduling; notice. 
(a)  When the city clerk receives a request for an appeal as outlined in section 86-33, the personnel officer shall be notified and, as soon as practicable thereafter, the personnel officer shall set the date for a hearing on the appeal. 
(b)  The hearing shall be scheduled within 15 days after notification has been given to the appellant and to the city manager. 
(1)  Written notice of the hearing of the appeal shall be the method of notification for the parties in interest. 
(2)  Such notification shall contain all necessary information concerning the hearing, such as the time and place of the hearing, and whether the appellant wants the hearing open to the public or closed to the public and private. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.140)  
Sec. 86-82. - Conduct generally. 
(a)  The chairperson shall serve as the coordinator and referee for the board at all hearings which the board sets in session. 
(b)  The board shall hear the evidence of the charges and the specifications of the charges so filed and stated by the city manager. No material amendment of or addition to the charges or specifications of the charges shall be heard by the board. 
(c)  The proceedings shall be as informal as is compatible with justice while still maintaining a court-like approach, with the rules which apply to administrative hearings governing the admission of evidence. 
(d)  The chairperson of the board shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations. 
(e)  The board shall have power to subpoena officers and employees of the city and other persons to testify and to produce documents and other effects as evidence. 
(f)  The appellant may be represented by counsel (at no cost to the city) and the city manager may be represented by the city attorney. 
(g)  The city manager may designate an alternate to represent him, but the board shall have the authority to require the city manager's presence. 
(h)  The board, after due consideration, shall render a judgment either affirming or disaffirming the action of the city manager, as further described in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.150)  
Sec. 86-83. - Presentation of evidence. 
(a)  The city manager or his authorized representative shall present the evidence in support of the charge. 
(b)  The appellant and/or his counsel shall then produce such evidence as either may wish to offer in opposition to the charges. 
(c)  The board shall have the right of query after each witness or at any other time any board member deems it necessary, and any board member may examine and ask questions about any other evidence offered either in support of the charges or in opposition to the charges. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.160)  
Sec. 86-84. - Failure to appear. 
(a)  If the appellant shall fail to appear for no acceptable reason at the time fixed for the hearing, the board shall hear the evidence and render a judgment thereon. 
(b)  If the city manager or his authorized representative shall fail to appear at the time fixed for the hearing and if no evidence is offered in support of the charge, the board may render judgment by default or it may hear the evidence as offered by the appellant and render a judgment thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.170)  
Sec. 86-85. - Records. 
(a)  The city clerk or an authorized representative shall be present at all hearings of the board. 
(b)  All proceedings of hearings shall be recorded on tape. 
(c)  Copies of all pertinent documents and evidence, where feasible, shall become a part of the record. 
(d)  The tapes, documents and evidence shall be a part of the official record of all hearings, and the tapes, documents and evidence shall be kept by the city clerk for a period of at least 48 months. 
(e)  After 48 months, the tapes, documents and evidence may, at the discretion of the city clerk and in accordance with state statutes, be automatically disposed of. 
(f)  Portions of the tapes, documents and evidence may be extended into writing only when requested by a majority of the board members. 
(g)  At the conclusion of any hearing or at intervals therein, the chairperson of the board will report the board's findings and recommendations to the city manager. 
(1)  The chairperson of the board shall render a written public statement regarding the hearing and the outcome thereof. 
(2)  Since this board only considers those cases of a particular nature to the individual involved, it is the intent of this section to protect the integrity of the individual involved from misuse. 
(3)  Such statements by the chairperson of the board are designed to provide the greatest benefit to the city and the individuals by giving the fullest understanding and explanation possible of the situation, while protecting the integrity of all those concerned with the case. 
(4)  The statements shall be filed with the city manager and city clerk and shall become a part of the official record of such cases. 
(h)  The city manager shall then make a final decision in writing regarding the appellant's layoff, suspension, demotion or removal, as the case may be. 
(i)  The statements shall then be filed with the city clerk as the official public record of such cases. 
(Code 1977, § 2.32.180)  
Sec. 86-86. - Action by board. 
The personnel board shall only find a decision as outlined in this section. 
(1)  The board may find in favor of the action issued by the city manager, and the action and decision in favor of the city manager shall be final and binding. No subsequent appeal of the action may be made. 
(2)  The board may find against the action taken by the city manager. 
a.  A two-thirds majority vote of all members of the board shall be necessary to deny the city manager's action. 
b.  If the board finds against the action taken by the city manager, it may recommend written modifications outlining the action the board feels should have been taken by the city manager and thereby modify the disciplinary action taken by the city manager. 
(3)  Should the board find that the layoff, suspension, demotion or removal was made for a political reason, or for any other reason other than the good of the service, it shall veto the layoff, suspension, demotion or removal, and the action by the city manager or other authority shall be nullified thereby. 
a.  The action and decision shall be final and binding. 
b.  The action, as outlined by the board, shall take effect immediately. 
(Code 1977, § 2.52.190)  
Chapter 90 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(9); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 50; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70; natural resources, ch. 74; signs, ch. 94; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102; subdivisions, ch. 106; utilities, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Acceptance of certain private streets and roadways. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, in an effort to improve the structure of the municipal roadway system for the general betterment of the Mustang community and its residents, the city council is authorized to accept certain private streets and roadways for public use as public streets and roadways, not otherwise meeting the standards set forth in this Code for public streets and roadways, within the city boundaries, subject to the following conditions and terms: 
(1)  This section shall apply only to private streets and roadways existing at the effective date of Ordinance No. 688. 
(2)  A written request must be presented to the city council signed by at least 60 percent of the owners of the property to be considered. Property held in joint ownership shall only require one signature. A list of property owners within the territory to be considered, certified by an abstractor, must be submitted with the request. 
(3)  All owners of the property to be considered must dedicate the easements to the city for public use, at no charge, of the type and width footage which would be required under this Code for comparable public streets and roadways, such determinations to be made by the city, which dedications shall be furnished to the city as a condition of final acceptance. However, it is specifically provided that such dedications will not be accepted by the city until and unless the property is approved for integration into the public street and roadway system. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the request, the city department of community development and the city engineer will prepare a report to be presented to the city council which will include an assessment of the condition of the street or roadway, including, without limitation, whether the street or roadway is curbed and guttered, width, material of the surface and roadbed, factors related to safety for public travel, drainage matters, an estimate of the costs required to improve the street or roadway to meet the requirements of this Code, portions of Code requirements in which the proposed street or roadway is deficient, and any improvements or other work necessary to integrate the street or roadway with the public street system. Reimbursement to the city for costs incurred by the city for the work of the city engineer in excess of that required for routine reports may be required by the city as a condition of final acceptance. 
(5)  If the conditions stated in this section are met, and if the city council determines that acceptance of the private street or roadway as a public street or roadway would serve the health, safety and welfare and general betterment of the city, then, upon a three-fourths vote of all members of the council, the council is authorized to accept the private street or roadway for public use. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the city council from imposing requirements for certain improvements as required by this Code upon the property owners prior to acceptance, nor shall this section prevent the city from accepting monies in lieu of the required improvements. 
(7)  The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(8)  Nothing in this section is intended or shall be construed to obligate the city council to accept any private street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 1, 6-16-1998)  
Sec. 90-2. - Vacation of easements within Peachtree Village Addition, City of Mustang. 
(a)  The City of Mustang holds certain easements located within the SW/4 of the NW/4 of Section 27, Township 11 North, Range 5 West, I.M., Canadian County, Oklahoma, and covering areas lying within a parcel known as the Peachtree Village Addition, which easements are described as follows (and, collectively, are referred to herein as the "easements"), to wit: 
(1)  Easement dated August 30, 1983, from Peachtree Partnership, Ltd. to the City of Mustang, and recorded in Book 1066, Page 832, of the records of the Canadian County Clerk, which easement grants a ten-foot wide utility easement over the property described therein; 
(2)  Easement dated August 30, 1983, from Peachtree Partnership, Ltd. to the City of Mustang, and recorded in Book 1066, Page 828, of the records of the Canadian County Clerk, which easement grants a 24-foot fire lane easement over the property described therein; 
(3)  Easement dated August 30, 1983, from Peachtree Partnership, Ltd. to the City of Mustang, and recorded in Book 1066, Page 830, of the records of the Canadian County Clerk, which easement grants a 24-foot fire lane easement over the property described therein; 
(4)  Easement dated August 30, 1983, from Peachtree Partnership, Ltd. to the City of Mustang, and recorded in Book 1066, Page 834, of the records of the Canadian County Clerk, which easement grants a utility easement as shown on exhibit A thereto over the property described therein; 
(5)  Easement dated June 21, 1983, from Peachtree Partnership, Ltd to the City of Mustang, and recorded in Book 1066, Page 836, of the records of the Canadian County Clerk, which easement grants of the Canadian County Clerk, which easement grants a utility easement as shown on the attached exhibit B across the property described therein; and, 
(6)  Permanent easement dated May 1, 1984, from Peachtree Partnership, Ltd. to the City of Mustang, and recorded in Book 1118, Page 489, of the records of the Canadian County Clerk, which grants an easement over the property described therein for purposes of public utility lines. 
(b)  The city has amended the zoning ordinances applicable to the Peachtree Village Addition to create a planned unit development therein and, pursuant thereto, some utilities and other uses for which the easements were granted will be relocated and rededicated pursuant to final plat. Therefore, the City of Mustang believes it to be necessary and expedient to vacate in their entirety the easements, except as set forth below. 
(1)  The city shall retain and continue to use and enjoy a portion of the utility easement granted in that certain easement dated June 21, 1983, from Peachtree Partnership, Ltd. to the City of Mustang, and recorded in Book 1066, Page 836, of the records of the Canadian County Clerk, for the existing sanitary sewer line located therein, along a line described as follows, to wit: From the point of beginning as described in the easement, and continuing to a point N 0°20'08" E a distance of 345 feet, the reserved easement area shall include a 20-foot wide area along the interior side of the following line: N 89°52'19" E a distance of 290 feet; thence S 27°59'43" E a distance of 329.37 feet; thence S 06°20'00" E a distance of 355.00 feet. 
(c)  At least 30 days' prior notice has been given by the city clerk to holders of franchises or others determined by the city council to have a special right or privilege to use the public way or easement, and to all owners of record, shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer, abutting the public way or easement, and to owners of record of property within 300 feet of the subject property. 
(d)  The City of Mustang reserves the absolute right to reopen the easements without expense to the city, and this section shall not affect the right to maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate or remove utilities, public service corporations, franchise holders, or transmission company facilities or services therein, nor shall such closing affect private ways existing by operation of law. 
(e)  This section shall go into effect upon the latter of 30 days after its passage or the date the final plat for the Peachtree Village Addition is approved by the city council and is filed of record with the clerk of Canadian County. 
(Ord. No. 999, § 1, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 90-3. - Vacation of easement within NW/4 of section 34, T11N, R5W, City of Mustang. 
(a)  The City of Mustang holds a certain easement dated August 25, 1983, from Quentin L. Ploch and Judy K. Ploch to the City of Mustang, and recorded in Book 1058, Page 622, of the records of the Canadian County Clerk (the "easement"), which easement grants an easement for roadway purposes over the property described therein. 
(b)  The city has never constructed or maintained a roadway over or upon said easement. Instead, the roadway constructed to serve the homes located near the easement was privately constructed and has been privately maintained by adjoining owners. Therefore, the City of Mustang believes it to be necessary and expedient to vacate in its entirety the easement. 
(c)  At least 30 days prior notice has been given by the city clerk to holders of franchises or others determined by the city council to have a special right or privilege to use the public way or easement, and to all owners of record, as shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer, abutting the public way or easement, and to owners of record of property within 300 feet of the subject property. 
(d)  The City of Mustang reserves the absolute right to reopen the easements without expense to the city, and this ordinance shall not affect the right to maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate or remove utilities, public service corporations, franchise holders, or transmission company facilities or services therein, nor shall such closing affect private ways existing by operation of law. 
(e)  This section shall go into effect 30 days after its passage. 
(Ord. No. 1034, § 1, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 90-4. - Vacation of easement within NE/4 of section 29, T11N, R5W, City of Mustang. 
(a)  The City of Mustang holds a certain easement dated November 17, 2003, from Cury Development, L.P. to the City of Mustang, and recorded in Book 2860, Page 636, of the records of the Canadian County Clerk (the "easement"), which easement grants an easement for constructing, maintaining and operating a sewer lift station on the property described therein. 
(b)  The city constructed a sewer lift station on the property covered by the easement, but later removed the lift station after determining it was not needed by the city. The City of Mustang believes it to be necessary and expedient to vacate in its entirety the easement. 
(c)  At least 30 days prior notice has been given by the city clerk to holders of franchises or others determined by the city council to have a special right or privilege to use the public way or easement, and to all owners of record, as shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer, abutting the public way or easement, and to owners of record of property within 300 feet of the subject property. 
(d)  The City of Mustang reserves the absolute right to reopen the easement without expense to the city, and this ordinance shall not affect the right to maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate or remove utilities, public service corporations, franchise holders, or transmission company facilities or services therein, nor shall such closing affect private ways existing by operation of law. 
(e)  This section shall go into effect 30 days after its passage. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 1, 9-3-2013)  
Sec. 90-5. - Vacation of easement within NW/4 of section 29, T11N, R5W, City of Mustang. 
(a)  The City of Mustang holds a certain easement dated October 19, 2000, from Phoenix Health Services, Inc., to the City of Mustang, and recorded in Book 2403, Page 246, of the records of the Canadian County Clerk (the "easement"), which easement grants an easement for constructing, maintaining and operating utilities and other public purposes. 
(b)  The easement contains an incorrect legal description, and therefore fails to properly describe the property to be covered by the easement. The City of Mustang believes it to be necessary and expedient to vacate in its entirety the easement, and to take and receive a new easement from the successor owner providing a correct legal description. 
(c)  At least 30 days prior notice has been given by the city clerk to holders of franchises or others determined by the city council to have a special right or privilege to use the public way or easement, and to all owners of record, as shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer, abutting the public way or easement, and to owners of record of property within 300 feet of the subject property. 
(d)  The City of Mustang reserves the absolute right to reopen the easement without expense to the city, and this section shall not affect the right to maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate or remove utilities, public service corporations, franchise holders, or transmission company facilities or services therein, nor shall such closing affect private ways existing by operation of law. 
(e)  This section shall go into effect 30 days after its passage. 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 1, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 90-6. - Vacation of easement within Lot 3, Block 1 of Magnolia Trace Phase 1, an addition to the City of Mustang, Canadian County, Oklahoma, according to the recorded plat thereof. 
(a)  The Final Plat for Magnolia Trace Phase 1, an addition to the City of Mustang, was recorded on May 20, 2004, with the county clerk of Canadian County, State of Oklahoma (hereinafter, the "plat"). 
(b)  Pursuant to ordinances of the City of Mustang, and by operation of law, the plat dedicated to the City of Mustang, and the City of Mustang accepted the public dedication of, inter alia , a utility easement ranging in depth from 15 to approximately 60 feet along the south and southwestern edge of Lot 3, Block 1, Magnolia Trace Phase 1 (hereinafter, the "easement"), and more particularly described as follows: 
A tract of land lying in the Northeast Quarter (NE/4) of Section 29, Township 11 North, Range 5 West, I.M., same being a portion of Lot 3, Block 1, Magnolia Trace Phase 1, according to the records plat thereof, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
Commencing at the Western most corner of said Lot 3, Block 1; thence S35°26'02"E along the boundary line of said plat a distance of 75.20 feet to the point of beginning; thence, N33°08'26"E a distance of 58.31 feet; thence, S19°30'11"E a distance of 135.20 feet; thence, S86°48'07"E a distance of 164.79 feet; thence, S30°42'19"W a distance of 22.55 feet; thence, N86°48'07"W a distance of 160.37 feet; thence, N35°26'02"W a distance of 120.59 feet to the point of beginning. 
(c)  The owners of Lot 3, Block 1, Magnolia Trace Phase 1, intend to acquire adjacent property and expand their rear and side year, and request that the easement be vacated to accommodate the expansion of their yard. 
(d)  The City of Mustang does not currently occupy the easement for utility purposes, and has no future intentions to use the easement for the provision of utility services. Lot 3, Block 1, Magnolia Trace Phase 1 obtains utility service from a 70-foot utility easement along the Northwestern edge of that lot, and the area to the south and west of that lot is a private common area which does not require public services. The City of Mustang believes it to be necessary and expedient to, and hereby does, vacate the easement. 
(e)  At least 30 days' prior notice has been given by the city clerk to holders of franchises or others determined by the city council to have a special right or privilege to use the public way or easement, and to all owners of record, as shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer, abutting the public way or easement, and to owners of record of property within 300 feet of the subject property. 
(f)  The City of Mustang reserves the absolute right to reopen the easement without expense to the city, and this section shall not affect the right to maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate or remove utilities, public service corporations, franchise holders, or transmission company facilities or services therein, nor shall such closing affect private ways existing by operation of law. 
(g)  This section shall go into effect 30 days after its passage. 
(Ord. No. 1145, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
Sec. 90-7. - Vacation of easement east of and adjacent to Lot 8 of Mitchell Addition, an addition to the City of Mustang, Canadian County, Oklahoma, according to the recorded plat thereof. 
(a)  The final plat for Mitchell Addition, an addition to the City of Mustang, was recorded on April 28, 1962, with the county clerk of Canadian County, State of Oklahoma (hereinafter, the "plat"). 
(b)  Pursuant to ordinances of the City of Mustang, and by operation of law, the plat dedicated to the City of Mustang, and the City of Mustang accepted the public dedication of, inter alia , an easement for street purposes, which easement extends south of the terminus point of South Mitchell Lane, with a width of 60 feet and a length of approximately 299.5 feet along the east side of said Lot 8 (hereinafter, the "easement"), and more particularly described as follows: 
A tract of land being a part of Mitchell Addition, an addition to Mustang, Canadian County, Oklahoma, according to the recorded plat thereof, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the Northeast Corner of Lot 8, Mitchell Addition; thence N 89°58'39" E along a distance of 30.00 feet to the centerline of South Mitchell Lane said point being the point of beginning; thence, N 89°58'39" E along a distance of 30.00 feet to a point on the East line of the recorded plat of Mitchell Addition; thence, S 00°17'36" E along the East line of said recorded plat of Mitchell Addition, a distance of 299.52 feet to the Southeast corner of said recorded plat of Mitchell Addition; thence, N 90°00'00" W along the South line of said recorded plat of Mitchell Addition, a distance of 30.00 feet to a point on the centerline of South Mitchell Lane; thence, N 00°17'36" W along the centerline of South Mitchell Lane, a distance of 299.51 feet to the point of beginning. 
Said tract having an area of 8985.53 square feet, 0.206 acres, more or less. 
-and- 
A tract of land being a part of Mitchell Addition, an addition to Mustang, Canadian County, Oklahoma, according to the recorded plat thereof, being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the Northeast Corner of Lot 8, Mitchell Addition; thence N 89°58'39" E along a distance of 30.00 feet to the centerline of South Mitchell Lane; thence, S 00°17'36" E along the centerline of South Mitchell Lane, a distance of 299.51 feet to a point on the South line of said Mitchell Addition; thence, N 90°00'00" W along the South line of said Mitchell Addition, a distance of 30.00 feet to the Southeast corner of said Lot 8; thence, N 00°17'36" W along the East line of said Lot 8, a distance of 299.50 feet to the point of beginning. 
Said tract having an area of 8985.18 square feet, 0.206 acres, more or less. 
(c)  The South 299.50 feet of South Mitchell Lane has not been completed as a street, the City of Mustang does not currently occupy the easement for utility purposes, and has no future intentions to use the easement. The City of Mustang believes it to be necessary and expedient to, and hereby does, vacate the easement. 
(d)  At least 30 days' prior notice has been given by the city clerk to holders of franchises or others determined by the city council to have a special right or privilege to use the public way or easement, and to all owners of record, as shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer, abutting the public way or easement, and to owners of record of property within 300 feet of the easement. 
(e)  The City of Mustang reserves the absolute right to reopen the easement without expense to the city, and this section shall not affect the right to maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate or remove utilities, public service corporations, franchise holders, or transmission company facilities or services therein, nor shall such closing affect private ways existing by operation of law. 
(Ord. No. 1150, § 1, 8-1-2017)  
Secs. 90-8—90-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authority, § 2-221 et seq. 
State Law reference— Planning commissions, 11 O.S. § 45-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 90-31. - Established; membership. 
There is created a planning commission of the city. The commission shall be composed of seven members, all of whom shall be appointed by the governing body. Members may be removed by the governing body for the good of the service. At least one member shall be appointed from each ward, when possible, and one member at-large. Such members shall be recommended for appointment by the council member who represents the ward and appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council. The members of the commission shall be appointed solely with reference to their fitness and without reference to party affiliation and shall serve without compensation. Members shall hold office for terms of three years or until their successors take office. 
(Code 1977, § 2.44.010; Ord. No. 909, § 1, 7-20-2004) 
State Law reference— Planning commission authorized, 11 O.S. § 45-101; planning commission membership, 11 O.S. § 45-102.  
Sec. 90-32. - Quorum. 
Four members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; provided, however, that no action shall be taken which is binding upon the planning commission unless concurred in by not less than a majority of all members composing the planning commission. No action may be taken in the absence of a quorum, except to adjourn the meeting to a subsequent date. 
(Code 1977, § 2.44.020)  
Sec. 90-33. - Officers; rules of procedure; records. 
The planning commission shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary, and may create and fill such other offices as it deems necessary. The term of the chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and shall keep a record of its regulations, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 2.44.030)  
Sec. 90-34. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  General powers and duties. The planning commission shall from time to time prepare, amend, alter and extend plans for the betterment and enjoyment of residents of the city as a place of residence or for business and make such recommendations to the city council. It may consider and investigate any subject matter tending to the development and betterment of the city and make recommendations as it may deem advisable, concerning the adoption thereof, to the city council, and for any purpose make or cause to be made surveys, maps or plans. The planning commission shall have such other duties and powers as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Engagement and payment of staff and consultants. The planning commission shall have the power and authority to engage planners, engineers, attorneys and clerks and such other consultants deemed necessary, subject to approval of the city council, as the compensation of any planning commission consultants shall be fixed by the city council and shall be paid out of the city treasury. 
(c)  The comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan shall be developed and amended with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, including, among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other damages, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of healthful and convenient distribution of population, and the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, and wise and efficient expenditures of public funds. In the preparation and proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan, the planning commission shall make careful comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city, with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The planning commission shall make its recommendations for development or amendment of the comprehensive plan to the city council. 
(d)  Subdivision of land. The planning commission may prepare and recommend to the council for adoption of rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city. All plans, plats and replats of land laid out in two or more lots, plats or parcels, or streets, alleys or other ways intended to be dedicated to public use within the corporate limits of the city shall first be submitted to the planning commission for its recommendations. The planning commission shall, with the help of appropriate municipal officials, check the proposed dedications or subdivisions of land to ensure compliance with the rules and regulations governing subdivisions of land and with other elements of the comprehensive plan for the city. The disapproval of any such plan, plat or replat by the council shall be deemed a refusal of the dedications shown thereon. No plat or replat of subdivisions of land or dedication of streets or alleys or other easements shall be entitled to record unless it bears the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, certifying the approval and acceptance thereof by the council. 
(e)  Zoning commission. The planning commission shall also act as the zoning commission which shall have the power to prepare and to recommend to the council for adoption a zoning plan to regulate and restrict height, number of stories and the size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residences and other purposes. 
(f)  Conditional use permits. The planning commission shall have the power to review and make recommendation to the council on applications for conditional uses listed in sections 122-212, 122-241, 122-472 and 122-641 of the district regulations, utilizing the procedures set forth under section 122-57. 
(g)  Uniformity of regulations. The planning commission may recommend the division of the city into districts of such number, size and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the zoning plan. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of buildings throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts. 
(Code 1977, § 2.44.040; Ord. No. 1023, § 3, 6-16-2009) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of planning commission, 11 O.S. § 45-103 et seq.  
Chapter 94 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; planning, ch. 90; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102; subdivisions, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 122. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 94-1. - Title; purpose and intent of chapter. 
(a)  Title. This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Mustang Sign Code." 
(b)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish effective sign regulations which recognize the public as well as private interest and investment in the city's environment, and which regulate the number, size and location of signs, regulate signs as to the individual use, site and structure, prohibit unsafe signs, cause removal of abandoned and nonconforming signs, and promote and protect the health, safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of the city for its residents and the general public. 
(c)  Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to promote more effective signing practices which will be compatible with their surroundings and appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain, to encourage greater consideration of influencing factors and thoughtful design of signs, to promote economic and business development, to protect property values, to reduce distractions and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents, and to enhance and protect the physical appearance and natural beauty of the city. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14.02.10, 14.02.20)  
Sec. 94-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the display, construction, erection, alteration, use, location and maintenance of all signs within the city, including any sign erected or constructed prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.30)  
Sec. 94-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory sign means any advertising device which identifies or displays information concerning the proprietor of the business conducted on the premises. 
A-frame sign, sandwich sign and swinger sign mean an advertising device which is ordinarily in the shape of an "A," spring mounted on a fixed base or some variation thereof, located on the ground but not otherwise attached thereto, and which is usually two-sided. 
Aggregate use means a group of primary uses integrated in a single development not separated by an opened public street, under common ownership, and sharing private parking facilities and other services in common. 
Animation means any visible mechanical movement in any sign, or apparent movement achieved by electrical pulsations or by other means, such as sequential light phasing. 
Architectural projection means any projection, excluding signs, which is not intended for occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, including but not limited to roof overhangs, wing walls, mansards, unenclosed exterior balconies, marquees, canopies, pilasters, fascias and awnings. 
Attached sign means an accessory sign attached to, painted on or in any other way represented on a building or the structural elements of a building. Attached signs shall include canopy signs, combination signs, fascia signs, marquee signs, module signs, parapet wall signs, projecting signs, roof signs and wall signs. 
Awning means a movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and of a type which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building. 
Banner means any pennant, streamer, flag, sign, picture, figure or other object, regardless of the materials of which it is made, which is suspended or otherwise designed for decoration or advertisement, or to attract the attention of passersby; excepting, however, official warning devices, public service facilities, streetlights and similar safety devices. 
Billboard (including poster and panel types) means a non-accessory sign or sign structure upon which advertising may be posted, painted or affixed, and which is primarily designed for the rental or lease of the sign space for advertising not related to the use of the property upon which the sign is located. 
Building code means the latest building code as amended and adopted by the city. 
Canopy means a permanently roofed shelter covering over a sidewalk, service station, driveway or other similar area, which is supported by posts or by the building to which it is attached. 
Canopy sign means an attached accessory sign painted on or attached to the vertical side of, or erected on the roof surface of, a canopy. 
Chief building official means the person charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or his duly authorized representative. 
Combination sign means any single attached accessory sign incorporating any combination of the features of the projecting, parapet wall, canopy, marquee, wall and fascia signs. 
Decoration means an illustration, symbol, flag, streamer, bunting, wreath, figure, insignia or other device employed to express and illustrate a message of patriotic holiday or seasonal character. Decorations shall not be considered signs for the purpose of this chapter. 
Directional and information sign, accessory means signs which direct attention to the location of a facility or group of facilities on the same property on which the sign is located, or which display brand name information as provided in this definition. Such signs may include entrance and exit signs, restroom signs, handicapped parking signs, license or permit information signs, and other similar groups. This also shall include the following specific signs: telephone booth or service signs, brand names on petroleum products pumps or other dispensing apparatus located outside of a building, identification and informational signs on public utility apparatus, and U.S. Postal Service signs on postal apparatus. 
Display surface means the surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated. 
Display surface area means the net geometrical area enclosed by the display surface of the sign including the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characters and delineations; provided, however, that the display surface area shall not include the structural supports for freestanding signs if the structural supports are so arranged as not to become a part of the attention-attracting aspect of the sign. Unless specifically provided in this chapter, the display area to be computed shall be based on the following standards: 
(1)  For signs of irregular design, the display surface area shall be determined by computing the area formed by an envelope of rectangles and triangles which shall be formed by drawing straight lines which connect the adjacent extreme points of the display surface of adjacent panels, figures, characters or delineations. 
(2)  Where a sign has two faces which are joined in a "V" shape forming an angle not to exceed 60 degrees, or where such a sign contains three or more faces which are joined to form a polygon shape when viewed from above, the total display surface area of the sign may be increased by 150 percent of the allowable maximum as outlined in this chapter, provided that no one side of the sign exceeds 75 percent of the normal maximum size as set forth in this chapter. 
(3)  The maximum display surface area of a double-faced sign shall be calculated on the basis of only one sign face. 
(4)  The display surface area of a double-surface sign, when the two surfaces are more than 36 inches apart and not joined to form a "V," as permitted in subsection (2) of this definition, shall be computed by adding together the square footage of each display surface. 
(5)  The space between modules in a module sign shall not be counted. 
(6)  The display surface area of a fascia sign shall be calculated by adding together the individual display surface areas of the front and the larger side of the fascia sign. 
Double-faced sign means any sign which has two display surface faces, each of which is parallel to the other, and which are not more than 36 inches apart. 
Electric sign means any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated solely by exterior light sources such as floodlights. 
Electrical code means the electrical code as adopted by the city. 
Erect means to build, construct, place, locate, relocate or structurally alter any sign or other advertising device upon the site where it is to be utilized, whether permanent or temporary. 
Fascia means a continuous translucent panel illuminated from within which may extend around one or more corners, and which is attached to and designed as a part of a building. 
Fascia sign means a wall, canopy, marquee or parapet wall sign attached to or printed on a fascia surface. Unless specifically provided in this chapter, a fascia sign shall be subject to the standards covering the sign it represents. 
Flare means any torch, fuse, wick or other illuminating device utilizing open flames to attract attention to an establishment. 
Flashing sign means an illuminated sign on which the artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in light intensity as a part of the sign. 
Footlambert means the average brightness of any surface, or the uniform brightness of a perfectly diffusing surface, emitting or reflecting one lumen per square foot. Footlamberts are measured with an exposure meter equipped with a footlambert scale. 
Frontage, building means the horizontal lineal dimension of that side of a building which abuts a street, a parking area, a mall or other circulation area open to the general public, and having either a main window display of the enterprise or a public entrance to the building. In industrial districts, a building side with an entrance open to industrial employees shall also qualify as a building frontage. Where more than one use occupies a building, each such use having a public entrance or main window display for its exclusive use shall be considered to have its own building frontage, which shall be the front width of the portion of the building occupied by that use. 
Frontage, street means the lineal frontage (or frontages) of a lot or parcel abutting on a private or public street which provides principal access to, or visibility of, the premises. 
Grade level means the average level of the finished or natural surface of the ground area adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or adjacent to the supports of a sign structure. In this instance, adjacent shall be limited to a radius of 25 feet from the center of the sign structure. 
Ground sign means a freestanding accessory sign of limited height which is secured to a fixed base, usually at ground level or a slight elevation above ground, rather than being pole mounted. A sign attached to a wall or fence which serves as the boundary of a parcel shall be considered a ground sign. 
Height means the vertical distance measured from the elevation of the nearest sidewalk, or, in the absence of a sidewalk within 25 feet, then from the lowest point of the finished grade on the lot upon which the sign is located and within 25 feet of the sign, to the uppermost point on the sign or sign structure. 
Identification nameplate means an accessory sign as permitted in this chapter which is attached to and flat against the wall of a building or suspended from a canopy or marquee. 
Illuminated sign means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes, whether such sources of illumination are a part of the sign or not. 
Illumination, direct means illumination which is performed by electrical apparatus from within the sign structure or which is otherwise a part of the sign structure. 
Illumination, indirect means illumination which is performed by spotlights or other lighting devices and which is not a part of the sign proper. 
Marquee means a permanent fixed roof attached to, wholly supported by and projecting from a building. 
Marquee sign means an attached accessory sign painted on or attached to the vertical side of, or erected on the roof surface of, a marquee. 
Module means a separate unit of a sign which consists of an individual letter or an individual metal, plastic, masonry or wood unit upon which no more than one letter or message, as permitted in the definition of module sign, is mounted or printed. Modules shall be open on three sides or mounted on a building with no visible interconnections between modules. 
Module sign means an accessory sign other than an identification sign or identification nameplate which is formed of individual modules which spell out only the name or nature of a business or the occupant of the premises. A module sign shall be erected so that there is a space between modules, and no more than one module shall contain information relating to the use of the property other than spelling out the name of the business or occupant. This sign shall be governed by the regulations applicable to the type of accessory sign which the module sign represents. Any sign not meeting this definition shall be subject to the regular accessory sign regulations. 
Nonaccessory sign means a sign or advertising device which directs attention to an activity, service or product sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises on which the sign is located. 
Parapet wall sign means an attached accessory sign erected on the top surface of a parapet. 
Portable sign means a transportable sign more than six square feet in size designed for temporary use in compliance with the structural requirements of this chapter. 
Primary sign means the single dominant use of any piece of property or lot. 
Projecting sign means an attached accessory sign which projects from and which has one end attached to a building, and which does not employ ground support in any manner. 
Roof sign. 
(1)  Roof sign, type A means an attached accessory sign designed to permit, but not necessarily limited to, the erection of a shield, symbol or similar trademark or brand name. Such signs shall be located immediately and entirely over the roof of a building and attached to a wall or pylon or similar physical support that is part of the physical and architectural design of the building. This definition shall apply only to a building which is four stories or less in height. 
(2)  Roof sign, type B means an attached accessory sign erected on a vertical framework supported by and located immediately and entirely over the roof of a building which is five stories or more in height. 
Sight triangle means an area which is clear of all structures or other sight impediments formed by measuring back equal distances along two intersecting lines of street curblines, or driveway lines, a distance of 25 feet, and connecting these points to form a triangle. 
Sign means any structure or part thereof or any device permanently or temporarily attached to, painted on, supported by or represented on a building, fence, post or other structure which is used or intended to be used to attract attention. The term "sign" shall not include a flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, association of nations, state, city or other political unit. 
Sign location means the site where one or more freestanding sign structures may be erected. Where more than one structure is placed on either a permanent or temporary basis, there shall be no more than a 12-inch separation between structures at the same sign location. 
Stake sign means a commercial accessory sign that is less than six square feet in size and less than two and a half feet in height. Such sign shall be constructed of plastic, cardboard, wood, metal, wallboard or other light material which is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. Such sign shall be affixed to a stake or other light frame and shall not be electric. 
Structure means anything built or constructed, whether or not permanently attached to the ground. 
Temporary sign means any sign or advertising device over six square feet in size constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, portable cardboard, wood, wallboard, metal or other light materials, with or without frames, which is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only, and is portable. 
Wall sign means an attached accessory sign painted on or attached to the wall or surface of a building or display surface, which is parallel to the supporting surface. A sign attached to a wall or fence located on the boundary of a parcel shall be regulated as a ground sign. 
Window sign means any accessory sign painted on the surface of, located on the interior of, or flashing through a display window. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14.04.20—14.04.540; Ord. No. 882, § 1, 2-17-2004; Ord. No. 883, § 1, 2-17-2004; Ord. No. 884, § 1, 2-17-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-4. - Penalty. 
A person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a sign in violation thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-8. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.210)  
Sec. 94-5. - Exemptions. 
Except as specifically provided, the following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. All of the following signs shall be securely attached to a structure or to stakes or posts that are firmly embedded in the ground. They shall not be illuminated. 
(1)  Real estate signs, residential. 
a.  Such signs shall advertise only the sale or lease of the premises on which the sign is placed. 
b.  Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet of display surface area and four feet in height. 
c.  One sign is permitted per street frontage. 
d.  Such signs shall be removed within 14 days of the sale, lease or rental of the property. 
e.  In the case of a special event such as an annual or semiannual Parade of Homes or a neighborhood association or civic organization housing tour, a single sign for the event may be placed on a property included in the event, provided the sign shall not exceed 30 square feet of display surface area and shall not remain on the property longer than 21 days. 
(2)  Real estate signs, commercial or industrial. 
a.  Such signs shall advertise only the sale or lease of the premises on which the sign is placed. 
b.  Such signs shall not exceed 60 square feet of display surface area and 14 feet in height. 
c.  Such signs shall be limited to property zoned for office, commercial or industrial districts, provided that property in the A-1 district may be advertised for commercial use if the sign shall have placed on it letters at least six inches in height which state "PRESENTLY ZONED A-1." 
d.  One sign is permitted per street frontage. 
e.  Such signs shall be removed within 14 days of the sale, lease or rental of the property. 
(3)  Temporary subdivision signs. 
a.  Such signs shall be placed behind all platted setback lines. 
b.  Such signs shall only advertise the sale or lease of property within the development on which the sign is placed. 
c.  Such signs shall have a separation of at least 400 feet from another sign for the same subdivision. 
d.  Such signs shall have a maximum display surface area of 250 square feet and a maximum height of 14 feet. 
e.  Such signs may have indirect illumination from a source other than a residential structure. 
f.  Such signs shall be removed upon sale by the developer of all lots and/or residences in the subdivision. 
(4)  Construction signs for commercial projects, industrial projects, apartments and similar large projects. 
a.  One sign is permitted per frontage per contractor, development company or financing institution participating in the construction. Subcontractors shall be identified on the sign of the contractor. 
b.  The permitted size for all such signs shall be based on two square feet of display surface area for each lineal foot of frontage up to a maximum of 500 total square feet for all signs. 
c.  Such signs may have indirect illumination. 
d.  Such signs shall be removed within ten days of completion of construction. 
(5)  Construction signs, one- through four-family residential. 
a.  One sign is permitted per frontage per contractor. 
b.  Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet of display surface area for the builder or principal contractor and four square feet for each subcontractor. 
c.  Such signs shall be removed within ten days of completion of construction. 
(6)  Noncommercial expressive signs, residential. Noncommercial expressive signs limited to two signs per frontage with an aggregate of eight square feet of display surface area per frontage shall be permitted in residential areas. 
(7)  Accessory directional and information signs. 
a.  Such signs shall include signs directing traffic movement into the premises or within the premises. 
b.  Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in area per sign. 
c.  Illumination of such sign shall be permitted in accordance with the building code and the zoning district regulations for the district in which the premises are located, provided that no flashing lights shall be permitted. 
d.  Horizontal directional signs painted on or installed flush with paved streets shall not be subject to the size regulations of this subsection. 
e.  The use of such signs is prohibited except where needed for the safe and efficient movement of traffic and provision of information as provided in the definition in section 94-1. 
(8)  Decorations, insignias and flags. The following are permitted: 
a.  Seasonal decorations. Decorations pertaining to recognized national, state and local holidays and observances, provided that such decorations shall not be erected earlier than six weeks prior to the holiday or observance and shall be removed no later than two weeks after the holiday. 
b.  Insignias, flags and banners. Such insignias, flags, banners and emblems of the United States, the State of Oklahoma and municipal and other bodies of established government, or flags which display the recognized symbol of a nonprofit and/or noncommercial organization. 
c.  Seasonal signs by churches and other nonprofit organizations. Decorations and signs pertaining to holidays and observances, provided that decorations and signs shall not be erected earlier than six weeks prior to the holiday or observance and shall be removed one week after the holiday or observance, provided only two signs shall be permitted per frontage with a maximum surface area of 24 square feet and height no greater than four feet and shall not be placed in any right-of-way. 
(9)  Public signs. This chapter shall not apply to signs erected by the city, county, state or federal government for traffic direction or street identification. 
(10)  Certain wall signs. Memorial signs on tablets, containing names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials, shall be exempt from this chapter. 
(11)  Accessory signs within structure. There shall be no restrictions on placement of signs within a structure where they cannot be viewed from any point outside the structure, for example, in a shopping center mall. However, all signs so constructed shall require appropriate building and electrical permits. 
(12)  Public utility signs. Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utility companies or construction companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions, including signs indicating the presence of underground cables, gas lines and similar devices, shall be exempt from this chapter. 
(13)  Political signs. Political signs may be erected at any occupancy or upon any premises, provided such signs comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter. These signs shall not be placed in any right-of-way, and shall only be placed on property for which permission from the owner has been obtained. Political signs shall be permitted for a period of 30 days prior to any primary or general election and shall be removed within three days after the election. 
(14)  Stake signs. Stake signs may be up to two and a half feet in height with a maximum area of six square feet. Stake signs are prohibited in the right-of-way and must have a 50-foot setback away from intersecting curb lines. Signs must be spaced 50 feet apart. Stake signs may be placed on private property only. Such signs shall be permitted as advertisements for only the property owner of the property on which they are placed. 
(15)  [Weatherproof banners.] Weatherproof banners in commercial and industrial zoning districts that meet the following conditions: 
a.  The weatherproof banner must also be an accessory sign; 
b.  Display surface area is limited to a cumulative total of one square foot per ten lineal feet of street frontage per right-of-way or 32 square feet, whichever is greater. 
c.  Any form of encroachment in the following areas is prohibited: 
1.  Public or private rights-of-way; 
2.  Sight triangles for street intersections or driveways; 
3.  Utility easements; 
4.  Parking required by the zoning district; 
5.  Landscaping required by the zoning district. 
d.  Sign contains no animation and conforms with subsections 94-155(a)—(c) of this chapter. 
e.  A minimum of 45 feet of separation is maintained between other signs exempt by this section located on the same tract. 
f.  Cannot block the view of landscaping or fencing required by the zoning district. 
g.  Freestanding banners may not exceed 8 feet above adjacent grade. Banners attached to fencing, canopies, buildings or other structures may not exceed the height of the structure they are attached to. 
h.  Must be properly maintained in good condition and be completely legible at all times. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.230; Ord. No. 839, § 1, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 885, § 1, 2-17-2004; Ord. No. 886, § 1, 2-17-2004; Ord. No. 1078, § 1, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 94-6. - Tables, forms and examples. 
The following is a design table for the construction of symmetrically loaded signs: 
A × H = Area of sign in square feet (A) times height from ground to area centroid of sign in feet (H). (See note below for height to area centroid.) 
Required 
Pole 
Size 	If A × H in cubic feet is not greater 
	Use 
Standard 
Weight 
Pipe 	Use 
Extra 
Weight 
Pipe 
One 3 inches 	   140 	   181 
One 4 inches 	   262 	   348 
One 5 inches 	   444 	   605 
One 6 inches 	   692 	   995 
One 8 inches 	 1,369 	 1,997 
One 10 inches 	 2,436 	 3,212 
One 12 inches 	 3,568 	 4,619 
One 14 inches 	 5,244 	 6,651 
Two 3 inches 	   281 	   363 
Two 4 inches 	   524 	   696 
Two 5 inches 	   888 	 1,211 
Two 6 inches 	 1,385 	 1,991 
Two 8 inches 	 2,739 	 3,993 
Two 10 inches 	 4,871 	 6,424 
Two 12 inches 	 7,136 	 9,238 
Two 14 inches 	10,489 	13,302 
 
Based on using A-36 and A-53 grade B steel and a 33 percent allowable overstress of steel or 29,326 p.s.i. 
The area centroid of a rectangular sign is the mid-point of the sign. The area centroid of an irregularly shaped sign must be calculated. 
Formula: Section modulus required equals the area of sign in square feet from ground to area centroid of sign in feet times 30 pounds per square foot wind load times 12 inches per foot divided steel in p.s.i. 
SM Required = A x H x 30 x 12 / 29,326  
EXAMPLE—WILD STRESS CALCULATIONS 
Area of Sign = 72.0 sq. ft. 
Centroid Height = 21 ft. 
Formula: A x H x 30 x 12 / 29,326 = 54,432 / 1,856 
Section Modulus Required @ 1,856 
SM Furnished One 10? Std Wall Pipe @ 2,436 as per design table. 
Three copies of each of the following must be submitted: 
(1)  Plot Plan: 
Plot plans shall be drawn to scale showing the location of all property lines, right-of-way, all existing buildings and structures and the location of the proposed sign showing the distance from lot lines and structures. 
(2)  Elevations: 
Elevations shall be drawn to scale showing the entire display area. 
(3)  Stress Calculations: 
Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
I hereby certify that the statements in this application and the attachments hereto are true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief, and that all construction work under this proposed permit will conform to the attached plans, specifications and drawings and the current ordinances of the city, as amended. 
Date _____ Applicant's Name _____ 
Address _____ Phone _____ 
By: _____ 
_____
TITLE 
Approved: ________, 20___ 
Denied: ________, 20___ 
Reasons: _____ 
_____
_____
Permit Fee _____ 
All illuminated signs shall be subject to the National Electrical Code and the permit fees required thereof. 
CITY OF MUSTANG 
APPLICATION FOR SIGN PERMIT 
I, (we) submit herewith the required plans, specifications and drawings for and request for sign permit for the work described below. I, (we) hereby agree to comply with all building, health, fire, traffic, engineering and zoning requirements of the City of Mustang, whether herein specified or not. 
Job Address Information 
Address of Sign _____ 
Lot _____ Block _____ Addition _____ 
Metes and Bound description - should be attached 
Owner Information 
Name _____ Home Phone _____ 
Street Address _____ 
City _____ State _____ Zip _____ 
Business Phone _____ 
Builder/Contractor/Application Information 
Name _____ 
Address _____ 
City _____ State _____ Zip _____ 
Business Phone _____ 
Permit Information 
? Residential       ? Commercial 
? Erect       ? Alter       ? Relocate 
? Illuminated nonflashing ? Illuminated flashing 
? Nonilluminated 
Type of Sign _____ 
Estimated Cost _____ 
Square Feet _____ Height _____ 
Zoning District _____ 
CITY OF MUSTANG 
SIGN PERMIT 
Date ________ 
Applicant _____ 
Address _____ Phone _____ 
Owner Erecting Sign _____ 
Zoning on Property _____ Setback _____ 
Legal Description Lot _____ Block _____ 
Addition _____ 
_____
_____
_____
Location of Sign _____ 
Type and Size of Sign _____ 
Wind Stress Calculations Submitted _____ 
FEES 
Sign Permit Fee _____ 
TOTAL FEE $_____ 
Having made the required application and paid the above fee, authority is hereby granted to erect the above type and size sign at the location indicated above, and in conformity with the applicable provision of Title 14, Sign Code. If electrical is required a separate electrical permit must be secured. 
Signed: 	_____
Applicant 	Signed: 	_____
Building/Construction Officer 
 
(Code 1977, § 14.08.080)  
Secs. 94-7—94-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 94-31. - Enforcement generally. 
(a)  The chief building official or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter. He shall appear for and on behalf of the city in all matters regarding the interpretation and application of this chapter, and shall resist and oppose any deviations from the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon presentation of proper credentials, the chief building official or his authorized designee may enter at reasonable times any building, structure or premises usually open to the public in the city, to perform any duty imposed upon him by this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.200)  
Sec. 94-32. - Inspections. 
The chief building official or his official designee shall inspect, at such time as he deems necessary, each sign regulated by this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.120)  
Sec. 94-33. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Impoundment without notice. Sign impoundment without notice is authorized. Any sign situated in the right-of-way of a public street or in a required sight triangle, or an unanchored sign, or one which has been damaged by a storm or collision in such a manner that its presence constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public, is hereby declared a public nuisance endangering public safety, and it may be impounded by the chief building official or any police officer of the city. If impounded, a reasonable effort shall be made to determine the identity of the sign owner for purposes of notification. If a sign contains ownership information as required by this chapter, the chief building official shall provide mailed notice that the sign has been impounded within two working days of the action. 
(b)  Impoundment with notice. As provided in this subsection, signs may be impounded on three days' written notice of violation being given to any of the following: the property owner, the sign contractor or the business identified on the sign advertising copy. Attachment of a tag to the sign citing the nature of the violation shall constitute sufficient notice if none of these methods are available. The following signs are subject to being impounded: 
(1)  A sign placed on private property without the owner's consent. 
(2)  A sign placed without a permit, except as exempted by section 94-5. 
(c)  Disposition of impounded signs; redemption by owner. All impounded signs shall be stored and, upon proper identification thereof by the owner, may be redeemed upon the payment of a reasonable charge as set forth in section 42-94, which is incurred by the city for removal, transportation, storage, safeguarding, accounting and bookkeeping resulting from the impoundment. All signs which are not redeemed shall be subject to disposal in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed property after a 30-day holding period. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.190)  
Sec. 94-34. - Notice of violation; hearing; order to correct violation. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the chief building official determines that violations of pertinent regulations exist under this chapter, he shall notify the licensee or permittee of such alleged violation. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other pertinent regulations; 
(4)  Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed seven working days, for the performance of any act it requires; and 
(5)  Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require, provided that such notice or order shall be deemed as properly served upon the owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by certified mail to his last known address. 
(b)  Request for hearing. Any person affected by a notice issued under this chapter or resulting regulations may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of adjustment, provided that such person shall file with the chief building official a written request for such hearing setting forth briefly the grounds for such request within ten days after the day the notice was served. The filing of such request shall stay the notice of suspension of permits and licenses except in cases of orders issued under subsection (e) of this section. The hearing shall be held at the next board of adjustment meeting for which the agenda has not been completed, or at a later meeting if so requested by the petitioner, should the chief building official determine that sufficient cause for such delay exists. 
(c)  Order by building official. After such hearing, the chief building official shall compile the findings of the board of adjustment as to compliance with this chapter and pursuant regulations and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the prior notice, which shall be served as provided in subsection (a)(5) of this section. Upon failure to comply with such order, the permit of the sign or sign company shall be revoked. 
(d)  Appeals. Appeals from decisions of the board of adjustment shall be to the city council. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may seek relief in district court. 
(e)  Emergencies. Whenever the chief building official finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the city council shall be afforded a hearing at the next regular meeting, even if the agenda has been completed. The provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.220)  
Secs. 94-35—94-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
Sec. 94-51. - Continuation of legal nonconforming signs. 
Any sign located within the city on October 16, 1984, or located in an area annexed to the city after such date, which does not conform with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as a legal nonconforming sign and is permitted, provided that the sign was in all respects in compliance with applicable law on October 16, 1984. If such sign is not in conformance with the existing law such sign must be brought into conformance or removed according to the procedures established in this chapter. Such sign shall be maintained in a good condition and shall be allowed to remain in existence so long as, and only so long as, such sign is not: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming sign; 
(2)  Structurally altered, except to meet safety requirements, so as to prolong the life of the sign; 
(3)  Expanded; 
(4)  Reestablished after its discontinuance for 90 days; 
(5)  Continued in use after cessation or change of ownership of the business or activity to which the sign pertains; or 
(6)  Reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the appraised replacement cost, as determined by the chief building official. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.160)  
Sec. 94-52. - Removal or alteration of prohibited signs. 
Any nonconforming sign which is listed as a prohibited sign shall be removed or brought into conformance with the provisions of this chapter according to the following schedule: Within six months after October 16, 1984, any sign in these categories which is in existence on such date shall be altered in such a manner that its movement or illumination does not continue operating in a prohibited manner. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.170)  
Sec. 94-53. - Removal of nonconforming portable or temporary signs. 
Any nonconforming sign erected or displayed more than 90 days prior to October 16, 1984, which is defined as a portable or temporary sign under this chapter shall be removed. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.180)  
Sec. 94-54. - Removal or restoration of obsolete signs. 
Any sign which the chief building official determines no longer serves a bona fide enterprise shall be removed or restored to a serviceable condition by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the land, buildings or structure upon which such sign is located within 15 days after written notification to do so from the chief building official or his designee. Upon failure to comply with such notice, the chief building official is hereby authorized to cause the removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the land, building or structure to which such sign is attached or upon which it is erected. 
(Ord. No. 887, § 1, 2-17-2004)  
Sec. 94-55. - Conversion of nonconforming signs. 
Existing nonconforming billboards may convert to multiple message or electronic signage, subject to the following: 
(1)  The billboard to be converted must be more than 300 feet from any residential zoning district. In measuring the distance from any residential district, the distance shall be measured as follows: 
a.  If the billboard is single sided, the distance shall be measured outward from the lighted side of the billboard and in a 180-degree arc on a plane with such lighted side, with the center of the arc being the billboard support structure that is closest to any residential district. 
b.  If the billboard is double-sided, the distance shall be measured outward in all directions, measured from the billboard support structure that is closest to any residential district. 
(2)  The electronic signage may be no taller or wider, or contain more square footage of display area, than the signage it is replacing. 
(3)  There shall be no structural change to the existing billboard to prolong its life; provided, minimal alteration to allow erection of the electronic signage will be permitted. Proposed changes to an existing nonconforming billboard must be set forth on detailed plans that bear the original seal of a professional structural engineer licensed to practice in Oklahoma and submitted to the traffic commission for approval prior to permitting. 
(4)  Electronic signage must comply with existing sign ordinances of the City of Mustang. Signs which include the steady illumination of sign faces, panels or slats that rotate to different messages in a fixed position, commonly known as tri-vision faces or multiple message signs shall be allowed; provided, the rotation of one sign face to another is no more frequent than every ten seconds and the actual rotation process is accomplished in four seconds or less. Some LED or other electronic type displays may be used under these guidelines, however, moving or flashing lights are strictly prohibited. Change from one panel to another must be accomplished with static displays only. Scrolling or fading from one display to the next is not allowed. 
(5)  Signs which contain, include, have attached or are illuminated by any flashing, blinking, intermittent or moving lights, or lights which involve any moving parts, or which fade, scroll, or have animation are prohibited. 
(6)  Signs which are not effectively shielded as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way of any street or highway and are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interferes with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle, are prohibited. 
(7)  Signs which are so illuminated that it interferes or potentially interferes with the effectiveness of, or obscures, any official traffic sign, signal or device, or imitates or may be confused with any such official traffic sign, signal or device, are prohibited. 
(8)  No person may upgrade an existing nonconforming billboard to an electronic or multiple message sign without first obtaining a billboard conversion permit from the city council approving of the proposed upgrade and the design and placement thereof prior to actual changes being made. 
a.  An application for a billboard conversion permit shall be submitted in writing, providing the location of the existing billboard, the type of technology intended to be used, the design and placement of the billboard and conversion features, and providing such other information as requested by the community development director and required by this section. The application shall be accompanied by a fee calculated in accordance with the permitting fee for signs set forth in this chapter. 
b.  Every application for conversion of an existing billboard to an electronic or multiple message sign shall be referred by the council to the traffic commission for a report and recommendation to the city council prior to action. It is the intent of the city council to vote upon applications for billboard conversion permits within 90 days of the filing of same by applicants. 
c.  Changes made in compliance with this section and subsequent to approval of the city council shall not constitute a prohibited change or structural alteration within the meaning of section 94-51 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 1104, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Secs. 94-56—94-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 94-71. - Required; alteration of permit conditions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to display, erect, relocate or alter any sign without first filing with the community development department an application in writing and obtaining a sign permit. 
(b)  When a sign permit has been issued by the chief building official, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of the permit without prior approval of the chief building official. A written record of such approval shall be entered upon the original permit application and maintained in the files of the building/construction officer. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.40)  
Sec. 94-72. - Submission of plans and specifications. 
(a)  The application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the following plans and other information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner or person entitled to possession of the sign and the sign contractor or erector. 
(2)  The location, by street address and legal description, of the site of the proposed sign structure. 
(3)  Complete information as required on the application forms provided by the community development department, including a site plan and elevation drawings of the proposed sign, the caption of the proposed sign and such other data as is pertinent to the application. 
(4)  Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be done, including details of all connections, guy lines, supports and footings, and material to be used. 
(5)  Application for, and required information for such application, an electrical permit for all electric signs if the person building the sign is to make the electrical connection. 
(6)  Wind stress calculations as per the design table for the construction of symmetrically loaded signs, as an attachment to the sign application. Wind stress calculations shall meet the structural requirements of an 80 mile per hour wind as certified by a registered professional in the field or the calculations as shown on the design tables in such table. 
(7)  A statement of valuation. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be erected. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.240(C)(1))  
Sec. 94-73. - Application. 
The application for a sign permit shall be made by the owner or a sign contractor licensed by the city. Such application shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the community development department and shall be signed by the applicant. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.50)  
Sec. 94-74. - Identification on signs. 
Every sign for which a permit has been issued and hereafter erected, constructed or maintained shall be plainly marked with the name of the person owning, erecting, maintaining or operating such sign. The method and location of this identification shall appear on the plans and within the specifications filed with the building official. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14.02.140, 14.02.240(C)(2))  
Sec. 94-75. - Revocation. 
If the chief building official finds that work under any permit issued under this division is not in accordance with the information supplied in the permit application and/or is in violation of this chapter or any other pertinent provisions of this Code, or should he find that there has been any misrepresentation in connection with the application for the permit, he shall notify the owner or sign contractor of such findings and that the violation must be corrected without delay. If such correction is not made, the chief building official shall revoke the permit and serve written notice by mail thereof upon the owner or sign contractor. No person shall proceed with any part of such work after such notice is received. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.60)  
Sec. 94-76. - Forfeiture of fee. 
When any permit has been revoked under the terms of section 94-75, permit fees shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.70)  
Sec. 94-77. - Amount of fee. 
A permit fee shall be paid to the city for each sign permit issued under this division; provided, however, that a fee shall not be charged for copy changes when no change in business is involved. The permit fee shall be in accordance with the schedule in section 42-94. The fees specified in this section do not include electrical permit fees, which shall be in addition to the sign permit fee. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.90)  
Secs. 94-78—94-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONTRACTORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 94-101—94-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 94-121. - Required; issuance; fee; expiration. 
No person except a licensed sign contractor shall engage in the business of manufacturing, installing, erecting, repairing, painting, altering, servicing or removing signs requiring permits as provided in this chapter. A sign contractor's license may be obtained from the office of the city clerk upon presentation of satisfactory evidence of qualifications from the chief building official and payment of a license fee as set forth in section 42-94. Such license shall expire on October 31 following the date of issuance, and no reduction in fees for a partial year shall be given. Employees of duly licensed sign contractors shall not be required in the regular course of such employment to obtain such license or pay such fee in order to engage in the work of manufacturing, installing, erecting, repairing, painting, altering, servicing or removing signs. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.100)  
Sec. 94-122. - Bond and insurance. 
(a)  No sign contractor's license shall be issued to any applicant until the applicant therefor shall have deposited with the city clerk a surety bond with a power of attorney, in the sum of $1,000.00, to be known as the sign contractor's bond. Such bond shall be executed by the sign contractor, and the surety thereon shall be a corporate surety company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall be payable to the city, and as a condition shall state that the licensee shall faithfully and properly conduct his business in compliance with all the ordinances of the city relating to signs and sign contractors; and the bond shall be conditioned for the payment of all fines and penalties imposed for the violation of such laws, and for the protection and indemnification of the city against all damages resulting directly or indirectly from any injury to person or property on account of negligence or unskilled work of the licensee. 
(b)  The sign company is also required to show proof of workers' compensation insurance and general liability insurance coverage, and copies of such documents shall be attached to the contractor's bond. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.110)  
Sec. 94-123. - Revocation. 
The city council shall have the right to revoke the license of any sign contractor for a violation of any of the city ordinances relating to signs. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.130)  
Sec. 94-124. - Transfer; allowing use by other person. 
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a sign contractor's license to transfer the license or allow the use of the license, directly or indirectly, by any other person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any of the sign work specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.150)  
Secs. 94-125—94-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 94-151. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  Unless specifically permitted in another section of this chapter, no sign shall be erected on or over the public right-of-way. Merchandise such as tires, produce, automotive vehicles and any other articles for display or sale shall not be located in any manner in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Where a parcel is occupied by a use or structure which does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which the parcel is located, no sign shall be erected on the parcel until the use is changed to become conforming. 
(c)  The use of any boulevards, streets, ways, terraces, drives and lanes, or park roads or parks, under the control of the city for any political, social, civic or charitable non-accessory advertising purpose within full view of those traveling on a public road is prohibited; provided that government use of these areas to display public information, for the placement of decorations, or for the placement of neighborhood identification signs as authorized by section 94-162 shall not be included in this restriction. 
(d)  The painting, scattering, posting or spreading in any manner along any public right-of-way or public property of any signs, bills, wastepaper, paper, cloth or other materials used in advertising is prohibited. This prohibition shall include the posting of such materials on any utility pole or device. 
(e)  No person shall permit the manufacturing, installing, erecting or displaying of any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
(f)  A-frame signs, sandwich signs and swinger signs are prohibited. 
(g)  The erection, construction or maintenance of any sign which will obstruct any fire escape, stairway or standpipe, or which will be attached to or supported by a fire escape or stairway, or which will interfere with human exit through any emergency opening, or which will obstruct the exterior door or required exit of any building, or which will obstruct any legally required light or ventilation, is prohibited. 
(h)  No sign shall occupy any parking space required under the minimum standards of the zoning ordinance (chapter 122), unless additional parking is provided. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.240(A))  
Sec. 94-152. - Signs on vehicles. 
(a)  Signs shall be permitted to be painted or directly attached to a commercial vehicle, provided the sign identifies the business for which the vehicle is operated. 
(b)  No trailer or vehicle larger than a 1½-ton capacity van or pickup truck shall be parked on the street side of a business property for purposes other than immediate loading or unloading. 
(c)  Use of a message painted on or affixed to trucks or semitrailers as an advertising device shall be prohibited unless the vehicles are parked in a defined storage area as permitted by the zoning ordinance (chapter 122). 
(d)  No portable, A-frame, sandwich, swinger or similar sign shall be mounted on a vehicle for purposes of advertising. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.240(B))  
Sec. 94-153. - Alteration or relocation of signs. 
A sign shall not be enlarged or relocated except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for new signs, or until a proper permit has been secured. The changing of movable parts of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or for the repainting or re-posting of display matter, shall not be deemed an alteration, provided the conditions of the original approval and the requirements of this chapter are not violated. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.240(C)(3))  
Sec. 94-154. - Responsibility for maintenance. 
The owner of any property on which a sign is located and those responsible for maintenance of the sign shall be equally responsible for the conditions of the area in the vicinity of the sign and shall be required to keep this area clean, sanitary, and free from noxious or offensive substances, rubbish and flammable waste materials. 
(Code 1977, § 14.02.240(C)(4))  
Sec. 94-155. - Flashing, moving and sound-emitting signs. 
(a)  No sign or part of a sign shall move or be permitted to move, with the exception of movable and flashing signs as permitted in this chapter. 
(b)  No sign shall emit any sound which is designed to attract attention. 
(c)  No strobe or high-intensity flashing lights shall be permitted, except where required on structures for aircraft warning lights. 
(d)  No flashing signs or lights on a sign used in a flashing manner shall be permitted unless approved by the city staff. The city staff shall use the following criteria: 
(1)  The sign shall not be located within 150 feet of a residential district if such lighting can be seen from the residential district; 
(2)  If the sign is an attached sign, it shall have a setback sufficient to avoid any traffic conflicts; and 
(3)  If the sign is a freestanding sign, it must be set back from the street a distance adequate to avoid traffic conflicts, and shall use lights of a color or combination of colors which will not be confused with emergency or service vehicles and equipment. 
(e)  The color of all flashing signs or lights on a sign used in a flashing manner shall be approved by the city staff. 
(f)  The city staff shall review all applications for the placement of flashing, rotating and moveable signs, including time-temperature and moving message signs, in authorized zoning districts, to protect against traffic hazards, subject to the standards listed in this section. The city staff shall review any complaint by the public or a public official in reference to a possible traffic hazard caused by any sign. Where a hazard is determined to exist, the staff shall, by written report to the city manager, request that the sign be removed or altered. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14.06.010—14.06.030) 
State Law reference— Flashing signs and signs resembling traffic signs, 47 O.S. § 11-206.  
Sec. 94-156. - Canopy signs, marquee signs, parapet wall signs, projecting signs, combination signs and wall signs. 
(a)  Size. Canopy signs, marquee signs, parapet wall signs, projecting signs, combination signs and wall signs located in commercial zoning districts shall not exceed 100 square feet. 
(b)  Clearance. The clearance above ground for these signs shall be not less than nine feet, or 14 feet if there will be vehicular access below them. Where there is no pedestrian access below a wall sign, there shall be no clearance requirement. 
(c)  Location. 
(1)  Regardless of building setback requirements, a canopy, marquee, parapet wall, projecting or combination sign may project from the supporting surface to a distance not to exceed ten feet or to within two feet of the nearest property line, whichever is the least. No such sign shall extend between the ground surface and the bottom level of the canopy or marquee to which the sign is attached, except as provided for identification nameplates in this chapter. 
(2)  A wall sign may extend from the wall as follows: 
a.  Where the bottom of the sign is less than 14 feet above the level of the ground below it, the sign may extend 12 inches from the wall; 
b.  Where the bottom of the sign is more than 14 feet above the level of the ground below it, the sign may extend 24 inches from the wall; and 
c.  No sign shall be wider than the surface to which it is affixed, except for a fascia sign. 
(d)  Exemption for certain wall signs, cornerstones and tablets. Memorial signs on tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface, or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material, shall be exempt from these regulations. 
(e)  Accessory signs within structure. There shall be no restrictions on placement of signs within a structure where they cannot be viewed from any point outside the structure, for example in a shopping center mall. However, all signs so constructed shall require appropriate building and electrical permits. 
(Code 1977, § 14.08.010)  
Sec. 94-157. - Agricultural, residential and mobile home zoning districts. 
The following shall apply in agricultural, residential and mobile home zoning districts: 
(1)  No accessory sign shall be permitted for single-family through four-family uses, except for the temporary signs authorized in section 94-5. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential uses shall be permitted either one ground sign or one attached sign as follows: 
a.  Five to 12 units: One sign, not to exceed eight square feet. 
b.  Thirteen to 29 units: One sign, not to exceed 20 square feet. 
c.  Thirty or more units: One sign per street frontage. Permitted size shall be one square foot of display surface area for each three lineal feet of frontage, except that, where street frontage is not available, then the sign footage will be based upon the number of units, up to a maximum of 100 square feet. 
(3)  Subdivisions or residential developments of five acres or larger shall be permitted one ground sign per entry street. The sign shall be nonilluminated, shall not exceed 18 square feet in area and six feet in height, and shall contain only the name of the subdivision or the street. 
(4)  The following standards shall apply to nonresidential permitted uses and uses permitted on review and special exception uses in agricultural, residential and mobile home zoning districts. They shall also apply to mobile home parks and subdivisions permitted under the R-MH-1 and R-MH-2 district regulations of the zoning ordinance (chapter 122): 
a.  Number: One per street frontage. 
b.  Type: Ground sign or attached sign. 
c.  Size: One square foot of display surface area for every three lineal feet of frontage, up to a maximum of 100 square feet. 
d.  Illumination: Indirect lighting or interior lighting behind a translucent panel. No flashing or intermittent lighting shall be permitted in these districts. 
(5)  Maximum height. 
a.  The maximum height for a ground sign is 20 feet above grade level. 
b.  The height of an attached sign shall not exceed the height of the surface to which it is attached. 
(6)  Setback. All permitted freestanding signs shall observe sight triangles of 25 feet from all street curblines and driveways. 
(7)  Installation by other than licensed sign contractor. In these zoning districts, nonilluminated signs and/or signs not affected by building code structural requirements may be installed by other than a licensed sign contractor, provided a permit is issued after application and review for conformance to all applicable regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 14.08.020)  
Sec. 94-158. - OPB and CN zoning districts. 
The following standards shall apply in OPB and CN zoning districts: 
(1)  No accessory sign shall be permitted for single-family through four-family uses, except for the temporary signs authorized in section 94-5. 
(2)  Signs for permitted multiple-family residential uses shall be subject to the standards for residential districts in section 94-157. 
(3)  Uses permitted in the OPB and CN districts shall be permitted signs as follows: 
a.  Number. One ground sign location and attached sign per street frontage is permitted. The attached sign can be split into two signs, but cannot exceed the maximum square footage. In the case of multiple occupants, one attached sign shall be permitted for each occupant, provided the total display surface area of all signs does not exceed the maximum permitted total. 
b.  Size. Size restrictions are as follows: 
1.  Ground sign: One square foot of display surface area for each two lineal feet of frontage, not to exceed 150 square feet; or 
2.  Attached signs: One square foot of display surface area for each two lineal feet of building width, not to exceed a total of 150 square feet. An attached sign can be two signs, but the total of both signs cannot exceed the maximum square footage. 
c.  Maximum height. 
1.  Maximum height of ground signs is 20 feet above grade level. 
2.  Attached signs: 
i.  The height of a wall sign shall not exceed the height of the structure to which it is attached. 
ii.  The height of all other signs shall not exceed six feet above the structure to which the sign is attached. 
d.  Illumination. Indirect lighting or interior lighting behind a translucent panel is permitted. No flashing or intermittent lighting shall be permitted in these districts. 
e.  Setback. All permitted freestanding signs shall observe sight triangles of 25 feet from all street curbs or driveways. 
f.  Installation by other than licensed sign contractor. In these zoning districts, nonilluminated signs and/or signs not affected by building code structural requirements may be installed by other than a licensed sign contractor, provided a permit is issued after application and review for conformance to all applicable regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 14.08.030)  
Sec. 94-159. - Other commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
The following standards shall apply for all commercial and industrial zoning districts other than OPB and CN districts: 
(1)  Residential uses. Signs for permitted multiple-family residential uses shall be subject to the standards for residential districts in section 94-157. 
(2)  Number. 
a.  One freestanding sign location per street frontage is permitted; provided that an additional sign location shall be permitted for each additional 150 lineal feet of frontage or portion thereof which is not included in calculations to permit a larger sign as provided in subsection (4) of this section. 
b.  One roof sign is permitted for any structure with three stories or more. 
c.  Attached signs are permitted for each occupant having street frontage, provided that the total display surface area of all such signs shall not exceed the maximum permitted total. 
d.  One identification nameplate is permitted for each business or professional occupancy of a building without direct exterior access, with a maximum size of four square feet per nameplate; nonflashing illumination is permitted. 
e.  There shall be no restriction on signs placed inside a display window. 
_____ 
(3)  Size standards for attached signs. The following standards shall be used to permit a larger sign area for attached signs in proportion to increased setback and building width: 
	Building Setback 
Building Width 
  (feet) 	0 to 24.99 Feet 	25 to 39.99 Feet 	40 to 59.99 Feet 	60 Feet or More 
Less than 25 	 50 square feet 	 60 square feet 	 70 square feet 	 75 square feet 
25 to 35.99 	 85 square feet 	105 square feet 	115 square feet 	125 square feet 
36 to 45.99 	120 square feet 	145 square feet 	160 square feet 	170 square feet 
46 to 55.99 	155 square feet 	190 square feet 	205 square feet 	220 square feet 
56 to 65.99 	190 square feet 	230 square feet 	250 square feet 	270 square feet 
66 to 75.99 	225 square feet 	270 square feet 	295 square feet 	320 square feet 
76 to 85.99 	260 square feet 	315 square feet 	340 square feet 	370 square feet 
86 to 95.99 	295 square feet 	355 square feet 	390 square feet 	420 square feet 
96 to 105.99 	330 square feet 	400 square feet 	430 square feet 	465 square feet 
106 to 115.99 	365 square feet 	440 square feet 	480 square feet 	515 square feet 
116 to 124.99 	400 square feet 	480 square feet 	520 square feet 	560 square feet 
Over 125 	435 square feet 	525 square feet 	570 square feet 	600 square feet 
 
_____ 
(4)  Size standards for freestanding signs. 
a.  Display surface area shall be permitted on the basis of two square feet of sign for each one lineal foot of frontage, up to the following maximum size: 
1.  CG, SC and CI districts: 400 square feet. 
2.  I-1 district: 400 square feet. 
3.  I-2 and I-3 districts: 700 square feet. 
b.  Any frontage above 400 feet utilized in calculations to permit an additional freestanding sign location under subsection (2)a of this section shall not also be included in calculations to permit a larger sign. 
c.  Where an individual or aggregate use abuts a major thoroughfare, (Highway 4, Highway 92 or Highway 152) and the lineal foot frontage of the use is less than 100 feet, a freestanding sign location may have 200 feet of display surface for better identification of the use from the highway, provided that all other regulations of this chapter shall apply. 
(5)  Height. 
a.  Freestanding signs. A minimum clearance of 14 feet above any driveway, service drive or trafficway is required, and the following shall also apply: 
1.  Lineal foot frontage from zero to 300 feet: Maximum height of 40 feet above grade level. 
2.  Lineal foot frontage above 300 feet: One additional foot for each 40 additional feet of lineal frontage, to a maximum height of 50 feet above grade level. 
3.  Use abutting a major thoroughfare: Maximum height of 50 feet above grade level on the thoroughfare frontage to provide better identification of the use from thoroughfares, subject to all other regulations of this chapter. 
b.  Attached signs. 
1.  The height of a wall sign shall not exceed the height of the surface to which it is attached. 
2.  Roof signs shall have no maximum height. 
3.  The height of all other signs shall not exceed six feet above the structure to which the sign is attached. 
(6)  Illumination. 
a.  Direct or indirect lighting is permitted. 
b.  Flashing signs shall be permitted subject to all regulations of this chapter. 
(7)  Setback. All permitted freestanding signs shall observe a sight triangle of 25 feet from all street curblines and driveways. 
(8)  Installation by other than licensed sign contractor. In these zoning districts, nonilluminated signs and/or signs not affected by building code structural requirements may be installed by other than a licensed sign contractor, provided a permit is issued after application and review for conformance to all applicable regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 14.08.040)  
Sec. 94-160. - Portable signs. 
In addition to being permitted and regulated in specified zoning districts as ground signs, portable signs shall be permitted as ground signs under the following conditions, and in no case for a period to exceed 90 days: 
(1)  Construction work disrupting normal access to business. Where street, highway or other public works construction disrupts normal access to a business, the director of community development may authorize a portable sign to be located on private property (and in some instances on public property) to provide directions to the business, where he has determined that the location will not constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public. This sign shall be permitted only as long as the construction disrupts access or until ordered to be moved by the director, whichever shall occur first. 
(2)  Special events. When a spectator event or special entertainment event is proposed, one portable sign shall be permitted in place of an authorized permanent sign for a period not to exceed 30 days per event, provided that no more than one sign per location at a time shall be permitted, subject to all regulations for accessory signs in this chapter. 
(3)  Temporary accessory signs. Where no more than one ground sign or freestanding sign is located upon a parcel and additional sign display surface in excess of 32 square feet is available for signing pursuant to this chapter, one portable sign shall be permitted as an accessory use. Permits may be issued for up to 90 days per year. The 90-day period may be broken into two or more periods for any one year, but in no case shall 90-consecutive-day periods be allowed. There shall be a minimum of a 60-day waiting period between renewals. 
(4)  Construction requirements. 
a.  Anchoring. All portable signs shall be secured by one of the following types of anchors: 
1.  If placed upon a concrete slab, concrete anchors at least one-fourth inch in diameter shall be placed to a minimum depth of two inches to secure each corner ground support; 
2.  If placed upon an earth base, a metal auger anchor at least three-eighths inch in diameter, with an expanded diameter of three inches, shall be placed to a minimum depth of 15 inches to secure each corner ground support; or 
3.  If placed upon an asphalt base, a metal stake at least three-eighths inch in diameter shall be placed to a minimum depth of 18 inches to secure each corner ground support. 
b.  Lighting and electrical wiring. 
1.  Lighting and electrical wiring shall be subject to the National Electrical Code and the zoning district standards for the district in which the sign is located. 
2.  Any sign which is located for a period in excess of 30 days shall be provided with a permanent underground wiring source. 
3.  Portable signs may be electric only if using a permanent underground source in compliance under the National Electrical Code. Battery-powered electric portable signs will be allowed for a maximum of 30 days. 
4.  Where no more than one ground sign is located upon a parcel and additional sign display surface in excess of 32 square feet is available for signing pursuant to this chapter, one portable sign shall be permitted as an accessory use. Permits may be issued for up to 90 days. 
(Code 1977, § 14.08.050)  
Sec. 94-161. - Billboards and commercial nonaccessory signs. 
(a)  Billboards. Off-premises outdoor advertising signs located along arterials and highways and used for the express purpose of product advertisement shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Commercial nonaccessory signs. No commercial nonaccessory signs shall be permitted within the city limits. 
(Code 1977, § 14.08.060; Ord. No. 888, § 1, 2-17-2004)  
Sec. 94-162. - Information signs on public right-of-way. 
The community development director or his designated representative may issue a permit to erect a non-accessory directional or informational sign on the public right-of-way when it is not considered a traffic hazard and if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Sixty percent of the property owners or neighborhood association members within the boundaries of any delineated area must request the signs. 
(2)  The sign must be used for public purposes, such as historical preservation markers, urban conservation markers and neighborhood watch signs. 
(3)  The sign must not interfere with the sight triangle. 
(4)  A map must be submitted to the director showing the location of all proposed signs. 
(5)  A sketch of each type of sign proposed must be submitted showing height, length and width and square feet of display surface. 
(6)  A letter from major utility companies shall be submitted indicating approval or disapproval of the location of the proposed sign. 
(7)  The sign may not exceed four square feet in display area. 
(Code 1977, § 14.08.070)  
Chapter 98 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; municipal solid waste disposal by burning, § 38-136; health and sanitation, ch. 54; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70; natural resources, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Hazardous Waste Management Act, 27A O.S. § 2-7-101 et seq.; Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Act, 27A O.S. § 2-10-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 98-1—98-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LITTERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Littering, 21 O.S. §§ 1753.3, 1761.1. 
 
Sec. 98-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Litter means garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined in this section and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this article, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1977, § 8.34.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-32. - Depositing litter in public place. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps. 
(Code 1977, § 8.34.020)  
Sec. 98-33. - Litter to be placed in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon private property. 
(Code 1977, § 8.34.030)  
Sec. 98-34. - Sweeping litter into gutter, street or other public place; duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
(a)  No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(b)  No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Code 1977, §§ 8.34.040, 8.34.050)  
Sec. 98-35. - Throwing litter from vehicle. 
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
(Code 1977, § 8.34.060) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 114.  
Sec. 98-36. - Vehicles scattering load or depositing materials from tires. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind which creates a health or safety hazard. 
(Code 1977, § 8.34.070) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 114.  
Sec. 98-37. - Depositing litter on occupied private property. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Code 1977, § 8.34.080)  
Sec. 98-38. - Duty to maintain premises free of litter. 
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Code 1977, § 8.34.090)  
Sec. 98-39. - Depositing litter on vacant lot. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not. 
(Code 1977, § 8.34.100)  
Secs. 98-40—98-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal solid waste management systems, 27A O.S. § 2-10-101. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 98-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garbage means any edible or nonedible waste consisting of animal or vegetable matter or other refuse from residential or commercial kitchens or storage locations, including hotels, restaurants, boardinghouses or dwelling houses, markets, public institutions, butcher shops or poultry or fish stores, or other accumulations not stated in this definition. 
Mobile container means any residential garbage container provided by or approved by the city, including but not limited to Poly-Karts. 
Refuse means any inflammable and combustible material, paper, boxes, excelsior, waste, tin cans, broken ware, clothing, shoes and ordinary waste accumulated by family residents. 
Resident means any person having supervision of any dwelling house, apartment house, roominghouse or business of any nature in the city, either as owner or rental agent. 
Trash means any organic combustible matter, including trees, limbs, leaves, grass, excessive boxes or papers, but expressly not including rocks, dirt, building material or other inorganic matter. 
(Code 1977, § 8.32.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-62. - Standards for mobile containers; furnishing of containers. 
(a)  The containers referred to in this section shall be 90-gallon plastic carts on wheels that will be furnished to each residence by the city. Such carts, and the grounds immediately around them, shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition at all times. The city shall provide one cart for each residence. In addition, residents shall have the option of leasing an additional cart for a minimum of six months for an additional monthly fee to be added to the resident's monthly utility bill. Containers are the property of the city, and shall remain at the assigned location regardless of changes of ownership or occupancy of the residence. Every dwelling in any zoning district within the city not zoned A-1 shall be provided a plastic cart for the disposal of garbage. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, those residents who had purchased a private owner cart prior to September 2, 1997, will be exempt from the minimum six-month usage period and shall only be charged for those months they actually use such carts, provided they contact the utility billing office so the necessary adjustments can be made. 
(Code 1977, § 8.32.020; Ord. No. 672, § 1, 12-2-1997; Ord. No. 679, § 1, 12-2-1997)  
Sec. 98-63. - Preparation of waste for collection; special collections. 
Garbage shall be put in containers. Limbs which are securely bundled and tied and not exceeding three feet in length and weighing no more than 25 pounds will be picked up when placed no more than two feet from the curb or edge of the street. Grass clippings shall be placed in plastic bags no larger than 30 gallons and weighing no more than 25 pounds each. The maximum number of plastic bags allowed per residence per pickup shall not exceed five bags. Special collections or pickups will be provided for additional bags and other refuse subject to certain restrictions, including prior arrangements being made with the city and certain days for and size of collections being established. Fees for special collections will be established by resolution. The additional charge for such special collections will be assessed and added to the resident's monthly utility bill. All construction waste, whether by contractors or residents, is the responsibility of the owner for disposal. No dirt, rock or grass with clods shall be placed in the containers. No substances which are deleterious to the plastic cart shall be placed in them, and if the cart is damaged by a substance placed therein the expense of repair will be charged to the resident. 
(Code 1977, § 8.32.030; Ord. No. 672, § 1, 12-2-1997)  
Sec. 98-64. - Placement of mobile containers for collection; frequency of collection; exceptions to frequency of collections. 
(a)  Placement of mobile containers for collection; frequency of collection. By 7:00 a.m. on the day of pickup, the 90 gallon plastic carts should be placed in the street right-of-way not more than two feet from the curb or edge of the street surface whereby collectors can obtain them without going on private property. The front of the cart should be placed facing the street to allow the sanitation truck loader to grasp the cart for emptying. Carts shall be removed from the street right-of-way and returned to a location behind the front building line of the residence within 24 hours after the cart has been emptied by the collectors. Residents will be furnished once-a-week pickup. 
(b)  Exceptions to frequency of collections. Residents will be furnished a once-a-week pickup. However, there may be certain extraordinary circumstances in which this cannot be met, including, but not limited to, weather conditions in which the refuse trucks cannot safely operate on the streets of Mustang and/or to and from the dumping site. These conditions may also include, but not be limited to debris blocking the streets, ice or snow-packed streets, or flooding. In such instances, the sanitation provider will provide that service as soon as conditions permit. In such circumstances, the provider will also make an exception to the normal amount of additional plastic bags a resident is allowed. However, this exception does not allow for such items that would normally not be considered for a weekly pickup, and all waste items must still be prepared as stated in section 98-63. There will be no adjustment to any charges for services if that service is simply delayed for such circumstances. 
(Code 1977, § 8.32.040; Ord. No. 672, § 1, 12-2-1997; Ord. No. 767, § 1, 2-6-2001)  
Sec. 98-65. - Containers for commercial establishments. 
Containers for commercial establishments shall be owned and maintained by the city. Container rental shall be based upon the number of service pickups required by the business establishment and the size of the container. Business establishments will be provided a container for the accumulation of garbage, and such container shall be of such construction and design that it can be maintained in a sanitary condition. Small business establishments having a low enough volume of garbage and refuse that it can be accommodated in the 90-gallon plastic cart will be allowed to use the 90-gallon plastic carts and will be furnished the carts by the city at the cost of the carts to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8.32.050)  
Sec. 98-66. - Use of municipal service required; monthly rate; deposit. 
All owners or occupants of all premises in the city shall be required to receive sanitation service and will be provided a 90-gallon plastic cart as directed in section 98-62. Every resident shall pay a monthly rate to the city clerk as the city council may establish. The city may require a utilities deposit in an amount to be determined annually by the city council. Such deposit may be applied by the city to the satisfaction of any delinquent account without waiving any remedies provided by section 98-69. 
(Code 1977, § 8.32.060)  
Sec. 98-67. - State user fee. 
On and after January 1, 1996, there is imposed upon each customer of the solid waste sanitation service operated by or through the city or the Mustang Improvement Authority a state user fee for landfill disposal sites as set forth in section 42-98. The fee shall be in addition to any periodic charges for sanitation services. The user fee shall be included in each billing cycle, shall be stated separately from any other periodic charges, and shall be identified as a fee necessitated by increased costs for utilization of landfill disposal sites for purposes of administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Act, pursuant to 27A O.S. § 2-10-802, as amended, effective January 1, 1996. The fee shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as, and in the same manner as, the periodic charges for sanitation service in accordance with the regular billing practice of the city and/or the Mustang Improvement Authority. The city and/or the Mustang Improvement Authority will use such monies to the extent necessary to defray the increased costs resulting from utilization of landfill disposal sites and related matters. 
(Code 1977, § 8.32.062)  
Sec. 98-68. - Private trash haulers. 
It shall be unlawful for any private contractor to furnish garbage and refuse, trash or rubbish removal service to any owner or occupant of any premises or to any individual, firm or corporation within the city where such service has been offered to such owner, occupant or individual, firm or corporation as provided in this section. It is further provided that any permit issued hereunder shall be revoked and the commercial services terminated when the city offers the services provided in this section. All agreements between commercial haulers and owner-occupants, individuals or firms or corporations within the city shall contain a clause incorporating this section or language substantially to the same legal effect. 
(Code 1977, § 8.32.065)  
Sec. 98-69. - Failure to pay for services; return of containers; damaging containers. 
(a)  A failure to pay the fees for sanitation services or any other utility services provided by the city within 60 days after being billed therefor shall result in the discontinuance of all utility services provided by the city. At least 48 hours prior to such termination of service, a notice of delinquency shall be delivered and hung on the door by the meter reader to the delinquent party. Such notice shall clearly state that all utility services will be terminated unless charges are paid within 48 hours of the date and time of this notice. A charge as set forth in section 42-98 will be assessed to replace a cart after nonpayment of the bill. The city shall be responsible for all normal wear and tear upon the carts, but any damage done through neglect or omission of the resident shall be repaired by the city, and the resident will be billed for such repairs. Upon a resident terminating his garbage service, the resident will account for his cart with the city and return the cart in good working condition, normal wear and tear excepted, and the failure to return the cart shall result in the total value of the cart being charged against the resident on his final bill. Vandalism or damage done to a cart by a party not the resident (third party) is declared to be a misdemeanor punishable in the municipal court of the city, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not greater than $100.00 plus court costs. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies contained in subsection (a) of this section, the following penalties may result from any wilful violations of this article: 
(1)  Any person who willfully fails to pay for sanitation services used or made available when the payment has become overdue by at least 60 days shall be guilty of an offense. 
(2)  Each day the person willfully fails to pay for sanitation services so used or made available shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(3)  Upon conviction for the offense of wilful failure to pay a utility bill for sanitation services used or made available, the person convicted shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(4)  The terms "wilful" and "willfully," as used in this section, carry the implication that, for guilt in the offense described in this section, the act must have been done willingly, beyond a reasonable doubt, rather than for the reasons of financial inability to pay in full a city utility bill for sanitation services when and after such a bill is due. It is the intent of the city that a punishable omission must be knowingly, willfully and willingly done by person having the ability to pay, in whole or in part, the city sanitation bill in question. Bona fide indigency may be an affirmative defense to the charge of willingly or willfully not paying the city sanitation bill when such indigency is successfully proved by the defendant. 
(Code 1977, § 8.32.070)  
Secs. 98-70—98-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SANITATION DIVISION 
 
Sec. 98-81. - Created. 
A sanitation division is created as a separate division of the public works department within the corporate body of the city. The sanitation division shall be under the supervisory control of the public works director. 
(Code 1977, § 8.24.010)  
Sec. 98-82. - Responsibilities. 
The sanitation division shall be responsible for the collection and disposal of garbage, trash and other refuse, and for the enforcement and administration of the provisions of articles III and IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 8.24.020)  
Sec. 98-83. - Public works director. 
In the vacancy, absence, disability, suspension or removal of the sanitation superintendent, the duties and responsibilities of the office shall be discharged by the public works director or his designee. 
(Code 1977, § 8.24.030)  
Sec. 98-84. - Duties. 
The sanitation division shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  The care, minor maintenance and custody of all equipment, vehicles and other property utilized by the sanitation division; 
(2)  The designation of prescribed routes and districts and the scheduling of regular collection and pickup service thereon at stated times; 
(3)  The implementation and supervision of such collection and pickup service to ensure that each resident of the city is afforded satisfactory and efficient service not less than two separate days each week, in accordance with the provisions of this article and article IV, division 2 of this chapter; 
(4)  The maintenance of a fixed and published location and telephone listing within the corporate limits of the city whereby citizens may communicate with the sanitation division during normal business hours, Monday through Friday; 
(5)  The enforcement of the provisions of articles III and IV relating to criminal offenses by coordination with the public works director, city manager and the chief of police, as appropriate; 
(6)  The performance of such other and further duties as may be determined by the public works director and/or city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 8.24.040)  
Sec. 98-85. - Contractual agreement. 
In lieu of the operation of a sanitation division, the council, in its discretion, may direct the city manager to enter into negotiations for a sanitation contractual agreement. Before the sanitation contractual agreement shall become effective, such sanitation contractual agreement shall be approved by the council, subject to the advice of the city attorney as to legality, signed by the mayor and filed with the city clerk. Such contractual agreement shall be subject to the provisions of article IV, division 2 of this chapter, and shall impose on the promisor of sanitation services all of the duties and responsibilities imposed on the sanitation division. All of the provisions, duties and responsibilities shall be incorporated into such contractual agreement by implication. 
(Code 1977, § 9.24.050)  
Secs. 98-86—98-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE HAULERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 98-101—98-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 98-121. - Operation without license prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to haul or transport any garbage, trash or other refuse over any street, highway or public right-of-way without having first been issued a license to operate a sanitation service within the city by the city clerk; provided, that residents of the city may transport organic trash. 
(Code 1977, § 8.28.010)  
Sec. 98-122. - Application for license. 
An application for a license to operate a sanitation service in the city shall be in writing, verified to by the applicant or his duly authorized representative, shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and current address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and current addresses of each of the partners. If the applicant is a corporation, the state incorporation seal and the names and addresses of the officers and directors thereof; 
(2)  The current address of the principal place of business of the applicant; 
(3)  A description of the vehicles to be used showing the make, model and type of truck plus state vehicle inspection registration number; 
(4)  All other information pertaining to the operation of the service as required by the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 8.28.020)  
Sec. 98-123. - Insurance. 
No person, firm or corporation required to have a license under this division shall haul or transport any garbage, trash or refuse or otherwise operate any sanitation service within the city without having a current certificate of insurance on file with the city clerk. Before a sanitation license for the operation of sanitation vehicles within the incorporated boundaries is to be issued, the owner shall file with the city clerk proof that a policy of insurance has been issued on each vehicle by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, providing liability insurance for each and every vehicle to be operated by the applicant. The policy of insurance shall include coverage of bodily injury, wrongful death and property damage in amounts to be determined by the city council, and will be effective irrespective of whether the vehicle was being driven by the owner, agent, servant, employee, lessee or licensee at the time of the accident. The policy shall contain a provision that it cannot be cancelled until ten days' written notice has been filed with the city clerk. Should the insurance terminate, lapse or become void or ineffective, the license of such vehicle shall automatically become null and void unless a new policy as provided in this section shall be obtained. The governmental immunity to tort action of the city is not waived to any extent, force or effect in excess, or outside the parameters of, any liability coverage provided pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1977, § 8.28.030)  
Sec. 98-124. - Surety bond. 
No person, firm or corporation required to have a license under this division shall haul or transport any garbage, trash or refuse or operate a sanitation service, and no license shall be issued for the operation of any sanitation service without such person, firm or corporation having on file with the city clerk an approved surety bond in an amount exceeding $15,000.00 for the current fiscal year. The bond shall be filed annually and shall correspond with the fiscal year of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8.28.040)  
Sec. 98-125. - Temporary license. 
The city is authorized to issue a temporary license upon the approval of the city council providing the requirements of this article have been temporarily adhered to until negotiations have been completed and the appropriate documents signed by both parties. The fee for the temporary license shall be set by the city council in regular session upon the approval of both parties. 
(Code 1977, § 8.28.050)  
Sec. 98-126. - License fee. 
A sanitation license fee in an amount to be determined by the city council shall be paid to the city clerk prior to the issuance of any license and shall be in addition to any fees required by the state. Licenses issued pursuant to this division are nontransferable. 
(Code 1977, § 8.28.060)  
Sec. 98-127. - Revocation. 
(a)  Licensees shall perform all duties required of the sanitation superintendent in this article or failure to perform any duty set forth in article II of this chapter shall constitute grounds for the revocation of a sanitation license. In addition thereto, a finding that a sanitation license was issued as a result of misrepresentation or fraud or that the licensee is not furnishing proper service to the residents of the city or that the licensee is not conducting his business in a safe or sanitary manner or that the licensee is violating any municipal ordinance or state or federal law shall constitute grounds for the revocation of a sanitation license. 
(b)  A sanitation license may be revoked in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  After proper investigation, the city manager shall render a finding that the licensee is guilty of a violation or breach of duty. 
(2)  Such finding along with his recommendation shall be placed on the agenda of a regularly scheduled city council meeting. 
(3)  The licensee shall be notified in writing not less than ten days in advance of such council meeting of the findings and recommendations of the city manager, of the time and place of such council meeting and of his right to be present and to be heard at such meeting. 
(4)  At such meeting the council shall accept or reject the city manager's recommendation and shall make the final decision as to whether or not the sanitation license shall be renewed. If it elects to revoke the license, the licensee shall be advised of his right to appeal the decision to the district court. 
(c)  The city manager shall notify the licensee in writing not less than 45 days prior to the renewal date of such license of a decision not to renew the license. 
(d)  Should the city require additional services such as extra pickup at commercial or residential locations, annual cleanup days or construction materials, additional service fees will be levied for those services rendered, as agreed between the parties. 
(Code 1977, § 8.28.070)  
Chapter 102 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(11); any ordinance establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; moving buildings, § 18-291 et seq.; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 50; library, ch. 66; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70; natural resources, ch. 74; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 82; planning, ch. 90; signs, ch. 94; subdivisions, ch. 106; traffic and vehicles, ch. 114; utilities, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122. 
State Law reference— General authority relative to streets, roads and public ways, 11 O.S. § 36-101. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 102-1. - Procedure for closing public ways and easements. 
The following procedure is established for closing public ways and easements: 
(1)  Upon application for closing a street, public way or easement, an ordinance shall be prepared and placed on the city council agenda for initial reading, and a date for a public hearing thereon shall be set. 
(2)  At least 30 days prior to passage of the ordinance, written notice shall be given by the city clerk to holders of franchises or others determined by the city council to have a special right or privilege to use the public way or easement, and to all owners of record, as shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer, abutting the public way or easement, and to owners of record of property within 300 feet of the subject property. 
(3)  The city clerk shall certify that the written notice was mailed. 
(4)  The applicant shall furnish a certified ownership list showing the necessary parties entitled to notice to the city clerk at the time of application. 
(5)  The applicant shall, at the time of filing the application, pay the application and notice fees as set forth in section 42-102. 
(6)  The ordinance shall reserve unto the city an absolute right to reopen the public way or easement without expense to the city, and the ordinance shall not affect the right to maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate or remove utilities, public service corporations, franchise holders, or transmission company facilities or services therein, nor shall such closing affect private ways existing by operation of law. 
(Code 1977, § 12.20.020; Ord. No. 1185, § 2, 4-2-2019) 
State Law reference— Closing public ways, 11 O.S. § 42-110.  
Sec. 102-2. - Limited access facilities. 
(a)  Generally. A system of limited access facilities, consisting of the streets, avenues, boulevards and ways and parts of streets, avenues, boulevards and ways described in subsection (b) of this section, is established and created within the corporate limits of the city, as now existing or as they may be hereafter extended, and in recognition of the general use of the streets, avenues, boulevards and ways and parts thereof, and of the wear and destruction of such streets, avenues, boulevards and ways by heavy general traffic thereon, including passenger automobiles, buses, trucks and other vehicles, and to the extent that the costs of acquisition of rights-of-way and property necessary in the establishment of the limited access facilities exceed the benefits to property abutting thereon, such limited access facilities are declared to be improvements of a general nature, and such costs, to the extent that they exceed the benefits to property abutting thereon, are declared to be costs of a general nature. 
(b)  Facilities designated. The following streets, avenues, boulevards and ways and parts of streets, avenues, boulevards and ways within the corporate limits of the city, as now existing or as they may be hereafter extended, are designated as limited access facilities and as arterial highways, such streets, avenues, boulevards and ways being streets or highways especially designed for through traffic, entrance into which at intersections may be limited by requiring all entering vehicles to be brought to a complete stop, and the city council may otherwise protect the right-of-way of vehicles thereon. Such arterial highways are described as follows: Mustang Road extending 2,600 feet north of State Highway 152 and extending 2,600 feet south of State Highway 152. 
(c)  Construction. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to affect any zoning ordinance or part thereof relating to the construction or use of improvements on property abutting on any limited access facility. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10.42.010—10.42.040) 
State Law reference— Limited access facilities, 69 O.S. § 1301 et seq.; authority to designate limited access facilities, 69 O.S. § 1302.  
Sec. 102-3. - Closing of streets and other public places during construction of improvements. 
When sidewalk, handicapped ramp, curbing, guttering, draining, paving or other street or alley improvements are in the course of construction in any public place or street in the city, the city building inspector and/or community development director shall have the authority to close such street, alley or other public place against traffic or travel of every character, pedestrians included, for such time as deemed necessary for the proper protection of the public and security of improvements. In such event, traffic may be entirely restricted or limited to definite classes. The portion of such street, alley or other place to be closed shall be barricaded at the limits in such manner as to indicate to the public that the street, alley or other place is closed, and signs shall be erected at each limit stating that such street or alley is closed. The erection of such barricades and signs by order of the building inspector and/or community development director shall be deemed sufficient notice to the public. It shall be no defense to the prosecution that any such barricade or sign has been removed by some person without authority. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.030(A))  
Sec. 102-4. - Barricades and signs around construction work. 
(a)  Generally. It is the duty of any person doing any type of construction work or excavating work upon or adjacent to any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground in the city to maintain substantial guard rails and barriers around such work or excavation in such a manner as to protect pedestrians, animals and vehicles. It is the duty of all such persons to display and maintain lighted lanterns, lights or lighted signal flares from sundown to sunup during the time such work, excavation or obstruction exists. Such lanterns, flares or lights shall be of a type approved by the building inspector and/or community development director. It is an offense for any person to fail to provide any of the signs, barricades and signals required in this section. Each such omission constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Unlawful removal. It is unlawful for any person to remove or destroy any barricade or sign erected as provided in subsection (a) of this section, except as may be necessary in the proper construction of the improvements thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.030(B), (D))  
Sec. 102-5. - Placement of materials on sidewalk or roadway during construction work. 
No material or equipment shall be placed on any sidewalk or roadway unless specifically authorized on a permit, except in that part of the width of such sidewalk or roadway which must be blocked in any case by the work underway or that part of the width of the roadway which might normally be occupied by standing vehicles. All operations shall be so handled as to provide minimum hazard to the public and minimum obstruction to traffic. All rubbish, equipment and unused materials and supplies shall be removed by the contractor before his work is opened to traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.030(C))  
Sec. 102-6. - Certain structures, activities and equipment prohibited in street. 
It is unlawful for any person to construct, erect, place, operate, maintain or permit to exist any icebox, ice dock, gasoline pump, gasoline storage reservoir, tire rack, tools or equipment, or water hose connection, any mercantile business, or any tools, stand, equipment, merchandise or appurtenances thereof, aerials, poles or wires therefor, whether permanent or temporary, or any other obstruction, upon any part of any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, curbing or parking within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 12.08.040)  
Sec. 102-7. - Obstruction of street or sidewalk. 
It is unlawful for any person to use or obstruct the sidewalks of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 12.08.050)  
Sec. 102-8. - Depositing refuse on street or sidewalk. 
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, throw or sweep into or upon a street, alley, parking or sidewalk of the city any paper, rubbish, grass, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes or other refuse of any kind. 
(Code 1977, § 12.08.060) 
State Law reference— Littering, 21 O.S. §§ 1753.3, 1761.1.  
Sec. 102-9. - Playing on street or sidewalk. 
It is unlawful for any person to play on the sidewalks or upon the main travelled portion of the streets and alleys of the city, except as may be authorized by ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 12.08.070)  
Sec. 102-10. - Allowing water or other liquid to drain across street or sidewalk. 
It is unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other place of business, or any agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease or other fluid to flow or drain into, upon, over or across any sidewalk, parking, street, alley or other public way. 
(Code 1977, § 12.08.090)  
Sec. 102-11. - Trimming of trees and shrubs along street or sidewalk. 
(a)  The owner of any premises abutting on any street of the city shall trim all trees and shrubbery growing between the sidewalk and the roadway of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any part of the premises and adjacent to the sidewalk or any street or alley, in such manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient passage and travel along the streets, sidewalks and alleys. When such premises are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the trees and shrubbery in the same manner as required of the owner by this section. Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or foliage shall not be lower than 15 feet above the roadway of a street or alley or lower than eight feet above the sidewalk. 
(b)  Any owner or occupant who fails, refuses or neglects to trim trees and shrubbery as provided in subsection (a) of this section after receiving five days' notice from the city manager, the director of public works or the street superintendent to do so is guilty of an offense against the city. Every day that the owner or occupant fails, refuses or neglects to trim such trees or shrubbery, after the expiration of the five days' notice, shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, §§ 12.08.010, 12.08.020; Ord. No. 673, § 1, 11-1-1997)  
Sec. 102-12. - Injuring trees or shrubs along streets. 
It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or alley in the city, provided that this shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care and removal of such trees and shrubbery. 
(Code 1977, § 12.08.030)  
Sec. 102-13. - Water; mud from vehicle; drainage onto street, prohibited. 
No automobile or other vehicle shall be washed at any place within the city where the water, dirt, mud or other substances removed therefrom by or during the washing thereof, will drain into or upon any street or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 12.08.080)  
Secs. 102-14—102-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DRIVEWAYS 
 
Sec. 102-41. - Permit required for driveway construction. 
Before constructing any driveway over a portion of a city street or easement, a permit must be obtained by the builder from the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.010)  
Sec. 102-42. - Permit fee; issuance of permit. 
A permit fee in the amount set forth in section 42-102 shall be paid to the city clerk as a condition to the issuance of a driveway permit. Applicants must provide information such as location, width, type and other details which are needed by the city to determine the feasibility of the proposed entrance. The city may deny the issuance of a permit where the entrance is considered to be a public hazard or in any way is not in the public interest. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.020)  
Sec. 102-43. - Construction details. 
All driveways shall be constructed in accordance with "Standard Residential and Commercial Driveway Entrance for Mustang, Oklahoma 1981." 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.030)  
Sec. 102-44. - Subgrade for entrances. 
The subgrade for driveway entrances shall be of suitable soil, free of vegetation, trash or other foreign matter, and compacted to 100 percent standard proctor density. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.040)  
Sec. 102-45. - Surfacing. 
Surfacing of all driveways shall meet the appropriate residential or commercial street surface standards as currently adopted by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.050)  
Sec. 102-46. - Height. 
Driveways shall be at least curb height at a point six feet from the back of the curb. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.060)  
Sec. 102-47. - Joints. 
All saw-cut joints for driveways shall have a depth of at least one inch and a width of at least one-eighth inch. All expansion joints shall have a width of at least one-half inch, and the material used to fill this type of joint shall be made of either redwood, cedar or pre-molded asphalt. All joints shall be cleaned in accordance with standard city street specifications. An expansion joint must be located at the property line and along the line where the driveway meets the street paving. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.070)  
Sec. 102-48. - Testing. 
The permit holder under this article shall be required to pay the cost of all testing of a driveway that may be deemed necessary by the city inspector or engineer. Such tests may include but are not limited to soil density, compressive concrete strength, and core samples. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.080)  
Sec. 102-49. - Replacement of defective work; liability for damage to streets. 
The permit holder under this article shall be responsible for the replacement of all defective work and materials not approved by the city inspector, and shall be liable for any damage to existing city streets that is not repaired in a manner suitable to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.090)  
Sec. 102-50. - Driveways for duplexes. 
The driveway of any duplex that has a common driveway for both dwelling units shall have a minimum width of 36 feet. If each of the two dwelling units in a duplex have a separate driveway, then each driveway shall be at least 18 feet wide. The separate driveways shall have a landscaped area between them, and this area shall be at least four feet wide and be landscaped. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.100)  
Sec. 102-51. - Driveway entrances on streets without curbs and gutters. 
Driveway entrances on streets not having curb and gutter drainage shall be constructed to the same details required in sections 102-41 through 102-50, except that the diameter and length of driveway culverts shall be approved by the city engineer prior to the issuance of a permit and the grade of the driveway at a point six feet from the center of the culvert shall be at least equal in elevation to the crown of the street. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.110)  
Sec. 102-52. - Width of driveways for single-family residences. 
The entire length of the primary driveway for any single-family residence located in an R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 district must have a minimum width of 18 feet. The primary driveway shall be defined as the driveway that leads directly to the required parking spaces. Secondary driveways must be a minimum of ten feet wide. A secondary driveway shall be defined as other driveways besides the primary driveway. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.120; Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 4-15-2014)  
Sec. 102-53. - Minimum radius. 
A residential driveway must have a minimum radius of five feet and a commercial driveway must have a minimum radius of 15 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 12.04.130)  
Secs. 102-54—102-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STREET NAMES AND HOUSE NUMBERS 
 
Sec. 102-81. - Division of city into quadrants. 
The city shall be divided into four quadrants, using the intersection of Mustang Road and Highway 152 as the central point. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.010)  
Sec. 102-82. - Street name suffixes and prefixes. 
All existing street suffixes will be abandoned and streets will carry the appropriate quadrant suffixes and prefixes described in this section. 
(1)  Northwest quadrant. In the northwest quadrant, that area north of Highway 152 and west of Mustang Road, all streets will carry the suffix "Way." All east-west streets in this quadrant will carry the prefix "West," and all north-south streets in this quadrant will carry the prefix "North." 
(2)  Southwest quadrant. In the southwest quadrant, that area south of Highway 152 and west of Mustang Road, all streets will carry the suffix "Drive." All east-west streets in this quadrant will carry the prefix "West," and the north-south streets in this quadrant will carry the prefix "South." 
(3)  Southeast quadrant. In the southeast quadrant, that area south of Highway 152 and east of Mustang Road, all streets will carry the suffix "Lane." All east-west streets in this quadrant will carry the prefix "East," and the north-south streets in this quadrant will carry the prefix "South." 
(4)  Northeast quadrant. In the northeast quadrant, that area north of Highway 152 and east of Mustang Road, all streets will carry the suffix "Terrace." All east-west streets in this quadrant will carry the prefix "East," and the north-south streets in this quadrant will carry the prefix "North." 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.020)  
Sec. 102-83. - Names of culs-de-sac. 
Names of culs-de-sac which contain the name of the street from which the cul-de-sac branches will include the suffix of that street, plus an added suffix of "Court." 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.030)  
Sec. 102-84. - Limitation on length of names. 
Street names shall be limited to three names, excluding the directional prefix and the suffix "Court." 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.040)  
Sec. 102-85. - Number of blocks per mile. 
There shall be eight blocks per mile for blocks running east and west and 15 blocks per mile for blocks running north and south. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.050)  
Sec. 102-86. - Starting point for numbering system. 
House numbering will start at the central point and continue in all four directions. No unit block will be used. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.060)  
Sec. 102-87. - Street names consisting of number or letter. 
There shall be no streets named by a number or a letter, except the perimeter streets, namely 59th and 89th. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.070)  
Sec. 102-88. - Perimeter streets. 
The perimeter streets running east and west, namely 59th and 89th, shall carry the quadrant suffixes and also the city numbering system. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.080)  
Sec. 102-89. - Names of north-south section line roads. 
The north-south section line roads shall continue to be called roads (i.e., County Line Road, Morgan Road, Sarah Road, Mustang Road, Czech Hall Road and Frisco Road); however, the existing Cemetery Road shall be named Clear Springs Road. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.090)  
Sec. 102-90. - Naming of unnamed streets. 
The planning commission should give consideration to naming any presently unnamed streets. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.100)  
Sec. 102-91. - Changes in names and numbering. 
In order to eliminate duplication and confusion of similar street names, the following specific proposals are made: 
(1)  Northwest Quadrant—Reference "Way." Westchester Addition: The existing Westchester Road shall be called West Westchester Way and the existing north-south Westchester shall be called North Westchester Way. 
(2)  Southwest Quadrant—Reference "Drive." 
a.  Heights Addition: Change Mustang Drive to South Heights Drive, in order to avoid confusion with Mustang Road. 
b.  Heights Addition: Change Forest Lane Drive (a north-south street) to South Forest Drive. 
c.  Heights Addition: Change the one block now called Hillcrest Place to West Hillcrest Drive, and one block south of the current Hillcrest Place to West Juniper Drive. 
d.  Lakehoma Addition: Change the numbering on Aqua Clear so that portion from the north end of South Clear Springs Road (currently called Cemetery Road) to the court has north-south numbering and the other portion has east-west numbering, and the appropriate section of the street shall be called South Aqua Clear Drive and West Aqua Clear Drive. Also, include the court in the east-west numbering. 
e.  Lakehoma Addition: Change the numbering along West Lake Park Drive to include the circle without interruption of the numbers. 
f.  Reestablish the originally planned names for Walnut Manor Addition and eliminate the numbered street designations. 
g.  The currently existing Lakehome Place shall be named South Lakehome Place Drive. 
(3)  Southeast Quadrant—Reference "Lane." 
a.  Original town site: Change Avenue A to East Juniper Lane. 
b.  Meadows Addition: Change Meadow Boulevard to Meadow Lane. (This will require special signs at the intersection with east Mohr Lane to indicate the continuation of South Meadow Lane and South Brookview Lane.) 
c.  Meadows Addition: Change Linden Court to South Linden Lane. 
d.  Meadows Addition: Change the numbering along South Glenn Lane to include the circle (now called Juniper Circle) without interruption of the numbers. 
e.  Lay Addition: Continue East Longview Lane east across South Morgan Road to include what is currently identified as SW 75th Street. 
f.  Lay Addition: Continue East Lake Park Drive East across South Morgan Road to include what is currently identified as SW 77th Street. 
g.  Lay Addition: Name the north-south street along the east line of the Lay Addition South Mitchell Lane. 
(4)  Northeast Quadrant—Reference "Terrace." 
a.  Canadian Estates: Change the existing Sherwood Drive and Sherwood Terrace (which runs from Country Club to Canadian) to East Sherwood Terrace. 
b.  Canadian Estates: Change the existing north-south Sherwood Drive to North Mitchell Terrace and the one block from Country Club to North Mitchell Terrace to East Mitchell Terrace. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.110)  
Sec. 102-92. - Length of blocks running east and west. 
City blocks running east and west shall be 660 feet in length, making eight blocks per mile. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.120)  
Sec. 102-93. - Length of blocks running north and south. 
City blocks running north and south shall be 352 feet in length, making 15 blocks per mile. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.130)  
Sec. 102-94. - Lot numbering units. 
(a)  Lot numbers shall have a two-unit change each 25 feet. 
(b)  Lot numbers for each 55- to 70-foot lot will change in increments of four. 
(c)  Lot numbers for each lot over 100 feet will change in increments of eight. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.140)  
Sec. 102-95. - Odd numbers to be used on north and west sides of street. 
All house numbers on the north and west sides of streets shall bear odd numbers. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.150)  
Sec. 102-96. - Even numbers to be used on south and east sides of street. 
All house numbers on the south and east sides of streets shall bear even numbers. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.160)  
Sec. 102-97. - Display of numbers. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of each house or business building to place in a conspicuous place the proper house or building number as assigned by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.170)  
Sec. 102-98. - Adoption of U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration Manual on uniform traffic control devices. 
The 2002 edition of the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration Manual on uniform traffic devices and all subsequent amendments or revisions are adopted by reference. All street, traffic and highway signs in the City of Mustang shall comply with these standards. In addition to these standards, the City of Mustang requires that all signs shall designate the 100 block on the lower right hand corner with two-inch letters and street name signs shall have a red background with white reflective lettering. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.180; Ord. No. 831, § 1, 4-1-2003)  
Sec. 102-99. - Street and traffic signs. 
All street and traffic signs within the subdivision shall be furnished at the expense of the subdivider and shall conform to the standards set forth in section 102-98. All street and traffic signs shall be obtained through and installed by the city public works department. It shall be the duty of the city to maintain the markers after the acceptance of the development from the developer. 
(Code 1977, § 12.12.190; Ord. No. 382, § 1, 4-1-2003)  
Secs. 102-100—102-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 102-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Contractor means any person engaged in the business of installing or altering walks or pavement on public property, whether by contract, day labor or otherwise. This term shall also include those who represent themselves to be engaged in the business, whether actually doing the work or not, and includes any person who subcontracts to do such work. 
Driveway approach means an area, construction or facility between the roadway of a public street and private property intended to provide access for vehicles from the roadway of a public street to private property. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbing or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, for the use of pedestrians. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.050) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 102-122. - Enforcement officer. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector of the city, and for this purpose he shall have police powers. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.060)  
Sec. 102-123. - Applicability of article. 
Sidewalks and handicapped ramps hereafter constructed or repaired shall conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.020)  
Sec. 102-124. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not having a permit from the office of the building inspector to in any manner construct, reconstruct, alter or change any sidewalk as provided in this article, as it applies to public lands. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.040)  
Sec. 102-125. - Nonliability of building inspector. 
When action is taken by the building inspector or his authorized representative to enforce the provisions of this article, such action shall be in the name of and on behalf of the city, and the building inspector or his representatives, so acting for the city, shall not render themselves personally liable for any damage which may occur to persons or property as a result of any action committed in good faith in the discharge of their duties, and any suit brought against the building inspector or his representatives by reason thereof shall be defended by the city attorney until final termination of the proceedings contained therein. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.070)  
Sec. 102-126. - Authority of building inspector. 
(a)  The building inspector shall have the authority to take legal steps necessary to secure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The building inspector or his authorized representative shall have the right to enter any premises in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test or otherwise to ensure compliance with this article. 
(c)  The building inspector shall have the power to inspect or reinspect surfacing, the laying of surfacing, and materials, and issue notices or affix them to premises, or to reject surfacing materials not meeting the standards provided in this article. The building inspector shall have the power to control and regulate improvements and facilities placed upon public property and the power to cause to be removed all obstructions and encroachments. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.080)  
Sec. 102-127. - Alignment and grade; safeguards during construction. 
The installation of sidewalks and handicapped ramps shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The work authorized by such permit shall be aligned and set to grade as determined by the building inspector and community development director. 
(2)  The contractor shall provide any necessary safeguards so placed to protect pedestrians from injury. Provisions shall be made for the passage of water in construction areas. 
(3)  Where it is necessary that a sidewalk be realigned, a request will be made to the building inspector and/or community development director. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.150) 
_____ 
Sec. 102-128. - Construction standards. 
(a)  Sidewalks. A typical section of a four-foot and five-foot sidewalk shall conform to the following exhibit: 
ADD FIGURE 
_____ 
(1)  Concrete. Sidewalks shall be constructed of four-inch P.C. concrete, with 3,000 psi compressive strength requirements, and shall be placed on a minimum of one inch of clean sand on a compacted subgrade. 
(2)  Cross slope. The cross slope shall not exceed one-fourth inch per foot to the street. 
(3)  Longitudinal slope. The maximum longitudinal slope shall not exceed five percent. 
(4)  Contraction joints. Contraction joints shall be saw cut within 24 hours, cut at a 90-degree angle every five linear feet at a maximum of two inches deep, and filled with an asphaltic sealer. 
_____
(b)  Wheelchair and handicapped ramps shall conform to the following exhibit: 
STANDARD WHEELCHAIR AND HANDICAPPED RAMP 
(1)  Expansion joints. Expansion joints are required every 50 linear feet, at a 90-degree angle, around any obstruction, and at all drive approaches and street returns. Expansion joint material shall be composed of three-quarter-inch expansion type material (no wood) that extends the full depth of the walk. Expansion material shall be trimmed flush with the surface of the sidewalk. 
(2)  Scored joints. Scored joints shall be made every five linear feet at a 90-degree angle at a maximum of a two-inch depth. 
(c)  Width. The width of permanent sidewalks and handicapped ramps in all residential subdivisions shall be a minimum of four feet, and sidewalks in commercial developments shall be a minimum of five feet in width. 
(d)  Repair. In cases of repair, all sidewalks shall be replaced to the existing sidewalk width. 
(e)  Corner lots. All corner lots shall have sidewalks installed on both street frontages. 
(f)  Handicapped ramps at street intersections. At all corners of all street intersections, there shall be one handicapped ramp installed at the curbline. 
(g)  Modification of existing sidewalk. Any property owner wishing to modify his sidewalk as originally installed must submit plans to the community development department in order to secure a permit to proceed. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.160)  
Sec. 102-129. - Maintenance of sidewalk and sidewalk area. 
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or sidewalk area. 
(Code 1977, § 12.08.100)  
Secs. 102-130—102-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 102-151. - Required. 
No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, surface or resurface any sidewalk or handicapped ramp without first obtaining from the building inspector a permit to do so. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.090)  
Sec. 102-152. - Application. 
To obtain a permit as required by this division, the contractor or his authorized representative shall file with the building inspector an application in writing. Each application for a permit shall describe the abutting property adjacent to which the proposed work on public property is to be done, either by lot, block or tract and house number, location on the street or similar description. Each applicant shall give other reasonable information as shall be required. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.100)  
Sec. 102-153. - Fee. 
The applicant for a permit under this division shall, in addition to filing an application therefor as provided in this division, pay to the building inspector a fee as set forth in section 42-102. No fee shall be required for a permit for placement, construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair of a sidewalk immediately adjacent to property which is exempt from taxation under the constitution of the state, or on property which the constitution authorizes the legislature to exempt from taxation. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.110)  
Sec. 102-154. - Submission of plans. 
The building inspector may require that a set of plans be furnished by the applicant for a permit under this division showing the location as to lot, size and placement of sidewalks and handicapped ramps, property lines, streets and other related information. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.120)  
Sec. 102-155. - Issuance. 
The application and plans filed by an applicant for a permit under this division shall be examined by the building inspector and/or community development director. Plans found to be in conformance with this article and other laws and ordinances applicable thereto will be approved and a permit issued upon payment of fees. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.130)  
Sec. 102-156. - Expiration; invalid permits; fee for commencing work without permit. 
Each permit issued under this division shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within six months of the date of the permit or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned after the expiration of the initial six-month period. No permit issued in violation of this article shall operate as granting any vested right, and upon discovery of any such violation of this article the permit shall be deemed to be null and void and confer no right whatsoever under it. Any work on sidewalks that is found to have been started without a permit shall be charged double for the permit. 
(Code 1977, § 12.24.140)  
Chapter 106 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(13); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 50; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70; natural resources, ch. 74; planning, ch. 90; signs, ch. 94; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102; utilities, ch. 118; zoning, ch. 122. 
State Law reference— Subdivision regulations, 11 O.S. § 45-104(C). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 106-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The word "building" includes "structure." The word "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
Access means a way of approaching or entering a property. 
Alley means a right-of-way or easement dedicated to public (public alley) use which gives a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
Applicant means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or his legally authorized representative. 
As-built plans means a set of detailed plans and documents specifying how the public improvements required in the final plat were actually constructed. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
Block means a parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks, parks or green strips, rural land or drainage channels, boundaries of a municipality, or a combination thereof. 
Building line and setback line mean a line designating the area outside of which buildings may not be erected. 
Certificate of survey means an instrument, prepared by a registered surveyor licensed to practice in the state, describing the location and boundaries of a tract or parcel of land. 
Chief building official means the designated officer responsible for enforcement of building codes and supervision of building inspections in the city. 
City engineer means the licensed engineer designated by the city council to furnish engineering assistance for the administration of this chapter. 
Comprehensive plan means the long range comprehensive physical development plan for the city which has been officially adopted to provide long range development policies for the area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future, and which includes, among other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision, circulation, transportation and community facilities. 
Construction plan means the maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and this Code. 
Covenant means a private legal restriction on the use of land contained in the deed to the property or otherwise formally recorded. 
Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminus for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
Dedication means the grant of an interest in property to the public for public use and benefit. 
Deed means a document under seal that states a conveyance of title to real property. 
Deed approval means a process by the staff following an administrative review procedure authorized by this chapter for approval of deeds. 
Deep absorption sanitary system means a soil absorption sewer system for disposal of effluent through the bottom and sides of a hole or trench at a depth of more than three feet below the natural undisturbed surface. See Individual sewage disposal system . 
Density means the average number of housing units per unit of land, generally expressed as dwelling units per acre. Density may be specified as either gross density, the number of dwelling units per acre based on total land area being considered, or net density, the number of dwelling units per acre excluding area in street right-of-way and other publicly owned property. 
Developer. See Subdivider . 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Director of community development and director mean the director of community development of the city, or his designated representative, who is the administrative official designated by the planning commission to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
Easement means a grant, not in fee simple, by the property owner to the public, a corporation or persons of the use of a designated area of land for specific purposes. 
Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation or normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  A temporary rise in a stream level that results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water; and 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Floodplain means the area adjoining a watercourse which, although not lying in the floodway, has been or may hereafter be inundated by floodwater. 
Floodway, regulatory means the channel of a river or other watercourse and portions of the adjoining floodplain that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor area ratio means a mathematical expression determined by dividing the gross floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located, as follows: 
Gross Floor Area / Lot Area = Floor Area Ratio 
Grade means: 
(1)  The slope of a road, street or other public way, specified in percentage terms; and 
(2)  The average elevation at ground level of the buildable area, i.e., the area conforming to all zoning setback requirements, of a lot, tract or parcel of land. 
Health department means the state department of health and the county health department. 
Individual sewage disposal system means a septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other approved on-lot sewage treatment device. See Deep absorption sanitary system . 
Intensity means the degree to which land is used, referring to levels of concentration or activity in uses. 
Land surveyor, registered means a land surveyor licensed and registered in the state. 
Landlocked means a lot, tract or parcel of land surrounded or bounded on all sides by other lots, tracts or parcels and lacking frontage on or access to an approved street. 
Lot means a subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the transfer of ownership or for development. 
Lot, corner means a lot located at the intersection of and abutting two or more streets. 
Lot depth means the average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot. 
Lot, double frontage means a lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot frontage means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot and bounded by a street on only one side. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot. 
Lot of record means a lot which is a part of an approved plat or metes and bounds subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the county registrar of deeds. 
Lot, reverse frontage means a double frontage lot which is designed to be developed with the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress and egress provided on a minor street. 
Lot width means the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at right angles to the depth, typically measured at the frontage line or front property line. 
Metes and bounds means a system of describing and identifying land by measures (metes) and direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference such as a monument or other marker. 
Nonconformities/noncompliance mean a lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was in existence prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or prior to the revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of this chapter. 
Nullification means a process by which to revoke and invalidate a legal instrument. 
Off-site means any real property not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval. 
Off-site improvements means any utility, paving, grading, drainage, structure or modification of topography which is or will be located on property not within the boundary of the property to be developed. 
Off-street parking means a type of parking wherein the maneuvering of the vehicle while parking and unparking, as well as parking itself, is done entirely off of the street right-of-way, and where access to the area is by means of a driveway approach built to the standards of the city. 
On-site means any real property located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval. 
Parcel means a contiguous area of land described in a single description in a deed or as one of a number of lots on a plat; separately owned, either publicly or privately; and capable of being separately conveyed. For ease of indexing data, a segment of a street, highway, railroad, right-of-way, pipeline or other utility easement may be treated as though it were a parcel. 
Percolation test means field test conducted and used in judging the suitability of soil for an on-site subsurface sewage disposal and seepage system. 
Planned unit development means a form of development characterized by a unified site design, which may include providing common open space, density averaging, and a mix of building types and land uses. 
Planning commission and commission mean the planning commission of the city, as created by the city council. 
Plat, final means a map or plat of a land subdivision prepared according to applicable laws of the state and ordinances of the city and county, having the necessary affidavits for filing, dedications and acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land. 
Plat, preliminary means a map or plat of a proposed land subdivision showing the character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail according to this chapter to indicate the suitability of the proposed subdivision. 
Professional engineer means an engineer licensed and registered in the state. 
Public improvement and improvement mean any improvements consisting of drainage, water, sanitary sewers, paving, parkways, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, trees, lawns, off-street parking areas, lot improvements or other facilities for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
Public use means any area, building or structure held, used or controlled exclusively for public purposes by any department or branch of any government, without reference to the ownership of the building or structure. 
Public utility means a business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of public consequence and need, such as electricity, gas, water, sewage disposal, transportation or communications. 
Real property means of or relating to permanent, immovable things. 
Rear lot line means ordinarily that line of a lot which is opposite and farthest from the front lot line, or as designated on the plat for corner lots. 
Reserve strip means a narrow linear strip of property, usually separating a parcel of land and a roadway or easement, that is characterized by limited depth which will not support development and which will prevent access to the roadway or easement from the land adjacent to the reserve strip. 
Resubdivision, replat, amended plat and amended subdivision mean a change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivision of land. 
Rezoning means an amendment to or change in the zoning status of a lot, tract or parcel of land. 
Right-of-way line means a boundary or dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street. The right-of-way line is also known as the "property line." Also, it is a line between private and public ownership. 
Right-of-way (private) means a strip of land in private ownership to be occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, or sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on the final plat as a private right-of-way shall be maintained by the property owners abutting the right-of-way. 
Right-of-way (public) means a strip of land dedicated to the public, in fee simple or by easement, to be occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, or sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on the final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
Roadway means the improved or unimproved portion of a street intended for the accommodation of vehicular traffic. 
Setback. See Building line . 
Short-form subdivision means a subdivision process by the planning commission, or, in planned unit developments, by the director, for subdivision of lots, tracts or parcels into three or fewer lots, tracts or parcels, usually by metes and bounds description. 
Sidewalk means a paved surface area usually paralleling and separated from the roadway, used as a pedestrian way. 
Sight triangle means a sight distance area at the intersection of two public streets, on any corner lot, which is a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and side lot lines a distance of 25 feet along the front and side lot lines and extending the hypotenuse (when at a right angle) to the curb and connecting the points so established to form a sight triangle on the area adjacent to the street intersection. The triangle is included in the street right-of-way. 
Site plan means a plan showing the location and size of water and sewer lines and storm sewers, paving, contours at two-foot intervals, building pad elevations, spot elevations at each lot corner for all lots in the subdivision, lot and street drainage arrows, streetlight locations, water and sewer service connections, top of curb elevations, lot dimensions, fire hydrants, manhole locations, right-of-way widths and utility easements. 
Street means generally any public or private right-of-way which affords the primary means of access to abutting property. 
Street, collector means a street located within a neighborhood or other integrated use area which collects and distributes traffic from local streets or other minor streets and connects with arterial streets or community or neighborhood facilities. 
Street, freeway means a divided multi-lane arterial street designed for rapid unimpeded movement of large volumes of traffic with full control of access and grade separation at intersections. 
Street, frontage or service means a minor street auxiliary to and located on the side of a major street for service to abutting properties and adjacent areas for control of access. 
Street, local means a street which collects and distributes traffic between parcels of land and collector or arterial streets, with the principal purpose to provide access to abutting property. 
Street, major means all freeways and primary and secondary arterial streets so designated on the transportation plan map of the city. 
Street, minor means all collector streets, local streets and streets not otherwise designated a major street according to the transportation plan map. 
Street, primary arterial means a multi-lane arterial street designed primarily for traffic movement and secondarily for providing access to abutting properties and with a minimum number of at-grade intersections. 
Street right-of-way width means the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street. 
Street, secondary arterial means a multi-lane facility for traffic movement and for giving access to abutting property which provides connections between local and collector streets and the primary arterials and freeways, and which provides movement of relatively large volumes of traffic for short distances within the community. 
Street stub means a temporary dead-end street designed to provide future connection with adjoining unsubdivided areas. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. This includes but is not limited to advertising signs, billboards, antennas, wind generators, fences, poster panels and buildings. 
Subdivider means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land. 
Subdivision means the division, redivision or delineation of land by lots, tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership, or for urban development, or for the dedication or vacation of a public or private right-of-way or easement. 
Subdivision plat, unrecorded means a plat which has been approved by a city or county but has not been recorded with the county registrar of deeds. 
Utility means a service provided to the public by either a private or public agency. 
Vacate and vacation mean to make legally void. 
Variation means a deviation from the required norm that may be granted following certain procedures specified in this chapter. 
Yard means an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward except where otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter or this Code. 
Zoning district means a section of the city designated in the zoning ordinance text and usually delineated on the zoning map in which requirements for the use of land and buildings and development standards are prescribed. 
Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the city and any revisions thereto adopted and amended by the city council (chapter 122 of this Code). 
(Code 1977, § 16.04.050) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 106-2. - General policy; intent of chapter. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and its subsequent development to be subject to control by the city pursuant to the city's comprehensive plan for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the city. 
(b)  Land shall not be subdivided unless it is of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until public facilities and improvements exist or proper provision has been made for necessary improvements such as drainage, water, sanitary sewer and transportation facilities. 
(c)  Existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to the intent of and be properly related to the policies of the city's comprehensive plan and the capital budget and program of the city. It is intended that this chapter shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the city zoning ordinance, the city comprehensive plan, the transportation plan map, and all related sections of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 16.04.010)  
Sec. 106-3. - Purpose of chapter. 
(a)  The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban development. The arrangement of land parcels in the community for residential, commercial and industrial uses, and for streets, alleys, schools, parks and other public purposes, will determine to a large degree the conditions of health, safety, economy and amenity that prevail in the urban area. The quality of these conditions is of public interest. This chapter and standards for the subdivision and improvement of land for urban use are intended to make provisions for adequate light, air, open spaces, drainage, transportation, public utilities and other needs to ensure the development and maintenance of a healthy, attractive and efficient community that provides for the conservation and protection of its human and natural resources. 
(b)  This chapter is designed and intended and should be administered in a manner to: 
(1)  Implement the long range/comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of slums and blight; 
(3)  Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining tracts; 
(4)  Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the tract, and that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole community be borne by the whole community; 
(5)  Provide the best possible design for the tract and establish reasonable design standards and procedures for subdivision and resubdivision; 
(6)  Reconcile any differences of interests; and 
(7)  Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision. 
(Code 1977, § 16.04.020)  
Sec. 106-4. - Applicability of chapter. 
(a)  The regulations and development standards of this chapter shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision and properties within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)  The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels, any part of which when subdivided shall contain five acres or less in area. 
(2)  The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, including those for use by public and private utility companies. 
(3)  The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract of land regardless of the area involved. 
(4)  Planned unit development. 
(5)  Any commercial or industrial development. 
(6)  The requirements and provisions set forth in article VII, division 3 of this chapter and sections 106-365, 106-366 and 106-367, which sections involve sewer and water, shall apply to new institutional, commercial or industrial structures and single- or multiple-family dwellings, unless specifically excluded. For purposes of those referenced sections, the term "developer" shall include any builder or developer of the structure or dwelling. 
(b)  This chapter shall not apply to land legally subdivided prior to the original adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, except where provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 16.04.040; Ord. No. 661, § 1, 3-4-1997)  
Secs. 106-5—106-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 106-31. - Conditions for issuance of building permits. 
No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change, improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land which was subdivided or sold in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 16.08.031)  
Sec. 106-32. - Amendments. 
The city council and/or planning commission may from time to time adopt, amend and make public rules and regulations for the administration of this chapter to the end that the public be informed and the approval of plats be expedited. This chapter may be enlarged or amended by the city council and/or planning commission after public hearings are held and due consideration given in a manner prescribed by law. 
(Code 1977, § 16.08.020)  
Sec. 106-33. - Enforcement generally. 
The director and chief building official shall assist the planning commission in enforcing this chapter and shall notify the city attorney of any violations or lack of compliance herewith. 
(Code 1977, § 16.08.030(A))  
Sec. 106-34. - Resubdivision. 
(a)  Any change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat that affects any street layout or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, shall be approved by the planning commission by the same procedures, rules and regulations as for a new subdivision. 
(b)  Whenever the resubdivision of land is such that a preliminary and final plat must be prepared for the approval of the planning commission, such plat shall be conditioned upon the nullification and/or vacation of any underlying subdivision plat and or intervening easements as deemed necessary by the director. Such nullification and/or vacation shall follow the procedures prescribed in this chapter. The relocation and/or abandonment of any utilities shall be the responsibility of the developers and shall be provided for concurrently with the nullification and/or vacation procedure. The cost of any such relocation and/or abandonment shall be borne by the developers. 
(c)  Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building sites, the planning commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of utilities and adjacent streets. Provisional easements providing for the future opening of such streets and utility extensions may be made a requirement of the plat. Such easements would become effective at the time the parcel in question is resubdivided. 
(Code 1977, §§ 16.04.060—16.04.062)  
Sec. 106-35. - Correction of errors in plats. 
The correction of errors in plats shall follow the following procedures: 
(1)  Any final plat which has been approved by the city council, but not recorded with the county clerk, which is found to contain erroneous descriptions or is otherwise defective on its face may be corrected by the applicant and approved by the director. 
(2)  Any recorded subdivision plat which has been erroneously described on any record in the chain of title to the plats, or is otherwise defective on its face, may be corrected by filing a petition in district court pursuant to the provisions of 11 O.S. §§ 41-112—41-115. 
(Code 1977, §§ 16.04.080—16.04.082)  
Secs. 106-36—106-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VARIATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 106-51. - Generally. 
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size, shape or topographical condition or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in this chapter would result in a substantial hardship or inequity, the planning commission may vary or modify, except as otherwise indicated, such requirement of design, but not of procedures or improvements, so that the subdivider may develop the property in a reasonable manner. Such a variation shall preserve the purpose, general intent and spirit of this chapter and shall protect the public welfare and interest of the city. The planning commission shall not approve variations except under the following conditions: 
(1)  The granting of the variation shall not be detrimental to the public safety, health or general welfare, or injurious to nearby property. 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable generally to other property. 
(3)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owners would result, as distinguished from mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of this chapter is carried out. 
(4)  The variation will not in any manner vary the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 16.08.010)  
Sec. 106-52. - Conditions of approval. 
In approving variations, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 16.08.011)  
Sec. 106-53. - Request for variation. 
A written request for the variation shall be submitted by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed. The request shall state the reason for the request and contain all supportive material. 
(Code 1977, § 16.08.012)  
Sec. 106-54. - Approval. 
A variation to this chapter shall be approved or granted by an affirmative vote of three-fourths of the full membership of the planning commission and shall be subject to: 
(1)  Reaffirmation by the planning commission at the time of final plat approval; and 
(2)  Acceptance of the final plat and the dedications thereon by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 16.08.013)  
Secs. 106-55—106-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - NULLIFICATION AND VACATION OF PLATS 
 
Sec. 106-71. - Generally. 
If the owner of any tract of land platted for municipal purposes, or the owner of any portion of such platted tract, desires to vacate the whole or some part thereof, the owner shall follow the procedures prescribed in this division. 
(Code 1977, § 16.04.070)  
Sec. 106-72. - Unrecorded plats. 
(a)  The owner of any plat may nullify or void the plat by application at any time prior to the recordation of the plat, by a written instrument, a copy of which shall be attached to the plat, declaring it to be null or void. 
(b)  The planning commission shall approve such an instrument in the same manner as platting or subdivision. The city council shall also review and approve the instrument if public easements were accepted by the city council. 
(c)  The applicant shall execute and acknowledge such a written instrument and submit it for review and recommendation by the planning commission and for approval by the city council. Upon being duly recorded or filed with the county clerk, the instrument shall operate to destroy the force and the effect of the approval of the plat so nullified, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications or easements laid out or described in the plats. 
(d)  A fee in the amount set forth in section 42-106 shall be submitted with the application for plat vacation. 
(Code 1977, § 16.04.071)  
Sec. 106-73. - Vacation of recorded plat by city council. 
(a)  At the request of the owner, the city council shall, at its discretion, vacate and nullify a duly approved and recorded plat or any part of any plat in accordance with 11 O.S. § 42-101 et seq., as amended. The owner shall apply for nullification and vacation of the plat by a written instrument, a copy of which shall be attached to the plat, declaring it to be null and void. 
(b)  To qualify for nullification and vacation with approval from the city council, the plat must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  None of the lots in the plat shall have been sold or title transferred; 
(2)  If any of the lots have been sold, all owners of the lots shall approve, in writing, of the proposed nullification and vacation of the plat. This written approval shall accompany the application for nullification and vacation; and 
(3)  The request for nullification and vacation shall be in accordance with 11 O.S. § 42-101 et seq., as amended. 
(c)  The city council shall review and approve the application. 
(d)  The applicant shall execute and acknowledge such written instrument and submit it for review and recommendation by the planning commission and for approval by the city council. Upon being duly recorded or filed with the county clerk, the instrument shall operate to destroy the force and the effect of the approval of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications or easements laid out or described in the plats. 
(e)  A fee in the amount set forth in section 42-106 shall be submitted with the application for plat vacation. 
(Code 1977, § 16.04.072)  
Sec. 106-74. - Vacation of recorded plat by court order. 
If the applicant desires to vacate a plat which does not meet the provisions of section 106-72 or 106-73, such vacation requires the approval of a court of competent jurisdiction in the county in which the property is situated. Compliance with 11 O.S. § 42-101 et seq., as amended, and district court procedures is required. 
(Code 1977, § 16.04.073)  
Secs. 106-75—106-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION PLANS 
 
Sec. 106-91. - Standards for improvements. 
All improvements shall be designed and installed in accordance with all of the elements of the latest adopted comprehensive plan, and shall meet the minimum requirements and standards established by the ordinances and regulations relating thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.040)  
Sec. 106-92. - General requirements. 
(a)  Construction plans shall be prepared for all subdivision improvements. 
(b)  Construction plans shall be submitted with the final plat. No construction shall commence until the city engineer has approved the construction plans. 
(c)  All water and sanitary sewer improvements must be approved by the state health department prior to any work commencing. 
(d)  All construction plans shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. 
(e)  All construction plans shall conform to all standards and specifications required by this Code. 
(f)  Plans shall be drawn on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets at a horizontal scale of 40 feet to an inch and a vertical scale of four feet to an inch, or at a scale approved by the city engineer. 
(g)  After all improvements have been installed, four sets of as-built plans and specifications certified and signed by a professional engineer registered in the state shall be filed with the department of community development prior to the acceptance by the city council of any improvements installed by the subdivider. 
(h)  The engineer shall utilize the Oklahoma One-Call system in locating all existing underground facilities. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.041)  
Sec. 106-93. - Final construction plans. 
(a)  Paving and street drainage. Final construction plans for paving and street drainage shall conform to all city standards and specifications, including: 
(1)  The horizontal layout and alignment showing geometric data and other pertinent design details. The horizontal layout shall also show the direction of stormwater flow and the location of manholes, inlets and special structures; 
(2)  Profile showing existing the centerline and proposed elevation along the curb tops of all roads; and 
(3)  Typical paving sections showing design details and type of material. 
(b)  Water distribution system. Final construction plans for water distribution systems shall conform to all city standards and specifications, including: 
(1)  The layout and specific location of the water mains, pump stations, elevated tanks and other related structures in accordance with all current city standards, specifications and criteria for construction of water mains; 
(2)  The size and location of all mains, existing and proposed; 
(3)  The location of fire hydrants and valves; 
(4)  Design details showing the connection with the existing city water system; and 
(5)  The specific location and size of all water service connections for individual lots, when applicable. 
(c)  Sanitary sewers. Final construction plans for sanitary sewers shall conform to all city standards and specifications, including: 
(1)  A complete sewage flow map with flow calculations at outfall points; 
(2)  Design details for manholes and special structures. The flow line elevation shall be shown at a minimum of every 100 feet and at every point where the line enters and leaves manholes; 
(3)  Detailed design for lift stations, lagoon oxidation ponds, package plants or other special structures; and 
(4)  Engineer's report and application for state health department approval. 
(d)  Stormwater management. Final construction plans for stormwater management and control shall conform to all city standards and specifications, including: 
(1)  A complete drainage map with computations as required by this chapter and other provisions of this Code; and 
(2)  Detailed design of all drainage facilities, including a typical channel or paving section, storm sewers and other stormwater control facilities. 
(e)  Supporting documents and calculations. Final design criteria, reports, basin calculations and all other related computations should be submitted with final construction plans, unless previously submitted. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.042)  
Secs. 106-94—106-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLATTING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 106-121. - Plat approval required. 
No subdivider, or agent of the subdivider, of any parcel located in a proposed subdivision shall convey any parcel before such subdivision has been duly approved by the planning commission and plats, if required, are filed with the county registrar of deeds. 
(Code 1977, § 16.08.030(B))  
Sec. 106-122. - Unlawful subdivision. 
The subdivision of any lot or parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds description, for the purpose of sale, transfer, mortgage or lease, with the intent of evading this chapter, shall not be permitted. All such described subdivisions are subject to the requirements contained in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 16.08.030(C))  
Sec. 106-123. - Enforcement of provisions of final plat. 
The city may enforce any provision set forth in the final plat, though such provision may be more restrictive than the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 16.08.030(D))  
Sec. 106-124. - Review of plats and plans. 
(a)  Review by city departments. For all cases of subdividing within the city, the subdivider shall be required to submit subdivision plans and documents as specified by this chapter and other applicable sections of this Code to the department of community development. Such submission is required 21 days prior to the date of the next scheduled planning commission meeting. Upon acceptance of the application, the director shall transmit the proposal to various city departments for internal review. When all internal reviews have been completed and all required changes have been made, the application shall be scheduled for the next appropriate planning commission meeting. 
(b)  Review by planning commission. Each item submitted for approval shall be placed on the agenda of the planning commission only after fulfilling the appropriate requirements of this chapter. However, a preliminary plat not meeting all the requirements may be submitted provided the subdivider presents with the plat application a written request for specific variations, explaining the reasons therefor. 
(c)  Review by county health department. For any subdivision proposing the use of water wells and/or septic tanks, the subdivider shall submit a copy of the preliminary plat and final plat to the health department for review. Comments from the health department shall be forwarded to the director prior to placing the item on the agenda. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.010)  
Secs. 106-125—106-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 
 
Sec. 106-141. - Required. 
The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat for submission to the planning commission. It shall conform to the minimum requirements of the comprehensive plan for the city. The preliminary plat shall include all contiguous land partially or fully owned or under option by the applicant. The applicant must submit all required documents as specified in this division before the planning commission can commence preliminary plat review. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.020)  
Sec. 106-142. - Submission requirements. 
The applicant shall submit the following as a preliminary plat application: 
(1)  An application form supplied by the department of community development. 
(2)  Twelve white background prints of the preliminary plat submitted to the planning and zoning department at least 21 days prior to the meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered, and five copies of any supporting maps. 
(3)  A filing fee as set forth in section 106-148. 
(4)  A listing of all property contiguous to that shown on the plat that is owned or under option to purchase by the subdivider. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.021)  
Sec. 106-143. - Certification of design. 
The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a statement signed by the professional engineer and/or registered land surveyor preparing the plat that they have, to the best of their ability, designed the subdivision in accordance with the comprehensive plan with which they are completely familiar, and in accordance with the ordinances and regulations governing the subdivision of land except where a variance is requested in writing and the reasons for the variance are clearly stated. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.022)  
Sec. 106-144. - General requirements. 
(a)  The preliminary plat and all supporting maps shall be prepared in pen or pencil at a minimum scale of 100 feet to an inch on one or more 24-inch by 36-inch sheets. If more than two sheets are required, these shall be match-line sheets and an index sheet of the same dimensions or a map insert showing the entire subdivision shall accompany the preliminary plat. Plats in which all lots contain a net area in excess of 40,000 square feet may be drawn to a scale of 200 feet to the inch on one or more 24-inch by 36-inch sheets. The preliminary plat and all supporting maps shall be legible, and show the map scale, a north arrow and the date of preparation. 
(b)  The subdivision name shall be indicated on the preliminary plat in the following manner: 
(1)  The name of the subdivision or development, if the property is within an existing subdivision or development; 
(2)  The proposed subdivision name, if not within a previously platted subdivision, or the name of a previously approved but not recorded subdivision; or 
(3)  The name of the property, as it is commonly or locally known, if no subdivision name has been chosen. 
(c)  A key map and description shall be shown on the preliminary plat accurately locating the property by lot, section, U.S. survey and congressional township lines, county boundaries, city limits or incorporated areas, sewer districts, public water supply and drainage districts, school districts and other public districts. The insert map shall identify the arterial streets bounding the section and shall approximately locate the actual project site. 
(d)  The following requirements concerning ownership shall be indicated on the preliminary plat: 
(1)  The name, address, zip code and telephone number of the legal owner or agent of the property shall be indicated. If the applicant is not the owner, a statement of the agent's authority and interest shall be submitted with the application. 
(2)  The applicant shall file with the preliminary plat an affidavit certifying the owners of record of the land included in the proposed subdivision. 
(3)  A description of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting the property shall be included. 
(4)  A copy of any existing covenants on the property, if any, shall be included. 
(5)  The name, address, zip code and telephone number of the professional person responsible for subdivision design, for the design of public improvements, and for surveys shall be indicated. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.023)  
Sec. 106-145. - Contents. 
The preliminary plat shall contain or show the following information: 
(1)  The scale, north point and date; 
(2)  The proposed name of the subdivision and the wording "Preliminary Plat"; 
(3)  The names and addresses of the owners of record, the subdivider and the professional engineer preparing the plat; 
(4)  A key map showing the location of the proposed subdivision referenced to existing or proposed major streets and to government section lines, and including the boundaries and number of acres of the drainage area of which the proposed subdivision is a part, at a scale of one inch to 2,000 feet; 
(5)  Names, with location of intersecting boundary lines, of adjoining subdivisions, and location of city limits, if falling within or immediately adjoining the tract; 
(6)  A topographic map showing existing contours, with intervals not to exceed two feet, referenced to a United States Geological Survey or Geodetic Survey benchmark or monument; 
(7)  The location of existing property lines, existing easements, buildings, fences and other existing features within the area to be subdivided and similar facts regarding existing conditions on immediately adjacent property; provided, however, that actual measured distances shall not be required; 
(8)  The location of any natural features, such as watercourses, water bodies, flood hazard areas, tree masses, steep slopes or rock outcroppings, within the area to be subdivided, and similar facts regarding existing conditions on immediately adjacent property; 
(9)  The location, width and name of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract; 
(10)  The location and size of all existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other drainage facilities within the tract and on immediately adjacent property; 
(11)  Proposed fill or other structure-elevating techniques, levels, channel modification, and other methods to overcome flood or erosion related hazards. Such fill and compaction shall be in conformance with the building code as adopted and approved by the city; 
(12)  The location of all existing or abandoned oil or gas wells, oil or gas pipelines and other appurtenances associated with the extraction, production and distribution of petroleum products and all related easements on the site or on immediately adjacent property; 
(13)  Zoning district classification on land to be subdivided and on adjoining property. If there is more than one classification, delineation of each district shall be shown; 
(14)  The location, right-of-way width, paving width and street names of proposed streets; 
(15)  The length of the boundaries of the tract, measured to the nearest foot, and the proposed locations and widths of alleys, easements and setback lines and the approximate lot dimensions; 
(16)  The proposed location and dimension size of all water distribution facilities; 
(17)  The proposed location and dimension size of all sewage collection and disposal facilities; 
(18)  The proposed location and dimension size of all stormwater management and control facilities; 
(19)  The location and width of all proposed pedestrian crosswalks, sidewalks, bike trails, horse trails or other supplementary movement systems; 
(20)  The approximate location, dimension and area of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public use, including schools and institutional or civic uses, or for the common use of property owners in the proposed subdivision; and 
(21)  The classification of every street within or adjacent to the subdivision based on the proposed design. This shall be done by placing the appropriate term (freeway, major arterial, minor arterial, collector or local) directly on each street. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.024)  
Sec. 106-146. - Statistical data. 
The applicant for preliminary plat approval shall provide the following statistical information: 
(1)  The total number of gross acres; 
(2)  The total number of lots; 
(3)  The number of dwelling units, the acreage, the gross residential density, and the net residential density by housing type; 
(4)  The number of lots and acreage allocated to commercial and industrial uses, including the square footage of commercial and industrial structures, if appropriate; 
(5)  The acreage allocated to parks and common recreational use; 
(6)  The acreage allocated to common open space; 
(7)  The lineal footage of proposed public local, collector and arterial streets; and 
(8)  The acreage allocated to other public and semipublic uses. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.025)  
Sec. 106-147. - Preliminary engineering design. 
The following information shall be shown either on the preliminary plat or on supporting maps as appropriate: 
(1)  Streets. The proposed street layout and design shall show the following: 
a.  Pavement widths; 
b.  Typical street standards; 
c.  The direction of stormwater flow; 
d.  The location and dimension of all private access facilities; 
e.  Bridges, culverts, overpasses and other proposed grade separations; 
f.  Width of right-of-way for all public and private streets; 
g.  The location and width of all proposed sidewalks and crosswalks; 
h.  Width of all public drainage and/or utility easements; and 
i.  Proposed location of all streetlights. 
(2)  Water distribution system. The proposed water distribution system and design layout shall be shown, with: 
a.  Existing water main location and size; 
b.  Proposed water main location and size in accordance with design criteria and standard details for construction of water distribution systems, including individual lot water service connections, when applicable; 
c.  The location and spacing of fire hydrants; and 
d.  Special structures such as elevated storage tanks and pump stations. 
(3)  Sanitary sewers. The sanitary sewer layout shall be shown, with: 
a.  Size of existing and proposed sanitary sewers; 
b.  Special structures such as lift stations and inverted siphons; and 
c.  Layout of sewage treatment facilities such as lagoons, oxidation ponds and package plants. 
Additional information may be required by the city engineer. 
(4)  Stormwater management. The proposed method of handling stormwater within and through the subdivision shall be shown, including: 
a.  The area of the preliminary drainage plan, in acres, shown at points where stormwater enters and leaves the proposed subdivision, and where drainage channels intersect roadways, and at junction points; 
b.  A drainage map indicating the direction of stormwater flow from all points within the subdivision; 
c.  The location, size and type of existing and proposed stormwater control facilities, including storm sewers, inlets, culverts, swales, channels and retention or detention ponds and areas. The approximate area in acres served by the facilities shall be shown; 
d.  Special structures such as dams, spillways, dikes or levees; and 
e.  The location of the regulatory floodway upon completion of the improvements and an engineering report on the downstream flood impacts. 
(5)  Supplemental transportation systems. The proposed supplemental transportation systems, showing the layout and dimensions of walkways, sidewalks, bike trails, horse trails and other related improvements, shall be indicated. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.026)  
Sec. 106-148. - Filing fee. 
To defray the cost of review and administration procedures, a filing fee shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time of preliminary plat application. Preliminary plat fees shall be as set forth in section 42-106. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.027)  
Sec. 106-149. - Action by planning commission; effect of approval; expiration of approval. 
(a)  Review by planning commission. The planning commission shall review the preliminary plat and supporting material, any recommendations from agencies or officials, and testimony and exhibits submitted, if any, and shall advise the applicant of any required changes and/or additions. The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove the plat within 60 days of the date of its submission by the applicant, unless additional time is agreed to by the subdivider. If the preliminary plat is disapproved or approved conditionally, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be signed by the planning commission chairman and shall be attached to one copy of the plat and transmitted to the subdivider. Reasons for disapproval or conditional approval shall refer specifically to those parts of the comprehensive plan or specific ordinances or regulations with which the plat does not conform. On conditionally approving a plat, the planning commission may require submission of a revised preliminary plat. 
(b)  Review by city council. 
(1)  A preliminary plat recommended by the planning commission for approval, or approval subject to modifications, shall be transmitted to the city council with the report and recommendations of the planning commission within 30 days of the planning commission action for hearing before and city council action thereon. 
(2)  A preliminary plat recommended for denial by the planning commission shall not be considered further unless the applicant, within 15 days of the action by the planning commission, shall file with the city clerk and the recording secretary of the planning commission a written request for a public hearing before the city council. If no such request is filed, then $50.00 of the original permit fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(3)  If the city council disapproves or disapproves conditionally the preliminary plat, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing, signed by the mayor, and transmitted to the subdivider or developer and shall refer specifically to the portion of the comprehensive plan or specific ordinances or regulations with which the preliminary plat does not conform. The revised preliminary plat shall be submitted to the city council for subsequent review and approval within 30 days of submission by the developer or subdivider to the community development director without the necessity of rehearing by the planning commission. 
(c)  Plat conformity. If the plat conforms to all standards, or after the applicant and planning commission agree upon any revision which shall be filed with the planning commission on a revised copy, and upon approval by the city council, the subdivider may proceed with the laying out of streets and roads, the preparation of utility plans, and with preparation of a final plat. 
(d)  Approval of preliminary plat. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one year, except as provided in section 106-146(b). If a final plat is not submitted for approval within this time, the preliminary plat shall be void unless the planning commission agrees to an extension of time. A formal request for extension and reasons thereof must be submitted prior to the one year deadline date. Extensions may be granted for a period of one year and may not be granted more than two times. Any final plat not receiving final approval within the stated time limits, including extensions, if granted, shall be null and void and the developer shall be required to resubmit a new plat, with payment of required fees, for preliminary approval subject to all new zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations. 
(e)  Validation of remainder of preliminary plat. Approval of the first and each subsequent final plat shall automatically validate the remainder of the preliminary plat for an additional one year, for developments constructed in "phases." The planning commission may, upon application of the developer or subdivider, extend the effective period of the remaining phases of the preliminary plat for one additional year. Applications for such extension shall not be considered more than two times. 
(f)  Zoning Regulations. Every final plat shall conform to existing zoning and subdivision regulations applicable at the time of preliminary plat approval. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.028; Ord. No. 758, § 1, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 1174, § 4, 9-4-2018)  
Secs. 106-150—106-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 
 
Sec. 106-171. - Required; compliance with approved preliminary plat. 
(a)  The subdivider shall prepare a final plat for submission to the planning commission. The applicant must submit all required documents as specified in this division before the planning commission can commence final plat review. In no case shall construction of permanent public improvements commence until the subdivider submits improvement plans and approval of final improvement plans as specified in this chapter has been given by the city engineer and city council. 
(b)  A final plat must be in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plat in order to be heard by the planning commission. A revised preliminary plat may be required if changes to the final plat are considered by the director to be substantial. Changes which may be considered to be substantial include the following: 
(1)  Changes in lot dimensions; 
(2)  Changes resulting in higher density; 
(3)  Changes in the circulation network; 
(4)  Changes in drainage patterns; 
(5)  Changes in relationship between uses of land; and 
(6)  Changes in land use in general. 
(c)  A final plat not meeting all the requirements of this chapter may be submitted provided the subdivider presents with the plat a written request for specific variations or exceptions and enumerates in detail the reasons therefor in conformance with section 106-51 and section 106-124. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.030)  
Sec. 106-172. - Time limits. 
(a)  The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the planning commission for final approval within one year of the date on which the preliminary plat was approved. If not submitted for final approval within such time, the preliminary plat shall be void unless the planning commission agrees to an extension of time. The final plat shall be filed in the office of the county clerk within two years after approval by the city council and planning commission, or, if not filed within such time, the approval shall be void. 
(b)  Where only a portion of an approved preliminary plat is submitted for final approval, a final plat of the remaining area may be submitted at any time within five years of the preliminary approval, if each subsequent final plat conforms substantially to the approved preliminary plat. If a subsequent final plat is not submitted for approval within such time, such subsequent final plat shall be void unless the planning commission agrees to an extension of time. Any final plat previously approved by the planning commission without formal granting of an extension of such time is hereby ratified and approved. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.031; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 10-1-2013)  
Sec. 106-173. - Submission requirements. 
The applicant shall submit the following as a final plat application: 
(1)  An application form supplied by the department of community development; 
(2)  Twelve white background prints of the final plat; 
(3)  The original tracing of the final plat; 
(4)  Five copies of any supporting maps; 
(5)  Eight copies of the final water plans and six copies of the final sanitary sewer, paving and drainage plans, as specified in this chapter; 
(6)  Two copies of final construction estimates, prepared and signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state; 
(7)  A filing fee as set forth in section 106-177; and 
(8)  Copies of percolation tests for each lot approved by the health department, if applicable. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.032)  
Sec. 106-174. - General requirements. 
(a)  The final plat shall be prepared in ink on tracing cloth or other acceptable reproducible material, in accordance with the permanency requirements of applicable state law. The final plat shall be drawn at a minimum scale of 100 feet to an inch, from an accurate survey, on one or more sheets having dimensions of 24 inches by 36 inches. The drawing surface of the plat shall have a binding margin of two inches at the left side of the plat, a margin of not less than one inch at the right side, and a margin of not less than 1½ inches at the top and bottom. If more than one sheet is required, these shall be match-line sheets, and an index sheet of the same dimensions or a map insert showing the entire subdivision shall accompany the final plat. 
(b)  Plats in which all lots contain a net area in excess of 40,000 square feet may be drawn to a scale of 200 feet to the inch on one or more 24-inch by 36-inch sheets. If more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same dimensions or a map insert showing the entire subdivision shall be filed. 
(c)  The final plat shall be signed and sealed by a registered land surveyor licensed to practice in the state. 
(d)  On the first sheet of every plat there shall be a key map showing the location of the subdivision referenced to government survey section lines and major streets, drawn at a scale of one inch to 2,000 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.033)  
Sec. 106-175. - Contents. 
The final plat shall show the following: 
(1)  The plat shall show the location and a description of all section corners and permanent survey monuments in or near the tract, to at least one of which the subdivision shall be referenced. 
(2)  The plat shall show the length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals thereof, and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in degrees and minutes, as specified in this section. 
(3)  The plat shall show the boundary lines of the land being subdivided, fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and the location of boundary lines of adjoining lands, with adjacent subdivisions identified by official names. 
(4)  The plat shall show the lines of all proposed streets, fully dimensioned by lengths and bearing or angles. 
(5)  The plat shall show the lines of all proposed alleys. Where the length or direction of an alley is not readily discernible from data given for lot and block lines, the length and bearing shall be given. 
(6)  The plat shall show the widths, and names where appropriate, of all proposed streets and alleys, and of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements, which shall be properly located. 
(7)  The plat shall show the lines of all proposed lots, fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings or angles, except that where a lot line meets a street line at right angles, the angle or bearing value may be omitted. 
(8)  The plat shall show the outline of any property which is offered for dedication to public use, fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, with the area marked "Public." 
(9)  The plat shall show blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with areas to be excluded from platting marked "Not a Part." 
(10)  The plat shall show the location of all building lines, setback lines and easements for public services or utilities, with dimensions showing their location. 
(11)  The plat shall show the radii, arcs, points of tangency, points of intersection and central angles for curvilinear streets and radii for all property returns. Distances measured along curves shall be arc lengths. 
(12)  Proper notation shall be placed on all final plats where access to any street has been limited by the planning commission. The lots and area affected by such limitation shall be clearly indicated. The note "Limits of No Access" may be used. 
(13)  The following note shall be placed on all private drives, private access facilities and private common areas: "ALL MAINTENANCE OF THE (Name Area(s)) AREA SHALL BE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE THEN CURRENT PROPERTY OWNERS OF THE SUBDIVISION THROUGH THE (Name of Subdivision) PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION. THE PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION SHALL, AT A MINIMUM, INCLUDE AS MEMBERS THE THEN CURRENT OWNERS OF TRACTS WITHIN THE PLATTED AREA, AND SHALL EXIST IN PERPETUITY. THE OBLIGATION TO MAINTAIN THE (Name Areas) IS INTENDED TO BENEFIT, AND MAY BE ENFORCED BY, THE CITY OF MUSTANG." The affected areas shall be clearly indicated. 
(14)  If the subdivider places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the zoning ordinance or this chapter, such restrictions or references thereto should be indicated on the subdivision plat. The proper acknowledgement of owners and the consent by the mortgagee to plat restrictions shall be shown. 
(15)  The following shall be made and shown on the original tracing: 
a.  Owner's certificate and dedication, with acknowledgements, signed; 
b.  Registered land surveyor's certificate of survey, signed, and his seal and acknowledgement; 
c.  Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to the public, acknowledged and signed; 
d.  Certificate of planning commission approval; 
e.  Certificate of city council acceptance of rights-of-way, easements and public land dedications; 
f.  County treasurer's certificate; and 
g.  Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive covenants, filed in the office of the county clerk, which directly affect the land being subdivided. 
(16)  The plat shall include a title which shall include: 
a.  The name of the subdivision; 
b.  The wording "Final Plat"; 
c.  The name of the city, county and state; and 
d.  The location and a description of the subdivision, referenced to section, township and range, and a boundary traverse. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.034; Ord. No. 1168, § 1, 7-3-2018)  
Sec. 106-176. - Statistical information. 
The applicant for final plat approval shall provide the following statistical information: 
(1)  The total number of acres (gross and net); 
(2)  The total number of lots; 
(3)  The number of dwelling units, the acreage, the gross residential density, and the net residential density by housing type; 
(4)  The number of lots and acreage allocated to commercial and industrial uses, including the square footage of commercial and industrial structures, if appropriate; 
(5)  The acreage allocated to parks and common residential use; 
(6)  The acreage allocated to common open space; 
(7)  The lineal footage of proposed public local, collector and arterial streets; and 
(8)  The acreage allocated to other public and semipublic uses. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.035)  
Sec. 106-177. - Filing fee. 
To defray the costs of review and administrative procedures, there shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time of submission of the final plat application, a fee in the amount set forth in section 42-106. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.036)  
Sec. 106-178. - Action by planning commission. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the planning commission to act upon the final plat within 45 days after the final plat application has been made and submitted for final approval. This approval and the date thereof shall be shown on the plat over the signature of the planning commission chairperson or secretary-member. Unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the subdivider, and if no action is taken by the planning commission at the end of 45 days after submission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. If the final plat is disapproved, grounds for this refusal shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be transmitted with the original and prints to the applicant. The reasons for disapproval shall refer specifically to those parts of the comprehensive plan or ordinance or regulation with which the plat does not comply. 
(b)  A final plat recommended by the planning commission for approval, or approval subject to modifications, shall be transmitted to the city council with the report and recommendations of the planning commission within 30 days of the planning commission action for hearing before and city council action thereon. 
(c)  A final plat recommended for denial by the planning commission shall not be considered further unless the applicant, within 15 days of the action by the planning commission, shall file with the city clerk and the recording secretary of the planning commission a written request for a public hearing before the city council. If no such request is filed, then $50.00 of the original permit fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.037; Ord. No. 1174, § 5, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 106-179. - Acceptance by city council. 
Before recording the final plat, it shall be submitted to the city council for acceptance of public ways and service and utility easements and land dedicated to the public use. This approval of the plat shall be shown over the signature of the mayor and attested by the city clerk. The disapproval of any plat or plan by the city council shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon. The subdivider must meet the requirements of section 106-473 prior to city council acceptance of any final plat. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.038)  
Sec. 106-180. - Endorsement of approval; recording. 
(a)  Signatures shall be affixed to the final plat under the following conditions: 
(1)  When a bond or other assurance for completion of improvements is required, endorsement of approval on the plat shall be given after the assurance has been approved by the city council and all the conditions of the final plat approval pertaining to the plat have been satisfied; and 
(2)  When installation of improvements is required, endorsement of approval on the plat shall be given after all conditions of the final plat approval have been satisfied and all improvements completed and accepted. There shall be written evidence that the required public facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the city as shown by a certificate signed by the director. 
(b)  A final plat may be recorded under the following conditions: 
(1)  After the final approval of the plat and the affixing of all required signatures, the subdivider, accompanied by the city clerk, shall file the original tracing, one dark-line print on cloth, and one contact reproducible cloth tracing or mylar with the county clerk. After recording, the subdivider shall provide the planning and zoning office with three white background prints and one contact reproducible mylar. The subdivider shall also submit to the department of community development one 8½-inch by 11-inch reproducible copy of the recorded plat. The subdivider shall pay all required county recording fees. 
(2)  No plat or other land subdivision instrument shall be recorded in the office of county clerk until it shall have been approved by the planning commission and by the city council as required. 
(Code 1977, § 16.32.039)  
Secs. 106-181—106-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 106-211. - Time limit for filing approved deeds. 
Deeds approved for subdivision of property, whether through the deed approval process, short form subdivision, lot line adjustment or exemption by the planning commission or director, must be filed within one year from the date of the approval as reflected on the deeds. The time to file approved deeds may be extended for a period not to exceed one year by submitting an application to the same body that granting the initial deed approval and showing good cause why additional time is needed to file the deeds. If the deeds are not filed within one year from the date of approval, or within any extension of the filing period, the approval shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 1060, § 1, 10-18-2011)  
Secs. 106-212—106-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEED APPROVAL 
 
Sec. 106-231. - Intent of division. 
The exemptions described in this division are intended to facilitate the limited conveyance of simple property divisions and to allow minor adjustments to be made to lot lines. Extensive subdivision or resubdivision shall not be accomplished by use of this division. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.010)  
Sec. 106-232. - Eligibility; compliance with other regulations. 
(a)  It is the intent of this division to limit this classification and procedure to those cases where the improvements required by this chapter have been provided and all such improvement requirements, except for the extension of service to individual lots, have been satisfied under applicable sections of this chapter. 
(b)  The classification of a subdivision as a deed approval procedure shall not be construed as a waiver of any requirements of this chapter or the provisions of any other ordinance or other statute pertaining to the property. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.031)  
Sec. 106-233. - General procedure. 
(a)  Application; fee. Application for deed approval review shall be filed with the director. The application shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The deed, with legal description, to be approved. In the case of a lot line adjustment, all deeds affected shall be submitted for approval concurrently. 
(2)  A copy of the original deed. 
(3)  A certified survey, prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state, showing the following: 
a.  The legal description of the subject tract; 
b.  Scale, north arrow and date; 
c.  Name and address of the owner of record; 
d.  A key map showing the location of the subject tract, parcel or lot referenced to existing and proposed major streets and government section lines; 
e.  Location of existing structures, and dedicated and/or private streets where they adjoin and/or are immediately adjacent to the lot adjustment, showing widths where applicable; 
f.  Easements and location of public utilities to serve the tract, parcel or lot, showing widths where applicable; and 
g.  Original signature and seal of the registered land surveyor preparing the plat of survey, properly notarized. 
(4)  Deeds of tracts or lots bordering the proposed deed approval, if deemed necessary by the director. 
A filing fee in the amount set forth in section 42-106 shall accompany each deed submitted for deed approval application. The filing fee is not refundable. 
(b)  Action by director. The director shall review the application and may submit it for review and comment to other agencies and/or departments as he deems necessary. Within five working days of the official date of application, the director shall approve or not approve the application for deed approval and shall notify the applicant of the decision. The applicant may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of the time period. If the application is not approved by the director, the applicant may apply to the planning commission for a public hearing following the same procedure as a short form subdivision. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.032)  
Sec. 106-234. - Lot line adjustments. 
(a)  The purpose of deed approval for lot line adjustments is to allow adjustments to be made to lot lines of platted lots for the purpose of adjusting the size of a building site; however, extensive replatting shall not be accomplished by use of this section. 
(b)  Exceptions to this chapter designated as deed approval lot line adjustments shall not violate any of the provisions of this chapter as to requirements for design or improvements and shall constitute only procedural exceptions as stated in this division. 
(c)  In addition to the criteria found in section 106-261, the approval of any lot line adjustment shall not result in the creation of any lot which is unusable or does not meet the requirements of this chapter or any ordinance of the city. 
(d)  All lots affected shall be submitted for approval concurrently. 
(e)  An application and filing fee shall accompany each deed submitted for approval. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.033)  
Sec. 106-235. - Other deeds eligible for deed approval. 
The director has the authority to approve deeds under the following conditions: 
(1)  Preexisting deeds. The property conveyed by the deed submitted for review existed in its present configuration prior to its annexation to the city or prior to the September 30, 1971, the date of adoption of the subdivision regulations. Documentation of such fact shall be required. 
(2)  Exempted deeds. 
a.  The configuration of the property to be conveyed was created by a court decree or by an action of other governmental authority. Documentation of such court decree or governmental action shall be required; 
b.  The property to be conveyed is bounded on all sides by properties which have previously received deed approvals by the planning commission or by the director. Documentation of such fact shall be required; and 
c.  The deed submitted is exempted from the requirements of planning commission approval by a provision of state law. Documentation of such exemption shall be required. 
(3)  Other deeds. The property to be conveyed is located within a noncomplying subdivision or other area of the city for which specific guidelines governing development and/or redevelopment have been adopted by the planning commission. The property shall be in full compliance with such guidelines. A deed conveying property in a subdivision which is found to be nonconforming because of ordinance or regulation changes will be considered to be a preexisting deed and may be approved administratively so long as the subdivision was in conformance with the ordinances and regulations in force at the time of its creation. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.034)  
Sec. 106-236. - Effect of approval. 
Once the initial deed or any subsequent deed has been approved through the deed approval process either by short form subdivision, lot line adjustments or exemption by the planning commission or director, such approval relates back to the original approved legal description and covers all future conveyances using the same legal description. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.040)  
Sec. 106-237. - Limitations on authority of director. 
No further delegation of the planning commission's authority for the approval of deeds is granted or implied by this division. The director is hereby authorized by the planning commission to sign or stamp approval on the face of those deeds receiving approval by any manner of the deed approval process. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the applicant from requesting a public hearing before the planning commission. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.050)  
Secs. 106-238—106-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SHORT FORM SUBDIVISION 
 
Sec. 106-261. - Eligibility. 
(a)  Whenever there is a tract or previously subdivided parcel under single ownership which is to be resubdivided into three or fewer lots, the proposed subdivision may be exempt from the procedural provisions of this chapter, and a preliminary and final plat may not be required. 
(b)  Subdivision of a tract, parcel or lot shall be defined as a short form subdivision under the following conditions and must meet the requirements described in this division: 
(1)  No more than three tracts, parcels or lots shall be created or approved based on the original legal description submitted at the time of original application for land subdivision; and 
(2)  For the land subdivision described in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the land shall not be resubdivided for a period of one year from the date of creation or approval of the short form subdivision, unless it is fully platted under article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.020)  
Sec. 106-262. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of the short form subdivision process is not to allow extensive subdividing and/or resubdividing of large tracts, parcels or lots. Whenever a short form subdivision shows one or more tracts, lots or parcels containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that such tracts, lots or parcels will eventually be resubdivided or extensive improvements are required, the director and/or planning commission may require the applicant to submit a preliminary and final plat. Platting procedures and requirements shall be followed as specified in article III of this chapter. 
(b)  The classification of a subdivision as short form subdivision shall not be construed as a waiver of any requirement of this chapter or the provisions of any other ordinance or statute pertaining to the property. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.021)  
Sec. 106-263. - Application for approval. 
(a)  Application for short form subdivision approval shall be filed with the director on forms supplied by the city. The application shall consist of the following: 
(1)  A deed on each tract to be approved, with legal description, shall be submitted. 
(2)  A certified survey, prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state, shall be submitted on the proposed tract and the resubdivision thereof. The survey shall show the following: 
a.  Each new tract being formed shall be labeled "Tract A," "Tract B" and/or "Tract C"; 
b.  The legal description of the original tract of land and each new tract being created by the subdivision shall be shown; 
c.  The scale, north point and date shall be shown; 
d.  The name and address of the owner of record shall be shown; 
e.  A key map showing the location of the reference to existing and proposed major streets and government section lines shall be included; 
f.  The location of existing buildings and dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin and/or are immediately adjacent to the subdivision shall be shown; 
g.  The length of boundaries of the tracts created, measured to the nearest foot, and proposed location and width of streets, alleys and easements and building setback lines, where applicable, shall be shown; and 
h.  The original signature and seal of the registered land surveyor preparing the plat of survey, properly notarized, shall be included. 
(3)  A copy of the original deed showing the legal description of the tract, site or parcel proposed as a short form subdivision shall be submitted. 
(4)  Deeds of tracts, parcels or lots bordering the proposed short form subdivision shall be submitted if deemed necessary by the director. 
(5)  All instruments for the dedication of required public easements and rights-of-way shall be submitted. This shall mean, in cases where private easements are required, that the applicant must submit certified copies of the instruments filed of record with the county clerk. 
(6)  Percolation test results approved by the health department shall be submitted if applicable. 
(b)  A filing fee in the amount set forth in section 42-106 shall accompany the short form subdivision application. The filing fee is not refundable. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.022)  
Sec. 106-264. - Review. 
The director and city staff shall review the proposed short form subdivision to ensure compliance with all design and improvement requirements of this chapter. The director may submit the application for review and comment to other agencies and/or city departments as he deems necessary. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.023)  
Sec. 106-265. - Approval procedure. 
(a)  Staff level approval. 
(1)  For short form subdivisions of lots, blocks or parcels approved for commercial, industrial or high density multiple-family residential land uses in an approved planned unit development, approval may be granted at staff level under the following conditions: 
a.  All other requirements of this section are met; or 
b.  The proposed short form subdivision is in substantial conformance with the approved planned unit development master development plan map. Substantial conformance shall be determined by the director and based on the provisions in section 106-171(b). 
(2)  If subsections (a)(1)a and b of this section are not met, the director may require the applicant to submit a preliminary and final plant and/or a revised planned unit development application to be reviewed and approved by the planning commission and city council. 
(3)  After review of the application, and within five working days of the official date of application, the director shall approve or not approve the application for short form subdivision and shall notify the applicant of the decision. The applicant may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. If the application is approved, each deed shall be certified by the director as the designated representative of the planning commission. If the application is denied, the director shall inform the applicant of the reasons for denial and shall advise him on appropriate alternate procedures. 
(b)  Planning commission approval. 
(1)  In all cases where staff level approval is not allowed, the director or his designate shall prepare a written report thereon, which shall be forwarded to the planning commission not more than 21 days after receipt of the short form subdivision application for consideration at the next regular meeting of the planning commission. 
(2)  Upon approval by the planning commission, each deed shall be certified by the signature of the chairperson or his designate. If the application is denied, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing, with reference made to the express provision of the regulations to which the proposed short form subdivision does not conform, and shall be transmitted to the applicant. 
(3)  Whenever a deviation is required from the improvement requirements contained in this chapter or an easement or other element is to be dedicated, the action of the planning commission shall be forwarded to the city council for its approval and acceptance of dedications. For all other types of short form subdivision applications, the action of the planning commission is final. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.024)  
Sec. 106-266. - Required improvements. 
(a)  All current subdivision regulations shall be complied with for subdivisions subject to this division, including all ordinances and regulations relating to the improvement of streets, the installation of water, sewer and drainage facilities, and the dedication of required easements. 
(1)  Sewage disposal facilities. The extension and/or installation of sanitary sewer facilities shall be required as prescribed by this chapter. If a subdivided tract, parcel or lot is proposed to utilize an individual sewage disposal system, the following conditions shall apply: 
a.  Percolation test results for each tract affected, approved by the health department, shall be submitted with the short form subdivision application; 
b.  The individual sewage disposal system shall be installed and inspected in accordance with health department and city requirements; 
c.  Minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
1.  Lots with water wells and septic tanks: One acre. 
2.  Lots with septic tanks only: Three-fourths acre. 
d.  All requirements of Septic Tank and Subsurface Tile Systems, Bulletin No. 600, of the state department of health, as currently adopted or subsequently amended, shall be met. 
e.  The width of the lot at the front building line shall not be less than 100 feet. 
(2)  Water distribution facilities. The extension of and/or installation of water facilities shall be required to serve the tract, parcel or lot as specified by this chapter. If a private water well is utilized, the following conditions shall apply: 
a.  Approval of water well drilling by the health department must be secured; or 
b.  The tract, parcel or lot must meet the locational criteria and health department requirements if a water well and septic tank are both used. 
(b)  In all cases where sanitary sewer and/or public water facilities are not available and the extension of such facilities is not required, the deed submitted for approval shall have affixed to its face the following: "NOT SERVED BY PUBLIC SEWER AND/OR WATER." 
(c)  If approval of the short form subdivision is conditional upon the extension and/or installation of any public improvements, upon short form subdivision approval by the planning commission and acceptance by city council, if appropriate, the applicant shall prepare and submit to the appropriate department improvement plans. All improvement plans shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter and any other applicable provisions of this Code. Assurance of completion of the improvements shall be made in accordance with article VII, division 4 of this chapter. Construction plans and the assurance of completion shall be submitted prior to any building permit being issued for any lot created using the short form subdivision procedure. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.025)  
Sec. 106-267. - Conditions for classification as deed approval. 
Subdivision of land shall be classified as a deed approval under the following conditions: 
(1)  No additional tract, parcel or lot shall be created by any deed approval. Deed approval shall include: 
a.  Deeds resulting from the adjustment of lot lines in an approved plat; or 
b.  Preexisting or otherwise exempt deeds as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  The dedication or abandonment of public rights-of-way and/or easements must not be involved in, included in or required by the deed approval. 
(3)  This chapter and all other applicable ordinances and statutes must be satisfied without the construction of streets, water facilities, storm drainage facilities or other improvements except as necessary to directly serve the created lots and to provide a direct connection to an existing and approved system. 
(Code 1977, § 16.12.030)  
Secs. 106-268—106-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 106-291. - General principles. 
The quality of design of the urban area is dependent on the quality of design of the individual subdivisions that compose it. Good community design requires the coordination of the efforts of each subdivider and developer of land within the urban area. Therefore, the design of each subdivision shall be prepared in accordance with the principles established by the comprehensive plan for land use, circulation, community facilities and public utility services, and in accordance with the general principles set out in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.010)  
Sec. 106-292. - Planning units. 
It is intended that the Mustang urban area should be designed as a group of integrated residential neighborhoods and appropriate commercial, industrial and public facilities. The neighborhood, as a planning unit, is intended as an area principally for residential use, and of a size that can be served by one elementary school. Space for religious, recreational, educational and shopping facilities to serve the residents of the neighborhood should be provided and designed as an integral part of each neighborhood. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.011)  
Sec. 106-293. - Size of lots and other areas to be adequate for intended use. 
The size of lots and blocks and other areas for residential, commercial, industrial and public uses should be designed to provide adequate light, air, open space, landscaping, and off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.012)  
Sec. 106-294. - Preservation of topography and natural physical features. 
The arrangement of lots, blocks and the street system should be designed to make the most advantageous use of topography and natural physical features. Tree masses and large individual trees should be preserved. The system of sidewalks and roadways and the lot layout should be designed to take advantage of the visual qualities of the area. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.013)  
Sec. 106-295. - Traffic circulation. 
Circulation within the urban area shall be provided in accordance with the following design criteria: 
(1)  Each subdivision shall provide for the continuation of all arterial streets and highways as shown on the transportation plan map. Arterial streets should be located on the perimeter of the residential neighborhood. 
(2)  Minor streets should be designed to provide access to each parcel of land within the residential neighborhood and within industrial areas, and in a manner that will discourage use by through traffic. They should be planned so that future urban expansion will not require the conversion of local streets to collector or arterial routes. 
(3)  Collector streets should be designed to provide a direct route from other minor streets to the major street system. 
(4)  All subdivision street systems should be designed to allow vehicular and pedestrian circulation within subdivisions and from one subdivision to another. 
(5)  Ingress and egress to residential properties shall be provided only on minor streets and, where design allows, restricted to local streets only. 
(6)  Pedestrian ways should be separated from roadways used by vehicular traffic. Sidewalks shall be designed to provide all residential building sites as required by section 106-370 with direct access to all neighborhood facilities, including elementary schools, parks and playgrounds, churches and shopping centers. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.014)  
Sec. 106-296. - Implementation of comprehensive plan. 
(a)  Minimum standards for development are contained in the zoning ordinance, the building code and this chapter. However, the comprehensive plan expresses policies which are intended to achieve optimum quality of development in the urban area. If only the minimum standards are followed, as expressed by the various ordinances regulating land development, a standardization of development will occur. 
(b)  Subdivision design shall be of a quality to carry out the purpose and spirit of the policies expressed in the comprehensive plan and in this chapter rather than be limited to the minimum standards required in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.015)  
Sec. 106-297. - Compliance with other regulations. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements established in this chapter, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules and regulations: 
(1)  All applicable statutory provisions; 
(2)  The provisions of this Code, including all requirements of chapter 122, pertaining to zoning, chapter 18, pertaining to buildings and building regulations, chapter 118, pertaining to utilities, and chapter 102, pertaining to streets and sidewalks; 
(3)  The city's comprehensive plan, including section 3.0, Goals, Objectives and Policies, the Transportation Plan Map and the Utility Plan Map; 
(4)  All laws, rules and regulations of the health department and appropriate state agencies; 
(5)  The requirements of the state department of transportation if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street; and 
(6)  The standards and regulations adopted by the director and by all boards, commissions, agencies and officials of the city dealing with the subdivision of land. 
(b)  If the owner of land proposed to be subdivided places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision which are greater than those required by this chapter or any regulations stated in this section, such restrictions or a reference thereto should be indicated on the subdivision plat. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.020)  
Sec. 106-298. - Streets. 
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to all of the elements of the comprehensive plan, including the standards contained in the transportation plan, and shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Integration with street system. All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established on the transportation plan and shall provide for the integration of future streets. 
(2)  Conformance with transportation plan. Major streets shall be planned to conform with the transportation plan map. 
(3)  Subdivisions abutting or containing major street. Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require service streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of arterial and local traffic. 
(4)  Minor streets. Minor streets shall be designed so that their use by arterial traffic will be discouraged, to conform as much as possible to topography, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary for convenient and safe access to property. 
(5)  Provision for future streets and resubdivision. When a tract is subdivided into lots containing one or more acres, such lots or parcels shall be arranged to permit the logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivision with provision for adequate utility easements and connections for such resubdivisions. 
(6)  Provision for development of adjoining properties. The arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no hardship in the subdividing of adjacent properties. The planning commission may require the dedication of street rights-of-way to facilitate the development of adjoining properties. 
_____ 
(7)  Specific standards. Street design standards shall be in accordance with table 1. 
TABLE 1. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR CITY STREETS 
Element 	Freeway 	Major 
Arterial 	Minor 
Arterial 	Collector 	Local 	Rural 
Estates 
Design speed: 						
	Outlying areas 	55 mph 	50 mph 	40 mph 	30 mph 	25 mph 	25 mph 
	Urbanized areas 	55 mph 	40 mph 	30 mph 	30 mph 	25 mph 	25 mph 
Minimum centerline radius (arc type curve) 	500' 	400' 	300' 	100' 	100' 	100' 
Maximum grade: 						
	Outlying areas 	4% 	7% 	7% 	10% 	15% 	15% 
	Urbanized areas 	6% 	7% 	7% 	10% 	15% 	15% 
Minimum grade 	— 	0.5% 	0.5% 	0.5% 	0.5% 	0.5% 
Stopping sight distance 	600'/475' 	350' 	200' 	200' 	200' 	200' 
Number of traffic lanes 	4 minimum 	4 minimum 	4 	2 	2 	2 
Total minimum street width (face to face of curbs) 	— 	50' 
minimum 	50' 
minimum 	32' 	26' 	22' with 6' sidewalk 
Minimum paving thickness: 						
	Asphalt section 	Structurally 
designed 	9¼? 	9¼? 	8¼? 	8¼? 	4? with 6? stabilized, aggregate base 
	Concrete section 	Structurally 
designed 	7? 	7? 	6? 	5? 	— 
Right-of-way width 	300' 	120' 
minimum 	100' 
minimum 	60' 
minimum 	50' 
minimum 	60' 
minimum 
Access control 	Full 	Planned 	Planned 	— 	— 	— 
Structure design load 	HS-20 	HS-20 	HS-20 	H-15 	H-15 	H-10 
Vertical clearance 	16.5' 	15.5' 	15.5' 	15.5' 	15.5' 	15.5' 
Surface type 	High 	High 	High 	High 	High 	High 
 
Notes: 
(1)  All streets (except rural estates) shall have six-inch curbs and provide storm drainage as per chapter 50, article III. Stopping sight distances for vertical alignment shall be determined by use of the methods given on page 609 of the Traffic Engineering Handbook, third edition, Washington Institute of Traffic Engineers, 1965. 
(2)  A cul-de-sac shall not exceed 500 feet in length, measured from the nearest street right-of-way line to the outer curbline (or edge of street paving in rural estate zoning) of the cul-de-sac. When topography or ownership create a hardship, the planning commission may waive the 500-foot maximum cul-de-sac length, but in no case shall the cul-de-sac length be in excess of 1,000 feet. If the street is more than 150 feet in length, a turnaround shall be provided. Culs-de-sac shall be designed in accordance with the design standards for city streets. 
(3)  An intersection sight triangle shall be used as per city codes. 
(4)  Rural estate streets shall be provided with bar ditches that have sufficient capacity to manage the storm drainage requirements per chapter 50, article III. Stormwater shall be contained within the bar ditches. Drainage culverts shall be provided with sufficient capacity to manage storm drainage per chapter 50, article III. The size of each culvert shall be shown on the preliminary plat. 
_____ 
(8)  Right-of-way width. Street right-of-way widths shall be in accordance with table 1, and where not otherwise designated it shall be the responsibility of the developer to dedicate rights-of-way to provide a width of not less than required in this chapter. 
(9)  Earth slopes. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in table 1 may be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide earth slopes. Slopes in excess of 2.5 to 1 shall be supported by a retaining wall or other construction method approved by the city council as recommended by the city engineer. 
(10)  Subdivisions abutting or containing limited access highway or railroad right-of-way. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances also shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separation structures. 
(11)  Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed or existing public easement or right-of-way in such manner that it denies access from adjacent property to the street or easement, except where their control is placed in the city under conditions approved by the planning commission and city council. 
(12)  Intersections. 
a.  Streets shall be designed to intersect, as nearly as possible, at right angles (90 degrees). 
b.  No more than two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the planning commission. 
c.  Street jogs with centerlines of less than 150 feet apart shall be avoided. The planning commission shall require that streets be connected in such a manner that a smooth flow of traffic and the elimination of traffic hazards are ensured. 
d.  Street corners shall have a minimum radius of 25 feet at the curbline. Street intersections involving major streets and highways shall have a minimum street corner radius of 30 feet at the curbline. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners rounded to permit safe vehicular movement in accordance with section 106-299 and standard engineering practice. 
_____ 
(13)  Driveways. 
a.  Separation from street intersections. Driveways shall be separated from street intersections by the distance defined in the following table: 
TABLE 2. MINIMUM SEPARATION BETWEEN DRIVEWAYS 
AND STREET INTERSECTIONS 
	Location of Driveway 
Intersecting 
  Street 	Freeway 	Major 
Arterial 	Minor 
Arterial 	Collector 	Local 
Freeway 	N/A 	200' 	200' 	150' 	125' 
Major arterial 	200' 	120' 	120' 	100' 	 80' 
Minor arterial 	200' 	120' 	120' 	 90' 	 75' 
Collector street 	150' 	100' 	 90' 	 60' 	 60' 
Local street 	150' 	100' 	 70' 	 60' 	 60' 
 
_____ 
b.  Separation between driveways. Driveways shall be separated from each other by the distance defined in the following table. However, the distance separation shall not apply to the following: 
1.  The following land uses on a collector street only: single-fmaily residences, duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes or townhouses. 
2.  Any use on an approved cul-de-sac. 
Distance separation shall be measured from center of driveway to center of driveway. This shall not prohibit the use of shared driveways. 
TABLE 3. MINIMUM 
SEPARATION OF 
DRIVEWAYS 
Location of 
Driveways 	Distance 
Separation 
Major arterial 	600' 
Minor arterial 	300' 
Collector street 	 100' 
 
When developments of commercial or industrial properties are to be located across from each other along a section line road, the ingress and egress driveways shall be in alignment. 
(14)  Street access for commercial and industrial subdivisions. Commercial or industrial subdivisions should have access to an arterial street and may have access to a collector street if traffic conditions, as determined by the planning commission, warrant such extension, but shall not have access to a residential street. 
(15)  Dead-end streets. 
a.  Permanent dead-end streets or culs-de-sac shall be designed in accordance with standards in the transportation plan. A cul-de-sac shall not exceed 500 feet in length, measured from the entrance to the center of the turnaround, and shall have a turnaround having a radius of not less than 50 feet at the property line and not less than 40 feet at the curbline; however, when deemed advisable, the planning commission may permit a variation from this length in order to adjust for topographic conditions. In all instances, provisions shall be made for adequate storm drainage structures to prevent water from standing in the end of a cul-de-sac or stub street. The cul-de-sac's terminus shall be no closer than 100 feet from the right-of-way line to the boundary of adjoining property. 
b.  The arrangement of streets should provide for the continuance of local, collector or arterial streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is deemed necessary by the planning commission for convenient movement of traffic, for effective fire protection, or for efficient provision of utilities, where such continuation is an accordance with the comprehensive plan and transportation plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. In the phasing of a final plat, a temporary turnabout may be required for temporary dead-end streets in excess of 1,000 feet. Temporary stub streets shall be permitted up to 200 feet, if adjoining property is under separate ownership. The planning commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of this chapter. 
c.  For temporary dead-end streets in excess of 1,000 feet as allowed in subsection (15)b of this section, the subdivider shall post signs stating that the street is a dead-end street, as well as providing fire hydrants along the radius. For permanent dead-end streets, the applicant shall be required to post signs and provide fire hydrants according to the requirements of section 106-444. In all instances, provisions must be made for adequate storm drainage structures to prevent water from standing in the end of the cul-de-sac or stub street. 
(16)  Access to major streets from residential subdivisions. Whenever a residential subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, access to such major street shall be limited by one or more of the following means: 
a.  Access from a major street to individual lots shall be prohibited. 
b.  Reverse frontage may be required with screened plantings along the rear property line. Deep lots or other such treatment may be required along with this solution. For corner lots or lots with double or reverse frontage, the planning commission shall require that a "Limits of No Access" note be placed on the face of the final plat resulting in no access from collector streets or major streets when a lot may derive its access from a local street. 
c.  A series of culs-de-sac, U-shaped streets or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to a parallel street with the rear line of their terminal lots backing onto major streets shall be encouraged. 
(17)  Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with other requirements of this chapter, and provided that the planning staff recommends to the planning commission that it will be practical to obtain the dedication of the other half of the street easement when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within the tract being subdivided. 
(18)  Improvement of existing streets; dedication of additional right-of-way. Where a subdivision borders an existing street or road not meeting city standards or specifications, or when the comprehensive plan, transportation plan or zoning setback requirements indicate plans for realignment or widening of that street or road which would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall dedicate the additional right-of-way from the centerline. All arterial or section line roads abutting or bordering a proposed subdivision shall be improved to city standards and specifications. Upon recommendation by the city engineer, the planning commission may require the improvement of an abutting collector or local street or road, or any part thereof, to city standards and specifications. Land reserved for any public street or road purposes shall not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the zoning ordinance. The land shall be either dedicated to the city in fee simple, as an easement, or as a dedication on an approved final plat. 
(19)  Street names generally. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission. (Refer to chapter 102, article III.) 
(20)  Street names for continuations of existing streets. Streets that are obviously in alignment with other already existing streets shall bear the names or numbers of the existing streets. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.021; Ord. No. 753, § 1, 6-6-2000; Ord. No. 834, § 1, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 106-299. - Alleys. 
(a)  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that, upon recommendation by the planning staff, the planning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as adequate off-street loading, unloading and parking facilities, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(b)  Alleys serving commercial and industrial areas shall not be less than 30 feet in width, and if provided shall be paved in accordance with city standards and specifications. 
(c)  Placement of utilities under paved alleys should be avoided in commercial or industrial areas which contain utility lines. 
(d)  Alleys are not required in residential areas, but when provided shall be not less than 20 feet in width and shall be paved in accordance with city standards and specifications. 
(e)  Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but, where necessary, corners shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to permit safe and convenient vehicular movement. 
(f)  Where alley intersections are unavoidable, as in "T," "L" or "H" alley configurations, a sight triangle at each intersection corner shall be provided. Corner lines shall be cut with a chord to provide a sight triangle with legs of ten feet from the point of intersection along both alley right-of-way lines. The sight triangle shall be included in the alley easement. 
(g)  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided, but, where unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as determined by the planning commission. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.022)  
Sec. 106-300. - Easements; installation of utilities. 
(a)  Utility easements required. The subdivider shall dedicate to the public easements to the end that each and every lot within a subdivision shall have access to all available essential public utilities. 
(b)  Width of utility easements. Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than ten feet shall be provided along each rear lot line, resulting in a 20-foot total easement along rear lot lines. If the area abuts property not previously subdivided, a 20-foot easement is required along the boundary of the subdivision; however, if the subdivider is able to obtain a ten-foot utility easement (by separate document in favor of the city) on this abutting property, then the subdivider is required only to dedicate ten feet of easement on his property. Where utility easements are necessary or required along side lot lines of individual lots, a ten-foot easement shall be required, centered on the property line, with five feet in each abutting lot. On such side lot easements, the side yard setback line will be measured from the near edge of the utility easement to the structure. 
(c)  Private improvements on utility easements. Private improvements on utility easements should be avoided; however, when an improvement such as fencing, landscaping, a driveway or parking is placed upon utility easements, the property owner shall be responsible for replacement or repair of any improvements when utilities must be repaired or replaced. No private improvement shall be situated on or across an easement in the rear yard unless a revocable permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(d)  Authority to require aerial easements or easements of greater width. Aerial easements and easements of greater width for either extension of main sanitary sewers or other utilities, storm sewers and drainage, or the accommodation of utilities in unique situations, such as but not limited to lots backing onto unplatted land, may be required where deemed necessary by the planning commission. 
(e)  Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage channel or stream, there shall be provided a right-of-way or easement for drainage, public open space and utility purposes adequate to contain all of the runoff from a 100-year flood. In addition, the easement shall be determined with due regard for convenient access of maintenance equipment, which requires a minimum of eight feet in width for access. In no case shall a drainage easement be less than 25 feet in width. All other requirements of the comprehensive plan, chapter 50, article III, pertaining to storm sewers, chapter 50, article II, pertaining to flood prevention, and other related regulations shall be met. 
(f)  Utility easements for private roads. For all subdivisions utilizing private roads, public utility easements having a minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided on one side adjacent to and outside of the designated right-of-way of the private roads. 
(g)  Location and depth of utility lines. 
(1)  Separation of water and sewer lines. A minimum horizontal distance of ten feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sanitary sewer lines. 
(2)  Placement in 20-foot easements. The placement of utilities within a 20-foot easement shall be as follows: 
a.  The electric line shall be located in the easement four feet north or east of the centerline. 
b.  The telephone line shall be located in the easement two feet north or east of the centerline. 
c.  The sewer or water line shall be located in the easement four feet south or west of the centerline. 
d.  The cable TV line shall be located within the easement six feet south or west of the centerline. 
e.  The natural gas line shall be located within the easement eight feet south or west of the centerline. 
(3)  Placement in 15-foot easements. The placement of utilities within 15-foot easements shall be as follows: 
a.  The electric line shall be located within the easement 2½ feet north or east of the centerline. 
b.  The telephone line shall be located within the easement 1½ feet north or east of the centerline. 
c.  The sewer or water line shall be located within the easement 2½ feet south or west of the centerline. 
d.  The cable TV line shall be located within the easement 3½ feet south and west of the centerline. 
e.  The gas line shall be located within the easement 6½ feet south or west of the centerline. 
(4)  Depth. The depth of utility lines shall be as follows: 
a.  The electric line shall be laid at a depth of approximately 40 inches. 
b.  The telephone line shall be laid at a depth of 18 to 24 inches. 
c.  The water line shall be laid at a minimum depth of three feet six inches. 
d.  The sewer line shall be laid at a depth in accordance with standard engineering practices and as approved by the city engineer. 
e.  The cable TV line shall be laid at a depth of 12 inches. 
f.  The natural gas line shall be laid at a depth of 24 to 30 inches. 
(h)  Order of construction of utilities. 
(1)  Electrical lines, telephone or television cables and/or gas mains shall not be buried in public easements prior to the installation of required water, sewer and stormwater drainage improvements being constructed; provided that in all cases the lines having the greatest depth shall be constructed first. 
(2)  The city engineer may permit the construction of utility tunnels and or conduits which meet city criteria and standards prior to the construction of water, sewer or stormwater drainage improvements. 
(i)  Conflicts with existing private easements. When existing private easements may potentially interfere with a proposed public dedication or easement, the subdivision shall be designed to minimize the number and extent of places where such existing private easements cross public easements. 
(j)  All new electrical distribution lines in the City of Mustang must be placed underground. 
All electrical distribution and service lines in new subdivisions must be placed underground within dedicated utility easements so as to promote and preserve the health, safety and general welfare of the public and to assure the orderly development of all such new additions and subdivisions. 
If it does not prove to be feasible to bury the new lines, the utility company may apply for a variance to this ordinance through the Mustang Planning Commission who will make a recommendation to the city council. 
A variance from this ordinance may be granted only upon a finding by the city council that: 
(1)  The application of this chapter to the particular area would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(2)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular area involved; 
(3)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter or the comprehensive plan; 
(4)  The variance, if granted, would be the minimum necessary to alleviate the unnecessary hardship. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.023; Ord. No. 903, § 1, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1138, § 1, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 106-301. - Public areas and open space. 
Public parks, playgrounds, school sites and other public areas and open spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in the comprehensive plan and in the ordinances relating thereto. Refer to article VI of this chapter for required park land dedication. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.024)  
Sec. 106-302. - Blocks. 
(a)  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard for the following: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)  Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  Blocks for residential use shall not be longer than 1,800 feet or less than 500 feet measured along the centerline of the block. Wherever practical, blocks along primary arterial and secondary arterial streets shall be not less than 1,000 feet. 
(c)  When a block exceeds 600 feet in length, the planning commission may require a dedicated easement not less than 15 feet in width and a paved crosswalk not less than four feet in width to provide pedestrian access across the block. Such pedestrian walkways or crosswalks may be required by the planning commission if deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities. 
(d)  Blocks used for residential purposes shall be of sufficient width to allow for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth, but shall not be less than 220 feet in width except where otherwise required to separate residential development from through traffic. Other exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted for blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads or waterways. Such exceptions are allowed provided other applicable provisions of this chapter are met. 
(e)  Blocks intended for business and industrial use shall be of a width and depth suitable for the intended use, with due allowance for off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.025)  
Sec. 106-303. - Lots. 
(a)  Generally. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography or other conditions in securing a building permit. All lots shall be arranged to comply with the comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance, all drainage ordinances and building codes and all other ordinances of the city, and to provide access from an approach street. 
(b)  Dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning ordinance. Additional requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lots shall have a width, depth and area of not less than that required by the zoning ordinance. Lots, tracts or parcels created for a particular commercial or industrial use shall have sufficient area and dimensions to provide for off-street parking and loading facilities as required by the zoning ordinance for the type of use and development proposed. 
(2)  Corner lots shall have an extra width that is adequate to permit building setbacks from side streets and front streets. 
(3)  Side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curving street lines, except in townhouse development abutting a curved linear right-of-way. 
(4)  Corner lot lines shall be cut with a chord to provide a sight triangle with legs of 25 feet from the point of intersection of the property lines along both property lines. The triangle shall be dedicated to the city and be included in the street right-of-way easement. 
(5)  The 2002 edition of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality, Title 252, Oklahoma Administrative Code, Chapter 641, "Individual and Small Public On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems" guidelines and all subsequent amendments or revisions are adopted by reference. 
(c)  Lots under one ownership; lots for commercial and industrial uses. Where a block is to be developed and retained under single ownership, it is not required that the block be subdivided into lots; however, the block must meet all requirements of this chapter and other applicable regulations for lots and blocks, including lot sizes and dimensions. All lots proposed for commercial or industrial use shall abut upon a dedicated street, and shall be of appropriate size and arrangement to provide for adequate off-street parking and loading facilities based on the intended use. No individual parcel shall be created for a particular commercial or industrial use that has an area, width or depth that is less than is required for the permitted use under the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except where they are needed to provide for the separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. In all cases, a sight-proof screening shall be provided and shall not be less than six feet in height. The sight-proof screening shall be provided along the rear portion of the lots abutting such a traffic artery. There shall be no right of access to the rear or side portion of any lot abutting such traffic artery. 
(e)  Street access. Low or medium density residential lots shall not derive access from a major street. Lots facing collector streets should be minimized to the fullest extent possible. Where a lot borders a collector street and a local street, access shall be gained from the local street only. If lots have access on local streets, the planning commission shall require on the face of the final plat a note limiting access for lots that back or side onto a collector, arterial or other major street. Where driveway access from a major or arterial street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the planning commission may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards. Driveways should be designed and arranged so that vehicles avoid backing into major or arterial streets. It is encouraged that driveways should be designed and arranged so that vehicles avoid backing into collector streets. 
(f)  Drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings. Individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. (Refer to chapter 50, article III, for storm sewer and drainage requirements.) 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.026; Ord. No. 827, § 1, 11-19-2002)  
Sec. 106-304. - Building and setback lines. 
(a)  Building lines shall be provided for all residential subdivisions as required by the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Where crosswalks are provided or required, a side yard building line shall be provided not less than ten feet back of a crosswalk right-of-way line on the side of a lot abutting a midblock crosswalk. 
(c)  Platted building lines shown on an approved final plat that are more restrictive than the setback requirements of the zoning ordinance shall represent the mandatory setback lines. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.027)  
Sec. 106-305. - Planned unit developments. 
(a)  Whenever a subdivision is developed as a neighborhood unit under the requirements and allowances of chapter 122, article VIII, pertaining to planned unit developments, the planning commission may vary the requirements of this chapter having to do with design, but not of procedures or improvements, in order to allow the subdivider more freedom in the arrangement of streets and lots, but at the same time protect the convenience, health, safety and general welfare of the future residents of the subdivision as well as the character of the surrounding property and the general welfare of the entire community. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of chapter 122, article VIII, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Review as to subdivision requirements shall be carried out simultaneously with the processing of the planned unit development application if the division of the land, vacant or improved, into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease or development, either on the installment plan or upon any or all other plans, terms or conditions, including resubdivision, whether residential or nonresidential, is part of and integral to the planned unit development application; and 
(2)  The applicant may submit an application for preliminary plat review and approval for all or part of the development concurrent with an application for planned unit development, even though such submittal is not mandatory under this chapter. 
(c)  The following procedure shall be required for simultaneous preliminary plat review and approval as set forth in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  An application for preliminary plat review or approval shall be submitted along with the application for planned unit development approval to the planning commission in accordance with the requirements and procedures of this chapter. 
(2)  The planning commission shall review the planned unit development application and shall forward its comments and recommendations to the city council. 
(3)  The planning commission shall review the preliminary plat, and if it finds that the plat conforms to this chapter and other applicable regulations, may grant tentative approval pending approval of the planned unit development application by the city council. Tentative approval of such plat shall vest no rights or interest to the applicant until the planned unit development is approved by the city council. 
(d)  A planned unit development may be subdivided or resubdivided for purposes of sale or lease after the planned unit development has been finally approved and development completed or partially completed, except when the proposed subdivision creates a change in the planned unit development design. If the change affects planned unit development boundaries or density of uses or if there are major changes to streets, drainage, utilities, etc., then the planning commission may approve the subdivision or resubdivision subject to city council approval of an amended planned unit development. 
(Code 1977, § 16.16.030)  
Section 106-306. - Storage area; garages required. 
(a)  All residential dwellings, including manufactured and mobile homes, shall contain one or more storage area(s) for each dwelling unit which may be in a basement located under said dwelling, in a closet area, and/ or in a separate fully enclosed structure on the site, which may be a garage, the total of which area shall be equal to not less than 15 percent of the interior living area of each dwelling. 
(b)  All one-family dwellings (including modular homes), two-family dwellings, townhouses and multifamily dwelling units must have a minimum of two off-street parking spaces for each family dwelling units, one of which must be in an enclosed garage. Said garage must measure not less than ten feet in width and 20 feet in depth. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, all conversions from existing garages to living area shall be reviewed by the community development director or his designee, before any permits will be issued, to ensure that all parking and storage requirements will be met. This section shall not apply to mobile homes. 
(Ord. No. 754, § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 844, § 1, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 864, § 1, 10-7-2003)  
Secs. 106-307—106-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PARK LAND DEDICATION 
 
Sec. 106-331. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall apply to all residential subdivisions or developments having a dwelling unit density of greater than one unit per acre, and/or to the owner or applicant for approval thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 16.20.010; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 3-2-1999)  
Sec. 106-332. - Land dedication or monetary contribution required. 
(a)  All persons subdividing land under provisions of the ordinances of the city for residential purposes within the boundary of the city, shall, prior to the acceptance of their respective final plat by the city council, comply with the following park land requirements: 
(1)  Dedicate land, pursuant to this article, to be used solely and exclusively for public parks and recreation purposes; and 
(2)  Make an equivalent monetary contribution based upon a value of the land required to be dedicated, in lieu of the actual transfer of land. 
(b)  Whether or not land or money shall be given to the city shall be at the sole option of the city council. However, such option of monetary contribution shall be available to the city council only when the total population for the pertinent preliminary plat, as projected under the provisions of section 106-334, is less than 1,500 persons. 
(Code 1977, § 16.20.020; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 3-2-1999)  
Sec. 106-333. - Duties of leisure services board. 
It is the responsibility of the leisure services board to review all subdivision applications for park land dedication requirements based on this chapter and the comprehensive plan. The board shall then make recommendations to the city council on size, location, required improvements of park land to be made, and dedication or fees in lieu of land. 
(Code 1977, § 16.20.032; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 3-2-1999)  
Sec. 106-334. - Procedure for determination of requirements. 
The determination as to whether land dedication or a monetary contribution is to be made for a particular subdivision shall be made by the city council, based upon the recommendation of the leisure services board and the standards set forth in the comprehensive plan. The following procedures will apply: 
(1)  Prior to the submittal of a preliminary plat, the developer of a potential subdivision shall submit to the planning staff a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. The developer shall consult with the planning staff about a set of mutually agreeable park sites and/or fee dedication. 
(2)  The developer shall attend a review session with the leisure services board prior to the submittal of a preliminary plat and prior to making detailed engineering studies or plans. A quorum of three voting members of the leisure services board is needed to make recommendations on a park dedication issue. 
(3)  Recommendations made by the leisure services board shall be referred to the city council. Recommendations shall be made on the following: 
a.  Dedication or fees in lieu of land; 
b.  Size of land to be dedicated; 
c.  Location of land to be dedicated; and 
d.  Any required improvements of park land. 
(4)  Upon receiving the recommendation from the leisure services board, the city council shall consider the matter. Recommendations shall be based on this chapter and the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  The city council shall, upon review of the sketch plan and the recommendations of the leisure services board, make a decision on the type and amount of land to be dedicated and location of the park dedication, or fee in lieu of land, and any required park land improvements. If land is required, the site shall be indicated on the preliminary plat as reserved for future dedication for city council approval. When required, the monetary contribution shall be paid prior to the final acceptance of the final plat by the city council. 
(6)  Further refinement of acres (or fee in lieu of if required by the council) shall be made on the preliminary plat. Exact measures of land (or fee in lieu of) may be made when the final plat is submitted for approval. 
(7)  If a subdivision is to be platted in phases, the city council shall decide how phasing of land dedication or fee in lieu of will be accomplished. 
(Code 1977, § 16.20.040; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 3-2-1999)  
Sec. 106-335. - Calculation of required land area. 
(a)  The land area to be dedicated from a residential subdivision plat shall be determined by the following formula: 
2 Acres × Each 1,000 Persons Projected to Occupy the Fully Developed Subdivision = Amount of Land to be Dedicated 
Which is: 
0.002 Acres × Number of Persons per Dwelling × Number of Dwelling Units Projected for Subdivision = Amount of Land to be Dedicated 
(b)  In determining the number of persons projected to occupy a subdivision, the most recent federal decennial census statistics on number of persons per dwelling unit for the city shall be used. These figures shall be calculated by the planning staff and approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1977, § 16.20.050; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 3-2-1999)  
Sec. 106-336. - Calculation of amount of monetary contribution; payment. 
(a)  In those instances where it is established that less than 1,500 persons will ultimately occupy any given subdivision as reflected by the sketch plan submitted, the planning staff and the leisure services board, as described in this article, shall review the plan and promptly recommend to the city council whether land or money should be required of the developer and builder. The city council shall then make the final decision. 
(b)  If a fee in lieu of land contribution is required, the amount of the fee shall be determined at the time of final platting according to the following formula: 
(1)  Fees in lieu of park land dedication will be calculated on a per-unit cost of $100.00 per unit. In the event of multi-unit dwellings or structures, each individual dwelling unit shall be deemed a unit for purposes of calculation of fees. 
(2)  One-half of this fee ($50.00) shall be due from the developer, as shown on the preliminary or final plat, and one-half ($50.00) shall be due by the builder as shown on the building permit; provided that nothing shall prevent either party from paying the entire fee. 
(3)  Fees due from or attributable to the developer and builder shall be placed in the park improvement fund. 
(c)  The entire amount of the fees assessed must be paid prior to recording the final plat. 
(Code 1977, § 16.20.060; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 3-2-1999)  
Sec. 106-337. - Credit for dedicating land in excess of requirements; deviations from preliminary plat. 
(a)  The city council may determine that a developer may dedicate more land than would be required by the formulas set out in this article and receive a written credit against future mandatory park land dedications. Where a developer dedicates land against future requirements, the development which is thereby relieved of all or part of its mandatory park land dedication requirement must be in the same general area as that served by the dedicated credit land, such general area to be at the city's sole determination. The credit shall attach to the relieved land and remain with the relieved land, regardless of change in ownership thereof. 
(b)  If a developer deviates from the approved preliminary plat in final platting or rezones land within the preliminary plat which has the effect of increasing the density of population over the earlier population density estimates made under this article, or where the use of property is changed from a nonresidential use to a residential use, the owner or subdivider shall be obligated to provide additional land or a fee based on the value of the previously platted land to compensate for the increase in population. Such contribution shall be made prior to the city issuing a building permit or the city council approving a final plat. 
(Code 1977, § 16.20.070; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 3-2-1999)  
Sec. 106-338. - Suitability of dedicated land. 
Any land dedicated to meet the requirements of this article shall be reasonably located and adaptable for use as an active park or recreation facility as defined by the comprehensive plan. Factors to be used in evaluating the adequacy of the proposed park and recreation land areas include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Unity. The dedicated land should form a single parcel or tract of land at least three acres in size, unless the leisure services board determines that a smaller tract would be in the public interest or that additional contiguous land will be reasonably available for dedication to or purchased by the city. 
(2)  Shape. The shape of the parcel or tract of land to be dedicated should be appropriate for park and recreation purposes, i.e., ball diamonds, tennis courts and usable open space. 
(3)  Access. Public access to park land shall be approved by the planning commission and delineated on the preliminary plat. The access shall consist of at least 150 feet of street frontage. At the time the land abutting the delineated areas is developed, the developer of such abutting land shall furnish and pay for paving all abutting street frontage and shall provide water and sewer access to the boundary of at least one side of the delineated area to meet minimum requirements as determined by the chief building inspector and/or city engineer. 
(4)  Topography. The land to be dedicated to meet the requirements of this article should be suitable for parks, open spaces and recreation activities. Fifty percent of the land to be dedicated shall not exceed five percent grade. 
(5)  Location. The land to be dedicated shall be located so as to serve the recreation and open space needs of the subdivision for which the dedication is made. However, an evaluation of possible locations would also include factors such as freedom from possible safety hazards, i.e., major thoroughfares, and unusable land such as floodplains or drainage channels. 
(6)  Usable open space. For purposes of this section, usable open space is defined to mean any parcel of land which meets the requirements as to suitability, and does not necessarily require that the land be appropriate for such recreation purposes as ball diamonds, soccer, tennis and organized sports. Usable open space uses would also include but not be limited to the following: hiking trails, arboretums, bike paths, picnic areas, existing or planned greenbelt areas to be left in their natural state, linkage parcels for the greenbelt corridors as shown on the comprehensive plan, and similar uses that would benefit the public either from natural beauty or open space type of recreation use. 
(Code 1977, § 16.20.080; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 3-2-1999)  
Sec. 106-339. - Use of monetary contributions. 
A separate fund to be entitled "Park Improvement Fund" is hereby created and will contain all money paid in by developers, builders, owners, subdividers or others at final approval of subdivision plats in lieu of the dedication of land. The fees and the interest accrued thereon shall be held in the fund, to be used only for the purposes of purchasing park land or for the improvement, development and maintenance of park and recreational land and for recreational facilities and programs within the general area in which the subdivision is located, as determined by the city council. It is specifically provided that the general area can include any location within the city boundaries when it is determined by the city council that such expenditures will inure to the benefit of the entire city. 
(Code 1977, § 16.20.090; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 3-2-1999)  
Sec. 106-340. - Conveyance of dedicated land. 
Land accepted for dedication under the requirements of this article shall be conveyed by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By dedication to the city within the plat to be filed of record in the office of the county clerk; or 
(2)  By warranty deed transferring the property in fee simple to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 16.20.100; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 3-2-1999)  
Sec. 106-341. - Moratorium on park land dedications. 
(a)  The City of Mustang finds that it currently has sufficient dedicated park lands to serve the needs of the citizens of the City of Mustang, and finds that a monetary contribution in lieu of park land dedication shall be required of developers on all applications for approval of zoning requests, preliminary plats or final plats filed or pending with the City of Mustang. 
(b)  On all applications for approval of zoning requests, preliminary plats or final plats filed or pending with the City of Mustang, a moratorium on compliance with section 106-334 is declared, except as provided in subsection (d), below. Instead, the fee in lieu of park land dedication set forth in subsection 106-336(b) shall be due from developers and builders. 
(c)  The duties of the leisure services board as set forth in section 106-333 shall be suspended during the period that this moratorium remains in effect, except for purposes of reviewing inquiries pursuant to subsection (d). 
(d)  In the event the city planning department desires to include a dedicated park within its proposed development, the developer shall follow the procedure set forth in section 106-334, in which event the leisure services board shall review the request and make its determination and recommendation to the city council in the same manner as it would have in the absence of this declared moratorium. 
(Ord. No. 975, § 1, 8-15-2006)  
Secs. 106-342—106-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - IMPROVEMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 106-361. - Conformance with comprehensive plan. 
All improvements shall be designed and installed in accordance with all of the elements of the latest adopted comprehensive plan and shall meet the minimum standards established by the ordinances and regulations relating thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.010)  
Sec. 106-362. - Construction plans. 
Final construction plans for the improvements required by this article shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state. Proposed plans and specifications for all improvements shall be filed with the community development department in accordance with section 106-91, pertaining to construction plans. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.020)  
Sec. 106-363. - Continuity of improvements. 
All improvements shall be designed and installed so as to provide for a logical system of utilities, drainage and streets and to create continuity of improvements for the development of adjacent properties. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.030)  
Sec. 106-364. - Inspection fees. 
The subdivider shall pay an inspection fee based upon the engineer's estimate of the cost of construction of all improvements to the subdivision to be dedicated for public use, including streets, water, sanitary sewers and storm sewers, according to the scale set forth in section 42-106. The payment shall be made to the city prior to any work order being issued thereon, and shall cover the cost to the city for inspection of the improvements. Any and all costs of testing as set forth in the standard specifications shall be paid by the subdivider and/or the contractor before the work receives final approval by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.040)  
Sec. 106-365. - Reference monuments and markers. 
The subdivider shall provide for permanent reference monuments or markers in the subdivision as follows: 
(1)  Each lot and block corner shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not less than one-half inch in diameter and not less than 18 inches long at least one inch below finished grade. 
(2)  Each subdivision corner shall be marked with a permanent concrete marker capped with a non-erosive metal plate set one inch below the finished grade. 
(3)  Permanent benchmarks shall be set to effectively serve the subdivision by a registered land surveyor, licensed as such in the state. The benchmarks shall be based on USGS datum. 
(4)  Centerline street control points shall be installed at all intersections, points of curvature and points of tangency in the following manner: 
a.  Chiseled X's on concrete streets; or 
b.  P.K. nails on asphalt streets. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.050)  
Sec. 106-366. - Sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  The subdivider shall provide a sewage collection and disposal system in accordance with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, standards or regulations. 
(b)  The subdivider shall, at his expense, install all sanitary sewers whenever a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible or procurable. For purposes of this section, a public sewer system is considered reasonably accessible if an existing or funded sewer main serves the watershed into which the subdivision naturally drains and is within one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) of any exterior boundary of the subdivision. Sewer service is considered procurable unless the city or other public agency owning and maintaining the public sewer system cannot or will not, by reason of statute, ordinance, regulation or policy, accept sewage from the subdivision. The internal sanitary sewer system shall be available to each lot within the subdivision. 
(c)  The city shall provide adequate engineering inspection and will bill the developer according to section 106-364. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.090)  
Sec. 106-367. - Individual sewage disposal systems. 
(a)  Generally. If a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible as described in section 106-366, as determined by the city engineer, the subdivider may install a temporary alternate sewage disposal system, upon the recommendation of the city engineer and the approval of the city council, in addition to the provisions set forth in subsection (d) of this section, such recommendation and approval to be based upon considerations involving the general health, safety and welfare and best interests of the city. Such alternate systems shall be installed in accordance with the recommendations and requirements of the state department of environmental quality. Such system shall be constructed under the supervision of the city department of community development and shall conform to the following provisions: 
(1)  At the time of submission of the preliminary plat to the planning commission, the developer shall also submit sketches showing the design, size and layout of the system. 
(2)  In addition to other requirements, the preliminary and final plat shall show: 
a.  The location of easements and utility line infrastructure, including the easements and infrastructure described in subsection (c) of this section; 
b.  The location of all present and proposed structures; 
c.  The location of all present walks and driveways; 
d.  The location of all existing or proposed water wells, if any; and 
e.  The location of the present disposal system. 
(3)  The system shall be dedicated to the city as shown on the plat, in the same manner as easements are dedicated. Upon acceptance, the system shall become the property of the city, which shall thereafter maintain the system, except for any tank type, air injection, aerobic treatment system, which will be owned, maintained and operated by the property owner until such time as city service becomes accessible. 
(b)  Sewer charges to users of alternate system. Property owners served by the alternate system shall be assessed charges for sewer service at the basic rate charged other customers of the city sewer system. Except for those portions of the sewer payments necessary for maintenance, operation and repair of the system, monies collected for sewer service from users of the alternate system will be placed in a special fund and used to extend city sewer service to properties served by temporary alternate systems. 
(c)  Provisions for future city sewer service. 
(1)  Infrastructure required. 
a.  Developments and subdivisions shall contain provisions and completed infrastructure for connection to city sewer service when such service becomes accessible. Therefore, in addition to the temporary alternate disposal system, such subdivisions or developments must meet requirements for sewer service as though such service were available. This sewer infrastructure must allow for connection of the properties included in the subdivision or development to city sewer service at a single connection site and will be dedicated to the city as a part of the final plat approval process. Sewer infrastructure, as used in this section, refers to sewer system mains or refers to installation of manholes, sewer mains, lateral lines, service lines and appurtenances. 
b.  If a developer desires to connect to city sewer service at the time of development when such service is not otherwise procurable as defined in this article, upon approval of the city council, the city will furnish materials and the developer will provide installation for connection lines. Such approval shall be solely within the discretionary authority of the city council, and such decision shall be made based upon funds available, the general health, safety and welfare, the best interests of the city, and applicable law. 
c.  The city may connect the subdivision or other properties to city sewer service when such service becomes accessible. There will be no additional charge or fee to property owners for such connection. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  Upon recommendation by the city engineer and upon approval by the city council, in lieu of installing the sewer infrastructure system, a fee in the amount of 110 percent of the engineer's approved estimate may be paid into an escrow account to be used, within the drainage basin, to bring the infrastructure to the area and/or pay for the cost of the system within the subdivision. If the city is unable to provide the infrastructure within five years, then the escrow funds will be returned to the developer. 
b.  If none of the requirements or other exceptions provided in this chapter related to the sewer infrastructure system are feasible or are in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare, as determined by the city council, which will be provided a recommendation by the city engineer, then the council may approve a type system not otherwise addressed in this article, or any modification of a system, whether or not addressed in this article. In such cases, the city may determine to maintain such system if the city determines that such maintenance would be in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare. If it is not a system that conforms to the sewer extension program, then an alternate system could be developed and the city will maintain the alternate system. 
(d)  New septic tank systems. Septic tank lateral field disposal systems shall not be permitted as temporary alternate systems without the express recommendation of the city engineer and the planning commission and approval of the city council. Approval from the council may be requested before the final plat is submitted. It is expressly declared that septic tank disposal systems are discouraged, and approval shall be given only in cases of extreme hardship involving topography or unique configurations of the property or other special considerations. The reasons for such approval shall be publicly declared. Generally, convenience or economic considerations shall not constitute hardship, except in cases involving construction by individuals not a part of a subdivision. 
(e)  Repairs to existing septic tank systems. 
(1)  For existing septic tank systems requiring repair, the owner or occupant of the property must submit an application for a repair permit to the community development department, at a fee in an amount set by the city council. The application must be accompanied by the results of a satisfactory percolation test performed within the past 15 days. The community development department reserves the right to refuse to issue a permit for repair if the department determines that the system cannot be practicably repaired and/or constitutes a danger or hazard to the general health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Notwithstanding and in addition to the provisions of subsection (e)(1) of this section, if a septic tank system, whether existing and operational before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, is damaged by fire, explosion, natural cause, public enemy or damage from any cause, including natural deterioration or wear and tear, by more than 50 percent of its true value, it shall not be replaced with another septic tank system unless the community development department shall determine that there is no other feasible option available to the occupant. In such cases, replacement of the system with another system will be determined by the applicable provisions of this article. 
(3)  For purposes of this subsection, the term "repair" shall not be construed to include normal maintenance, which would include the removal of sludge, root removal or other clearing of obstructions, repair of broken or crushed service lines, and those other activities commonly associated with the operation and maintenance of septic tank systems. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.100; Ord. No. 661, § 1, 3-4-1997)  
Sec. 106-368. - Storm sewers and drainage. 
(a)  The planning commission shall not approve any plat or subdivision which does not meet the requirements of this chapter, chapter 50, article III, or any ordinances or regulations relating thereto. 
(b)  Storm drainage facilities, when required, shall be designed by methods outlined in chapter 50, article III. A copy of design computations shall be submitted with all drainage plans. 
(c)  in all cases, the storm drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. 
(d)  Each lot, site and block within a plat or subdivision shall be adequately drained as prescribed in this chapter and all other ordinances and regulations. 
(e)  No lot or site within a plat or subdivision shall derive sole access to a public street through a regulatory floodway unless such access shall be designed to remain open under base flood conditions. 
(f)  Areas subject to inundation under base flood conditions shall be indicated, with the minimum floor elevation of each lot so affected on a certified copy of the recorded final plat. The planning commission and the city council may, when deemed necessary for the health, safety or welfare of the present and future population, place restrictions on the subdivision, design and use of areas within or affecting the regulatory floodway. The planning commission shall not approve any subdivision of land within the regulatory floodway of any stream or watercourse unless the applicant demonstrates that the subdivision and all development anticipated therein will comply with all ordinances and regulations relating thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.110)  
Sec. 106-369. - Trees. 
(a)  The subdivider shall plant trees in new subdivisions that are not located in wooded areas. Before the trees are planted, the subdivider shall submit a plan of such planting to the planning commission for its study and recommendation in order to prevent the planting of certain species that could become nuisances either because of insects or disease or because they might unduly interfere with sewer mains or other utilities. The planting of trees in street easements shall be a minimum distance of four feet from the curb. 
(b)  Planting and maintenance of all trees and landscaping shall be in accordance with chapter 122, article IX, division 2. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.140)  
Sec. 106-370. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be required on minor streets in subdivisions within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts to serve each lot and parcel of land situated within such subdivision. On streets forming the exterior boundary of subdivisions within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts, developers shall be required to install sidewalks abutting that side of such boundary streets which lie adjacent to the developer's subdivision that have been constructed with curbs and enclosed storm sewers. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be required in all commercial developments and subdivisions along with collector and major streets. 
(c)  Sidewalks shall be constructed in the street right-of-way, shall be 12 inches from the property line, and shall have not less than a two percent grade or more than a five percent grade from sidewalk to curb. 
(d)  Sidewalk improvements shall be the responsibility of the individual builder unless specifically required by the planning commission to be the responsibility of the developer, and shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications found in chapter 102. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.150; Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 11-18-2008)  
Sec. 106-371. - Driveways. 
All driveways and approaches shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts. All driveways and approaches within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts shall: 
a.  Primary driveways must maintain a minimum width of 18 feet on the entire length of the driveway. Secondary driveways must be a minimum width of ten feet. 
b.  Maintain a minimum curb radius of five feet. 
(2)  R-E zoning district. All driveways and approaches within the R-E zoning district shall conform to the following: 
a.  Approaches on section lines shall be a minimum of 18 feet in width with a 15-foot turning radius. All other approaches must be a minimum of 15 feet in width with a five-foot turning radius. 
b.  On the entire length of the driveway, a minimum width of ten feet shall be maintained. 
c.  Driveway approaches from the edge of the paved street to the right-of-way line shall be paved to the R-E paving standard. 
d.  The minimum driveway standard for R-E zoning is a sealed surface being either four inches of concrete on a compacted subgrade ten feet wide or two inches of asphalt on four inches of gravel of ten feet in width. 
(3)  Commercial driveway approaches. All commercial driveway approaches shall maintain a minimum curb radius of 15 feet. 
(4)  Additional standards. All driveways shall be improved to city standards and specifications in accordance with chapter 102. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.160; Ord. No. 1101, § 2, 4-15-2014)  
Secs. 106-372—106-390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STREETS AND ROADWAYS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 106-391. - General standards. 
The subdivider of any subdivision designed to be used for residential, commercial, industrial or other purposes shall lay out, grade and otherwise improve all streets that are designated on the approved plat or that directly serve the subdivision in accordance with the specifications of the city and in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The design of an improvement of an intersection of any new street with an existing state or federal highway shall be in accordance with the specifications of the state department of transportation, but in no case shall the standard be less than the applicable specifications and requirements of this chapter or other applicable regulations of the city. 
(2)  The city will provide adequate engineering inspection and will bill the developer according to section 106-364. 
(3)  All driveways which connect with public streets or private streets shall be constructed in accordance with section 106-371 and, where applicable, with specifications of the state department of transportation as well as this chapter. 
(4)  Street surfacing shall be in accordance with the transportation plan and street standards as approved by the city council and, where applicable, the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.060)  
Sec. 106-392. - Streetlights. 
(a)  The subdivider shall be responsible for having street lighting installed in all subdivisions and shall be responsible for all installation costs. 
(b)  A streetlight standard of 30 feet mounting height shall be installed at all street intersections, at the end of all culs-de-sac, and at intermittent spacing necessary to produce a minimum of 0.6 maintained footcandle for collector streets and 0.4 maintained footcandle for local streets, with a uniformity ratio not exceeding three to one. Luminaires shall have minimum 175-watt high intensity discharge lamps. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.120)  
Sec. 106-393. - Street and traffic signs. 
All street and traffic signs within the subdivision shall be furnished at the expense of the subdivider and shall conform to the standards set forth in section 102-98. All street and traffic signs shall be supplied and installed by the city public works department. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.130; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 4-1-2003)  
Sec. 106-394. - Paving standards for rural estate district. 
The following paving standards are hereby required for rural estate roadway paving: 
(1)  Private roadways. 
ADD FIGURE 
General notes: 
1.  Stabilized aggregate base shall conform to state department of transportation specifications for type A aggregate, section 703. 
2.  Asphaltic concrete mix design shall conform to state department of transportation specifications for type B asphaltic concrete mix design. 
3.  Provide the city with one SPD per 2,400 SY of base, one field density per 500 tons of asphalt and one Hveem stability per 500 tons of asphalt. 
4.  Provide one core per block to verify paving thickness. 
(2)  Public roadways—concrete. 
ADD FIGURE 
General construction notes: 
1.  Install expansion joints at 100 feet c/c with sawed joints at 20 feet c/c. 
2.  Provide city with one SPD per 2,400 SY of base and one set of conc. cylinders per 600 SY. 
3.  Provide one core per block to verify paving thickness. 
(3)  Public roadway—asphalt. 
ADD FIGURE 
General notes: 
1.  Stabilized aggregate base shall conform to state department of transportation specifications for type A aggregate, section 703. 
2.  Asphaltic concrete mix design shall conform to state department of transportation specifications for type B asphaltic concrete mix design. 
3.  Provide the city with one SPD per 2,400 SY of base, one field density per 500 tons of asphalt and one Hveem stability per 500 tons of asphalt. 
4.  Provide one core per block to verify paving thickness. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.170) 
_____ 
Secs. 106-395—106-410. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Private Roadways 
 
Sec. 106-411. - Areas where permitted. 
Rural land not served by city water and sanitary sewer facilities shall be permitted the use of private roadways in either platted or unplatted areas, and building permits may be issued to property owners abutting upon private roadways under the conditions set out in this subdivision. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.070)  
Sec. 106-412. - General standards. 
(a)  The location of the private roadway easement shall be in compliance with the transportation plan map and city street standards, regardless of the size of the abutting property. 
(b)  The private roadway easement shall be at least 50 feet in width in the case of local streets, or 60 feet in width in the case of collector streets. 
(c)  All drives and curb cuts contained within the private roadway system shall comply with chapter 102, article II, and this chapter. 
(d)  The tracts, lots, sites or parcels of land contained within the private roadway subdivision shall contain not less than two acres each, including respective portions of the adjacent roadways. However, public right-of-way on section line roads is not to be included in the two-acre requirement. 
(e)  The nearest boundary of the property contained within the proposed subdivision must be more than one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) from sewer and water facilities furnished by the city. The measurement shall be the actual number of feet of sewer and/or water lines required to serve the property, to be determined by good engineering practices. 
(f)  All storm drainage shall be in compliance with section 106-368. Open type bar ditches shall be prohibited. All stormwater runoff must be contained within the street curbline and removed in a safe manner from the subdivision. 
(g)  The private roadway shall not be dedicated to the public, but reserved for future dedication, and until such future dedication it shall be the private roadway of the abutting property owners. 
(h)  Private roadways shall be surfaced and improved in accordance with the transportation plan map and city street standards. 
(i)  The private roadway shall be maintained by the owners of the property within the subdivision. 
(j)  The city shall have no responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the private roadway or easement. 
(k)  If the property is platted, there shall be emblemized on the face of the plat, clearly conspicuous, a notice that the streets shall always be open to police, fire and other official vehicles of all state, federal, county and city agencies, and subject to all traffic regulations of these agencies. 
(l)  Every deed shall clearly acknowledge that the roadway is private and not maintained by the city. 
(m)  All names for private roadways shall be approved by the planning commission in both platted and unplatted areas. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.071)  
Sec. 106-413. - Street signs and "private roadway" sign. 
(a)  Street signs. The developer shall install street signs at the intersection of all private roadways. The markers shall conform in style and quality with the standard street markers adopted by the city. After initial installation, the street signs shall be maintained by the property owners within the subdivision. 
(b)  Private roadway sign. Prior to the sale of any parcel of land in the subdivision, a conspicuous sign shall be posted at the entrance into the subdivision, reading "Private Roadway not maintained by the City of Mustang, Oklahoma." The sign shall meet the following specifications: 
(1)  The sign shall be of 20-gauge steel; 
(2)  The dimensions shall be 36 inches by 48 inches; 
(3)  Letters shall be three inches high and block style; 
(4)  The color shall be a red background and white reflective lettering; and 
(5)  The sign shall be affixed on two metal poles, with its lowest point not less than seven feet above grade. 
(c)  Maintenance. After initial installation, the required street signs and the "private roadway" sign shall be maintained by the property owners within the subdivision. The property owners within the subdivision shall be given ten days' written notice by certified mail if a damaged, dilapidated or faded street sign or "private roadway" sign is not replaced or repaired. The procedure for abatement of a public nuisance, as outlined in chapter 38, article II, shall be followed if the sign is not replaced or repaired after the property owners have been given proper notice. Any cost for materials or labor suffered by the city shall be recovered directly from the property owners, or collected from the property owners by the county treasurer in the manner prescribed by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.072)  
Sec. 106-414. - Dedication to city; installation of city water or sewer facilities. 
(a)  At any time after the city recognizes and permits the use of a private roadway, a petition of at least 60 percent of the owners in an area to improve and dedicate the street shall bind all of the owners thereby to permanently improve the street or roadway in order for it to be considered for acceptance into the city's street system. 
(b)  If either city water or sewer facilities are provided to a private roadway subdivision, they shall be installed in accordance with the city ordinances relating thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.073)  
Sec. 106-415. - Resubdivision on private roads. 
Resubdividing property fronting on private roadways into tracts, lots or parcels any part of which, when subdivided, contains less than two acres shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.074)  
Sec. 106-416. - Gated access. 
(a)  Generally. Gated access for private streets may be permitted and approved for residential subdivisions, planned unit developments, apartment projects or two-acre private street developments under the terms and conditions set forth in this section and subject to other applicable provisions of this Code and when the city council determines, at its discretion, that such proposed gated access would not pose a threat to the general health, safety and welfare. The community development department and/or the planning commission may recommend, and the city council may require, multiple entrances. Gated access will not be permitted for public streets or roadways. 
(b)  Conditions and requirements. 
(1)  The gate shall be located a sufficient distance from a public street to allow four cars to line up at the gate without interfering with vehicles utilizing the public street. The minimum acceptable distance from the gate opening shall be no less than 80 feet from the nearest edge of the traveled public roadway. 
(2)  A turnaround lane shall be provided for vehicles unable to enter the gated development, which shall not interfere with any adjacent public way. 
(3)  Road spikes, barbs or other tire-damaging devices shall not be allowed. 
(4)  Controlled access development shall comply with standards of the city involving engineering requirements, private streets, sidewalks, fire lanes and fire hydrants. In cases of conflict, the provisions of this section shall govern unless the city council specifically determines to the contrary, upon the recommendation of the city engineer. 
(5)  The minimum gate opening width, including clearance for all improvements related to the gate, shall not be less than 20 feet. 
(6)  An entry key pad shall be located on a pedestal near the normal access route. The entry code will be used for non-emergency access and shall be given to the fire department and the police department. If for any reason the entry code is changed, the new entry code shall not be implemented until the fire and police departments have been so notified. Failure to comply with any portion of this subsection shall be considered a violation of this section by the developer or the agent of the responsible party. 
(7)  An emergency pull box shall be located on the key pad pedestal. When activated, the pull box will cause the gate to open and stay open until the emergency system is reset by the agent of the responsible party. 
(8)  An emergency release hitch pin shall be installed on the control arm. This hitch pin, when removed, will detach the control arm from the gate and allow the gate to swing open freely with manual intervention. 
(9)  A battery backup system shall be provided for each gate. These batteries will be trickle-charged to maintain electrical energy, and in the event of loss of normal electrical current cause the gate to open and remain open until reset by the homeowners' association. 
(10)  The location of all entrance pedestals, emergency pull boxes, key pads, hitch pins and related equipment, operation of the gate, signage, opening design, swinging or sliding operation of the gate or any other design specification shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the plans approved by the community development director. 
(11)  The minimum paving width for all lanes entering and exiting the development shall not be less than 20 feet in width. There shall be no parking on the 20-foot roadway. Appropriate signage shall be provided. If parking is requested, the minimum width of the roadway shall be 26 feet. 
(12)  Should any problem occur in the operation of the gate or any violation of any provision of this section, the gate shall remain open and accessible until the problem is resolved and/or the gate is repaired and tested. 
(13)  All culs-de-sac, dead-ends, turnarounds and entry or median street curblines shall be constructed to provide a minimum 40-foot radius to the outside edge of the fire lane pavement to ensure adequate access for fire protection vehicles. Parking along the fire lane and in the cul-de-sac or turnaround shall be prohibited, except where off-street parking is provided in a center island or median. If the cul-de-sac or turnaround design includes a center island or median with a radius concentric to the radius of the cul-de-sac or turnaround, the maximum radius to the outside edge of the center island or median along the back side of the cul-de-sac or turnaround shall be ten feet. If the radius of the center island or median is not concentric with the radius of the cul-de-sac or turnaround, the outside edge of the center island or median shall be so configured as to provide a minimum 26-foot width of fire lane pavement. In all cases, the entire area of fire lane pavement shall be unobstructed either horizontally or vertically, including any signage or landscaping. The design of all culs-de-sac, dead-ends and turnarounds, and entry of median street curblines, shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer and city fire marshal. 
(14)  When a covered entry structure is requested, the minimum height shall be no less than 16 feet. The width shall be no less than 20 feet. 
(c)  Responsible party. 
(1)  There shall at all times be a responsible party for the gated access, who shall be the developer, or property owner, or homeowners' association formed pursuant to the provisions of 60 O.S. § 851 et seq. The name, address and telephone numbers of the responsible party shall be on file with the city clerk. A copy of the document forming such homeowners' association shall be on file with the city clerk, and a current membership list of the association shall be attached and updated within 30 days of any change. An agent of the association shall be appointed by the association, who shall serve as agent of the association for purposes of this section. The developer shall serve as the responsible party until a homeowners' association is formed. 
(2)  The responsible party, as defined in subsection (c)(1) of this section, shall abide by and be responsible for the following: 
a.  Maintenance and repairs of the private streets and/or fire lanes, and the provision of funds for the maintenance and repairs thereof through the use of assessments. 
b.  Maintenance testing and repairs of all functions of the gate. 
c.  Establishing the access code, and ensuring that the city emergency and utility services have the proper code number. Changing the code will not be allowed until all persons having the right of access, including the fire and police departments and utility services, if applicable, have been notified in writing, except that in an emergency all such persons may be notified by telephone with such change confirmed in writing within five days. In no instance shall persons who have a right of access to the property be denied an entrance to or exit from the property caused by failure of notification of a change in the code. 
d.  Accompanying the fire department officer during inspection and testing of the opening systems. 
e.  Maintaining a service agreement with a qualified contractor to ensure maintenance and the availability of instant emergency service. 
(3)  The fire department shall approve an access agreement with the responsible party providing for an annual inspection of each gate to ensure that each gate is tested to meet all of the construction requirements. An inspection shall also be required for continued operation at any time the gate fails to meet the standards set forth in this section or when the fire chief determines that an inspection is in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare. A copy of the access agreement will be kept on file at the fire department with the maintenance contractor's name, address and 24-hour telephone number. No inspection shall be approved until the requirements for such agreement have been met. The fire chief is granted authority to deny approval for the operation of the gate in the event of failure of an inspection. An inspection will be repeated upon request of the responsible party when the deficiencies have been corrected. 
(4)  Operation and maintenance of the controlled access system shall at all times remain the sole responsibility of the responsible party. 
(d)  Penalty. Violation of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, subject the violator to the penalties of section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 1, 12-2-1997)  
Secs. 106-417—106-440. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WATER SUPPLY, FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE LANES 
 
Sec. 106-441. - Water system required; connection of subdivision to public water supply. 
(a)  The subdivider shall provide a water supply and distribution system to a proposed subdivision capable of meeting water use and fire protection requirements in accordance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances, standards and specifications. 
(b)  The subdivider shall, at his expense, provide a water system capable of supplying water to each lot within the subdivision. All such construction must comply with city standards and specifications and must be approved by the city engineer. 
(c)  Where an approved public water supply is reasonably accessible or procurable, the subdivider shall connect with the water supply. For purposes of this section, a public water supply is considered reasonably accessible if an existing or funded water main serves any quarter section in which the subdivision is wholly or partially located or is within one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) of any exterior boundary of the subdivision, whichever is the greater distance. Water supply is considered procurable unless the city or other public agency owning and maintaining the public water system cannot or will not, by reason of statute, ordinance, regulation or policy, furnish water to the subdivision. All water main construction must conform to the city standards and specifications and must be approved by the city engineer. Exceptions, under the special circumstances set forth in this subsection, to these construction standards and specifications for the sizing of water mains may be granted by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.080)  
Sec. 106-442. - Water main extensions required; use of public water supply. 
(a)  Water main extensions are required to serve all new subdivisions or new institutional, commercial or industrial structures, or multiple-family dwellings. 
(b)  Individual water wells may be allowed when a public water supply is adjacent, however, water wells shall be allowed for outside watering purposes only. In no case shall a water well be connected to the house service line. Water well drilling permits are required on all water wells drilled for domestic and outside watering purposes, as further provided in section 106-447(b). 
(c)  When any building, structure, facility, lot, parcel or tract of land has once been connected to a public water supply, it shall not be disconnected or use discontinued until authorization has been secured from the city council for discontinuance, as further provided in section 106-447(c). 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8, and each day that the facility is disconnected from city water and connected to an individual water system is a violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense, as further provided in section 106-447(d). 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.081; Ord. No. 661, § 1, 3-4-1997)  
Sec. 106-443. - Size of water mains. 
(a)  Water mains constructed along section line roads shall be 12 inches in diameter. Water mains constructed along quarter section lines or along the closest street to be built to a quarter section line shall be eight inches in diameter. All other water mains shall be six inches in diameter. The location of water mains on section line roads shall be approved by the city engineer and city staff. 
(b)  Water mains constructed along section line roads shall connect to 12-inch or greater diameter water mains. 
(c)  The city council may grant exceptions to the requirements contained in subsections (a) and (b) of this section upon recommendation of the city engineer and when such exceptions are in the best interests of the city, and the record shall reflect the reasons for the granting of the exceptions. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.082)  
Sec. 106-444. - Water supply for fire protection; fire hydrants and fire lanes. 
(a)  Water supply for fire protection required. The developer of any subdivision containing four or more lots or building sites for single-family or two-family residences shall extend water mains for fire protection at his expense, except as provided in this section. All sites other than single-family or two-family residences shall provide water main extensions for fire protection, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  Interconnection of mains. Water mains shall be interconnected to form a grid system. The length between interconnections shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Six-inch line: 1,200 feet. 
(2)  Eight-inch line: 2,640 feet. 
(3)  Twelve-inch line: 6,000 feet. 
(c)  Diameter of mains; hydrants required; alternate fire protection plan. The city engineer shall not approve a water main supplying fire hydrants which is less than six inches in diameter. Fire hydrants of a type and manufacture approved by the fire chief shall be available to serve the building site of all commercial, industrial, mercantile, educational, institutional, assembly, hotel, motel, single-family, two-family, multifamily and mobile home park occupanciesprior to the start of construction. In lieu of the required water line extension and fire hydrant installation, a developer may submit to the fire chief and city council for their approval an alternate fire protection plan for single-family and two-family residences in a subdivision containing less than four building sites and for business occupancies, other than mercantile, containing less than 5,000 square feet of gross floorspace. The alternate fire protection plan may include but is not limited to a special building requirement or an on-site water supply. The council and fire chief may approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove such plan after hearing such proposal and reviewing any other alternatives. 
(d)  Hydrants to be shown on building plans. Building plans for all new construction involving the occupancies listed in subsection (c) of this section shall show the location of fire hydrants on both public and private property as approved by the fire chief and the city engineer before any actual construction is undertaken. 
(e)  Hydrant location and standards. Hydrant location and standards shall be as follows: 
(1)  All hydrants are to be installed according to city standards; 
(2)  Fire hydrant requirements and locations shall be determined pursuant to section 46-64 of chapter 46 of the Mustang Code; and 
(3)  Fire hydrants shall be located apart from buildings and be fully accessible from paved driveways and fire lanes. 
(f)  Marking of fire lanes. The marking of fire lanes on private property devoted to public use shall be approved by the fire chief and chief of police of the city. 
(g)  Access by fire equipment. Fire lanes and driveways shall be located so that all buildings served by them are accessible to fire equipment. 
(h)  Standards for fire lanes. The contractor or designated person in charge of any construction site for commercial, industrial, mercantile, educational, institutional, assembly, hotel, motel, single-family, duplex, and multifamily dwelling or mobile home park uses shall provide and maintain an approved hard-surfaced all-weather access fire lane, not less than 20 feet in width, as shown on approved site plans. Such access fire lane, at the beginning of and during construction, shall be at least a graded roadbed with a gravel surface. At such time that construction has progressed to completion, the access lane shall be an approved hard-surfaced all-weather lane before any occupant shall be allowed to occupy the structure. 
(i)  Fire department connections. The location of the fire department connections ("FDC") shall provide hose connections that shall not block access to the building or obstruct other fire apparatus from accessing the building. A fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the FDC measured along a fire apparatus access road. FDC's shall have a five-inch Storz connection on a 30-degree downturn and shall include an approved locking cap as specified by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.083; Ord. No. 1016, § 1, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 1075, § 1, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 1167, § 2, 7-3-2018)  
Sec. 106-445. - Approval of plans for water system. 
The developer shall provide the city with copies of construction plans in accordance with article II, division 4 of this chapter. Upon approval by the planning commission, the city council and the state department of health, the director or the city engineer shall issue a notice to proceed for the approved water improvements. The developer shall not commence construction of water improvements until receiving the notice to proceed. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.084)  
Sec. 106-446. - Responsibility of developer for cost of water main extensions. 
(a)  The developer shall be responsible for the full cost of constructing and/or extending all water mains to serve the development. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a developer from entering into a private agreement to share the costs of water main extensions. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.085)  
Sec. 106-447. - Connection of individual lots to public water supply. 
(a)  Whenever the public water supply is accessible by street right-of-way or public easement and is within 300 feet of any point of the lot, parcel or tract of land, connection to the public water supply shall be mandatory. In unique and unusual circumstances where hardships are created the decision shall be made by the city manager. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a new building or an addition to an existing building without the owner or contractor first paying to the city clerk's office the water connection fee described in section 106-448. No building or addition to any building shall be occupied until the connection to the public water supply is completed and inspected by the city, with the exception of those structures which were not connected to the public water supply prior to the application for a building permit. Building permits for the construction and remodeling of detached accessory buildings shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(b)  Individual water wells may be allowed when public water supply is adjacent, however water wells shall be allowed for outside watering purposes only. In no case shall a water well be connected to the house service line. Water well drilling permits are required on all water wells drilled for domestic and outside watering purposes. 
(c)  When any building, structure, facility, lot, parcel or tract of land has once been connected to a public water supply, it shall not be disconnected or use discontinued until authorization has been secured from the city council for discontinuance. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8, and each day that the facility is disconnected from city water and connected to an individual water system in violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.086; Ord. No. 661, § 1, 3-4-1997)  
Sec. 106-448. - Water connection fee. 
No person shall connect to the public water supply system without first paying to the city clerk's office the applicable water connection fee calculated by the chief building official of the city. The actual cost of the installation shall be calculated as provided for in chapter 118. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.087)  
Sec. 106-449. - Individual water wells. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Where an approved water supply is not procurable as described in section 106-441, the subdivision, institution, commercial or industrial structure or single- or multiple-family dwelling may be served by individual water wells upon the express approval of the city engineer, the planning commission and the city council. Individual water wells must meet federal and state drinking water standards. 
(2)  Individual water wells shall meet state health design standards and construction specifications and shall provide adequate capacity to meet domestic demand. 
(3)  Individual water wells shall have a minimum capacity of five gallons per minute. If soil and geological data indicates a possible groundwater deficiency, the applicant must demonstrate, at his expense, that the water is available in adequate quantity and quality. 
(4)  As a fire protection measure, a minimum distance of 50 feet separation between residential structures shall be maintained in any residential district utilizing private water wells as the main source of water. 
(5)  Developments and subdivisions shall contain provisions and completed infrastructure for connection to city water service when such service becomes accessible. Therefore, in addition to the temporary water well system, such subdivisions or developments must meet requirements for water service as though such service were available. This water infrastructure must allow for connection of the properties included in the subdivision or development to city water service at a single connection site and will be dedicated to the city as a part of the final plat approval process. Water infrastructure, as used in this section, refers to water mains or refers to the complete installation and acceptance by the city of the water mains, valves, fire hydrants, service lines, meter boxes and appurtenances required to serve the proposed development or subdivision. 
(6)  If a developer desires to connect to city water service at the time of development when such service is not otherwise procurable as defined in this section, upon approval of the city council, the city will furnish materials and the developer will provide installation for connection lines. Such approval shall be solely within the discretionary authority of the city council and such decision shall be made based upon funds available, the general health, safety and welfare, the best interests of the city, and applicable law. 
(7)  The city may connect the subdivision or other properties to city water service when such service becomes accessible. There will be no additional charge or fee to property owners for such connection. Under no circumstances will any private water well be connected to the city system. 
(b)  Provisions for future city water service. 
(1)  Infrastructure required. 
a.  Developments and subdivisions shall contain provisions and completed infrastructure for connection to city water service when such service becomes accessible. Therefore, in addition to the individual water wells, such subdivisions or developments must meet requirements for city water service as though such service were available. This infrastructure will be dedicated to the city as a part of the final plat approval process. 
b.  The city may connect the subdivision to city water service when such service becomes accessible. There will be no additional charge or fee to property owners within the subdivision or development for such connection. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  Upon recommendation by the city engineer and upon approval by the city council, in lieu of installing the water infrastructure system, a fee in the amount of 110 percent of the engineer's approved estimate may be paid into an escrow account, to be used within the drainage basin to bring the infrastructure to the area and/or pay for the cost of the system within the subdivision. If the city is unable to provide the infrastructure within five years, then the escrow funds will be returned to the developer. 
b.  If none of the requirements or other exceptions provided in this article related to the water infrastructure system are feasible or are in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare, as determined by the city council, who will be provided a recommendation by the city engineer, then the council may approve a type system not otherwise addressed in this article, or any modification of a system, whether or not addressed in this article. In such cases, the city may determine to maintain such system if the city determines that such maintenance would be in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare. If it is not a system that conforms to the water extension program, then an alternate system could be developed and the city will maintain the alternate system. 
(Code 1977, § 16.24.088; Ord. No. 661, § 1, 3-4-1997)  
Secs. 106-450—106-470. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 106-471. - Generally. 
(a)  Improvements may be installed only in accordance with a final plat that has been approved, or approved on condition, by the planning commission. The improvements must be in accordance with construction plans approved by the city engineer, planning commission and city council. The subdivider may submit a construction phasing plan. 
(b)  The applicant shall build and pay all costs of temporary improvements required by the planning commission and city council, and shall maintain the temporary improvements for the period specified. 
(c)  All required improvements shall be made by the applicant, at his expense, without reimbursement by the city or any improvement district therein, except where approved by the city council. 
(d)  Approval shall be deemed to have expired in subdivisions for which no assurance for completion has been posted and the improvements have not been completed within the period specified by the provisions of this chapter. In those cases where a performance bond or other instrument has been required and improvements have not been completed within the terms of the performance bond or other instrument, the city council may declare the bond to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed. 
(Code 1977, § 16.28.010)  
Sec. 106-472. - Inspection of improvements; certification of completion. 
(a)  Engineering inspection of required improvements shall be provided by the city. The subdivider shall be responsible for inspection fees as required in section 106-364. If the city engineer finds, upon final inspection, that any of the improvements have not been constructed in accordance with city construction standards and specifications, the subdivider shall be responsible for completing the improvement. 
(b)  The city council shall not accept dedications of required improvements, or release or reduce a performance bond, until the director has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed. Also, the applicant's engineer or surveyor registered in the state shall submit to the city engineer four copies of certified as-built survey plans of the subdivision, indicating location, dimensions, materials and other information required by the city council. The as-built plans shall illustrate that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision and that the improvements are ready for dedication to the local government and are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendations, the city council shall accept the improvements in accordance with established procedure. 
(Code 1977, § 16.28.020)  
Sec. 106-473. - Methods of assurance. 
Completion of the required improvements may be assured by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Prior to recording the final plat, or, in the case of an approved planned unit development as per this chapter, prior to the issuance of a building permit, the subdivider shall complete, in accordance with the approved construction plans, all improvements required in this chapter as specified in the final plat and/or planned unit development master plan and master development plan map, and, when required, shall dedicate the improvements to the city in accordance with this chapter. The final plat shall be held by the planning commission and signed by the city council only after satisfactory completion and acceptance of the required improvements. 
(2)  In lieu of completion of all improvements prior to final plat recording, the city council may, at its discretion, enter into an agreement with the subdivider, whereby the subdivider shall guarantee to complete all improvements as may be specified by the planning commission and approved by the city council. To secure this agreement, the subdivider shall provide, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the following guarantees: 
a.  Surety bond. The subdivider shall file a surety bond with the city as set forth in this section in the amount of 110 percent of the estimated construction costs of the required improvements. A professional engineer shall furnish estimates of the costs of all required improvements and utilities to the city engineer, who shall review the estimates in order to determine the adequacy of the bond for insuring the construction of the required facilities. All dedications, easements and improvements relative to the final plat and to the surety bond shall be brought before the city council for its acceptance. Upon such acceptance, the applicant shall file the final plat with the county clerk. The bond shall be released when all improvements are certified as complete by the director and accepted by the city council, and a copy of the as-built plans on linen or other acceptable reproducible material, prepared by a professional engineer, showing the location of all improvements, is submitted to the director. 
b.  Escrow account. The subdivider shall deposit cash, or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the city or in escrow with a bank or savings and loan institution. The use of any instrument other than cash shall be subject to the approval of the city council. The amount of the deposit shall be 110 percent of the full amount of the cost of the required improvements, as estimated by a professional engineer and approved by the city engineer. In the case of any escrow account, the subdivider shall file with the city council an agreement between the financial institution and himself guaranteeing the following: 
1.  That the funds of the escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the city council and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider as security in any other matter during that period; and 
2.  That in the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to complete the improvements, the financial institution shall immediately make the funds in the account available to the city for use in the completion of those improvements. 
c.  Letter of credit. Subject to the approval of the city council, the subdivider shall provide a letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution or individual. This letter shall be submitted to the city council and shall certify the following: 
1.  That the creditor does guarantee funds equivalent to 110 percent of the full amount as estimated by a professional engineer and approved by the city engineer; 
2.  That, in the case of failure on the part of the subdivider to complete the specified improvements within the required time period, the creditor shall pay to the city immediately and without further action such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements, up to the limit of credit stated in the letter; and 
3.  That this letter of credit may not be withdrawn, or reduced in amount, until approved by the city council according to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1977, § 16.28.030)  
Sec. 106-474. - Time limit for completion of improvements. 
(a)  The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the planning commission in approving the final plat and shall be incorporated in the bond or other instrument, and shall not in any event exceed two years from the date of final approval of the plat or surety bond, whichever is later. 
(b)  The planning commission may, upon application of the subdivider and upon proof of hardship, recommend to the city council extension of the completion date set forth in such bond or other instrument for a maximum period of one additional year. Such extension shall be granted no more than two times. Each application for extension shall be accompanied by an updated estimate of construction costs prepared by a professional engineer. Surety bonds or other assurance for completion must be filed in the amount of 110 percent of the updated estimate of construction costs as approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 16.28.040)  
Sec. 106-475. - Maintenance of improvements. 
(a)  Responsibility for maintenance. The contractor shall be required to maintain all improvements on the individual subdivided lots and on streets until acceptance of the improvements by the city council. Upon dedication to and acceptance by the city council of all public improvements, maintenance bonds shall be posted and submitted to the director according to procedures established by the director. 
(b)  Maintenance bonds. Maintenance bonds shall be filed in the following amounts: 
(1)  Paving: 100 percent for one year and ten percent for four years thereafter; and 
(2)  Water, sewer and storm sewer systems: 110 percent for two years. 
(c)  Sidewalks constructed by developer. The maintenance of sidewalks constructed by the developer as part of the subdivision improvement shall be the responsibility of the developer until the improvements are inspected and approved by the chief building official as per chapter 102. 
(d)  Sidewalks constructed by individual builders. The maintenance of sidewalks constructed by individual builders shall be the responsibility of the builder until the improvements are inspected and approved by the chief building official as per chapter 102. 
(Code 1977, § 16.28.050; Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 5-6-2008)  
Sec. 106-476. - Prerequisites for issuance of certificates of occupancy. 
Where a surety bond or other instrument is required for a subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision, or any approved phase, shall be issued prior to the completion of the improvements and dedication and acceptance of the improvements by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 16.28.060)  
Chapter 110 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance levying or imposing or otherwise related to taxes saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-171 et seq.; occupation tax for alcoholic beverages, § 6-61 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; fees, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Municipal taxation generally, 68 O.S. § 2701 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 110-1—110-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal license taxes on occupations, 11 O.S. § 22-106. 
 
Sec. 110-31. - Tax levied. 
There is levied a license tax on callings, trades, businesses, avocations and occupations as provided in section 110-39. 
(Code 1977, § 5.04.020)  
Sec. 110-32. - Separate license required for each place of business and each occupation. 
A separate license must be obtained for each branch or separate place of business in which the trade, calling, profession or occupation is carried on, and each license shall authorize the party obtaining it to carry on, pursue or conduct only that trade, calling, profession or occupation described in such license, except as may be otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 5.04.080)  
Sec. 110-33. - Licensing and payment of tax required prior to engaging in business. 
No person, either as principal or agent, shall, in the city, conduct, pursue, carry on or operate any calling, trade, profession or occupation subject to this article without first paying in advance to the city clerk the license tax prescribed in this article and procuring a license therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 5.04.010)  
Sec. 110-34. - Evidence of liability for tax. 
In the trial of any action brought under this provisions of this article, the fact that any party to such action represented himself as engaged in any business or occupation for the transaction of the thing for which a license is required, or that such party exhibited a sign indicating such business or calling, or such proprietorship or management, shall be evidence of the liability of such party to pay the license tax therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 5.04.030)  
Sec. 110-35. - Due date; delinquency. 
All business license fees shall become due on November 1, and shall be considered delinquent if not paid within ten days thereafter. For every month or fraction of a month a license shall remain delinquent after the ten days allowed, there shall be added to the whole amount of such license fee a penalty of two percent, which shall be collected in the same manner as the license. The addition, if any, of a penalty to a license shall not exempt the person from whom the license fee may be collectible from any penalty to which he may be liable for violating any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 5.04.040)  
Sec. 110-36. - Issuance of license; expiration of license. 
All licenses relating to the regulation of any business or occupation, whether required by this article or other sections of this Code, shall expire on October 31 of the year issued. However, licenses issued after September 1 shall expire on October 31 of the following year. No license shall be issued until the amount prescribed therefor shall be paid to the city clerk, and no license shall in any case be returned or transferred. Licenses shall be signed by the mayor and the city clerk, and countersigned by the treasurer. The clerk shall affix the corporate seal of the city to the license. 
(Code 1977, § 5.04.050)  
Sec. 110-37. - Free licenses or rebates prohibited. 
No free licenses shall be granted, or rebate allowed, for any cause, or any sum accepted less than the amount specified in this article, or for a shorter period than required in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 5.04.060)  
Sec. 110-38. - Inspection of places of business. 
Any police officer or other designated representative of the city shall have power to enter any place requiring a license under this article during business hours to ascertain whether this article and other ordinances of the city are being complied with. It shall be the special duty of all such officers to see that all license taxes required under this article are paid when due. 
(Code 1977, § 5.04.070)  
Sec. 110-39. - Amount of tax. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the license tax provided for in this article shall be in such amount as the city council may determine by resolution. A copy of the resolution shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and the tax may be changed or modified as the city council may determine necessary. 
(Code 1977, § 5.04.090)  
Secs. 110-40—110-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 110-61. - Definitions. 
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., are adopted by reference and made a part of this article. In addition thereto, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tax collector means the department of the city government or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax levied in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.030) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions generally, 68 O.S. § 1352.  
Sec. 110-62. - Use of revenue. 
(a)  It is declared to be the purpose of the first excise tax levied by this article to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city. 
(b)  It is declared to be the purpose of the revenues provided by the additional excise tax levied by Ordinance No. 277 to make payments into the sinking fund of the city in relation to bonded indebtedness of the city in the principal amount of $3,125,000.00 voted upon at a special election held in the city on June 9, 1981, to provide funds for the purpose of extending and improving the water system of the city required to the extent to reduce the ad valorem tax therefor to 12.27 mills on each dollar of taxable property. 
(c)  It is declared to be the purpose of the revenues provided by the additional one percent excise tax levied by Ordinance No. 532 to provide revenues solely for capital improvements of the city and for payment of the principal and interest on indebtedness incurred on behalf of the city by any duly constituted authority thereof for capital improvements. The term "capital improvements," as used in this subsection, shall not include maintenance except for extraordinary nonrecurring projects. The sales tax revenues shall be utilized within the following priorities, in order of importance: first, sanitary sewer facilities; second, water system facilities; and third, other capital improvements. 
(d)  It is declared to be the purpose of the revenues provided by the additional one percent excise tax levied by Ordinance No. 624 to provide funds solely for street and road improvement projects of the city and for payment of the principal of and interest on indebtedness incurred on behalf of the city, if any, by the Mustang Improvement Authority, a duly constituted authority thereof, for street and road improvements. The term "street and road improvement projects" as used in this section shall include maintenance, the providing of matching funds for federal or state funded road improvement projects, signalization, bridges, paving, storm drainage, engineering fees and other activities normally and commonly associated with street and road improvement projects. The street and road improvement projects shall be undertaken on a "pay as you go" schedule, except and unless Ordinance No. 625, approving the incurring of indebtedness in the manner as set forth therein, is approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the ordinance in the manner prescribed by law. This subsection (Ordinance No. 624) shall become and be effective on and after January 1, 1995, for five years, through December 31, 1999. 
(e)  It is hereby declared that the revenues of the one percent excise tax currently levied pursuant to Ordinance No. 647 be made available for the following purposes: (i) ninety percent of the revenues be used for capital expenditures for the use and benefit of the city, or any public trust with the city as beneficiary and/or for debt service in connection with obligations issued to finance said capital expenditures and (ii) ten percent of the revenues be used for personnel expenses related to city public safety. The change in purpose as set forth above shall become effective on the date The Mustang Improvement Authority Utility System and Sales Tax Revenue Note, Taxable Series 2013 is paid or provision for payment is made. The one percent excise tax levied pursuant to Ordinance No. 647 shall terminate and shall cease to be levied after June 30, 2030. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.040; Ord. No. 647, § 2, 6-20-1996; Ord. No. 710, § 1, 5-12-1999; Ord. No. 1139, § 1, 6-7-2016)  
Sec. 110-63. - Tax levied. 
There is levied an excise tax of four percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.050; Ord. No. 647, § 1, 6-20-1996; Ord. No. 1139, § 2, 6-7-2016) 
State Law reference— Sales tax authorized, 68 O.S. § 2701; sales subject to tax, 68 O.S. § 1354.  
Sec. 110-64. - Exemptions. 
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this article the gross receipts or gross proceeds and the transfers of tangible personal property exempted from the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, §§ 3.12.060—3.12.080) 
State Law reference— Exemptions from state sales tax, 68 O.S. §§ 1355—1360.  
Sec. 110-65. - Due date. 
The tax levied under this article shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.090)  
Sec. 110-66. - Payment. 
The tax levied in this article shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.100) 
State Law reference— When state tax due and payable, 68 O.S. § 1365.  
Sec. 110-67. - Classification of taxpayers. 
The classification of taxpayers under this article shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.120) 
State Law reference— Taxpayers classified, 68 O.S. § 1363.  
Sec. 110-68. - Vendor's duty to collect tax. 
(a)  The tax levied under this article shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor, and it shall be the duty of each and every vendor in the city to collect from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this article, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent thereof. 
(b)  Vendors shall add the tax imposed under this article, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(c)  A vendor who willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied, or willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by whatever means, all or any part of the tax levied in this article, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner whatsoever, is guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.130) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 1361.  
Sec. 110-69. - Returns and remittances; discounts. 
Returns and remittances of the tax levied in this article and collected shall be made to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.). Remittances of tax collected under this article shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code for collection of state sales taxes. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.140) 
State Law reference— Remittances, 68 O.S. § 1362; discounts, 68 O.S. § 1367.  
Sec. 110-70. - Delinquency. 
The provisions of 68 O.S. § 217 are adopted and made a part of this article, and interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein specified are levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this article; provided that the failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this article shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.160)  
Sec. 110-71. - Waiver of interest and penalties. 
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax levied in this article may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220, and to accomplish the purposes of this section the applicable provisions of such section are adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.170)  
Sec. 110-72. - Tax constitutes debt. 
Such taxes, penalty and interest due under this article shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.110) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to enforce payment of taxes by civil action, 68 O.S. § 2703; lien for municipal taxes, 68 O.S. § 2704.  
Sec. 110-73. - Refund of erroneous payments. 
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax levied in this article may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purposes of this section the applicable provisions of that such section are adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.180)  
Sec. 110-74. - Failure to file return or pay tax; fraudulent returns. 
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the wilful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances required in this article, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this article, shall be an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.190)  
Sec. 110-75. - Confidentiality of records. 
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the confidential and privileged nature of such records and files the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 are adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of this article as if set forth in full in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.200)  
Sec. 110-76. - State permits ratified. 
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the state tax commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.) are, for the purposes of this article, ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.020) 
State Law reference— Permits to do business, 68 O.S. § 1364.  
Sec. 110-77. - Provisions cumulative. 
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Code 1977, § 3.12.150)  
Secs. 110-78—110-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - USE TAX 
 
Sec. 110-101. - Definitions. 
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in 68 O.S. § 1401 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. In addition thereto, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tax collector means the department of the city government or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax levied in this article. 
Transaction means sale. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.020) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 110-102. - Use of revenue. 
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city, and any and all revenues derived under this article may be expended by the city council for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.030)  
Sec. 110-103. - Tax levied. 
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming within the city tangible personal property purchased or brought into the city an excise tax on the storage, use or other consuming within the city of such property, at the rate of four percent of the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the city, tangible personal property purchased or brought into the city. The additional tax levied under this section shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property within the city and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside the state; provided that the tax levied in this article shall not be levied against tangible personal property intended solely for use outside the city but which is stored in the city pending shipment outside the city, or which is temporarily retained in the city for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable for payment of the tax authorized in this section may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or services, provided that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by the city had been levied on the sale of such goods or services. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.040; Ord. No. 653, § 1, 9-3-1996) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, 68 O.S. § 1411.  
Sec. 110-104. - Exemptions. 
Persons and transactions exempt from taxation under the provisions of 68 O.S. art. 14 (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.) are exempt from taxation under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.050) 
State Law reference— Exemptions, 68 O.S. § 1404.  
Sec. 110-105. - Due date; payment. 
The tax levied by this article is due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under 68 O.S. art. 14 (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.060) 
State Law reference— When state tax due, 68 O.S. § 1405.  
Sec. 110-106. - Tax constitutes debt. 
Such taxes, penalty and interest due under this article shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.070) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to enforce payment of taxes by civil action, 68 O.S. § 2703; lien for municipal taxes, 68 O.S. § 2704.  
Sec. 110-107. - Vendor's duty to collect tax. 
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state, and making sales of tangible personal property from a place of business outside this state for use in the city, shall at the time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this article from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the tax commission, if the tax commission shall, by regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the tax commission the name and address of all his agents operating in this city and the location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of business in this city. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.080) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 1406.  
Sec. 110-108. - Collection by out-of-state vendors. 
The tax commission may in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax levied in this article by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible personal property for use in this city, and by the out-of-state place of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state and making sales of tangible personal property at such out-of-state place of business for use in the city. Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes by the tax commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible personal property sold to his knowledge for use within the city. Such authority and permit may be cancelled when at any time the tax commission considers that such tax can more effectively be collected from the person using such property in the city; provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the purchaser within the city by the retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable municipal sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under the taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.090) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 1407.  
Sec. 110-109. - Revocation of tax permit and business license of out-of-state vendors. 
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax levied in this article, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article or 68 O.S. art. 14 (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.) or any order, rules or regulations of the tax commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in 68 O.S. § 1408, by order, revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized to do business in this state may, after notice and hearing as provided in this section, cancel the corporation's license to do business in this state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the obligations under this article, 68 O.S. art. 14 (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.), or any order, rules or regulations of the tax commission. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.100) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 1408.  
Sec. 110-110. - Returns and remittances; discounts. 
Returns and remittances of the tax levied and collected under this article shall be made to the tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by 68 O.S. art. 14 (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.), and remittances of tax collected under this article will be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by 68 O.S. art. 14 (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.) for the collection of state use taxes. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.110) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 1410.  
Sec. 110-111. - Delinquency. 
The provisions of 68 O.S. § 217 are adopted and made a part of this article, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this article; provided that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this article shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.120)  
Sec. 110-112. - Waiver of interest and penalties. 
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of the retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the tax levied in this article may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purposes of this section the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.130)  
Sec. 110-113. - Refund of erroneous payments. 
Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax levied in this article may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state use tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purpose of this section the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.140)  
Sec. 110-114. - Failure to file return or pay tax; fraudulent returns. 
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances required in this article, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this article, shall be an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.150)  
Sec. 110-115. - Confidentiality of records. 
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the confidential and privileged nature of the records and files the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.160)  
Sec. 110-116. - Classification of taxpayers. 
The classification of taxpayers under this article shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of 68 O.S. art. 14 (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.180)  
Sec. 110-117. - State permits ratified. 
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the tax commission pursuant to 68 O.S. art. 14 (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.) are for the purpose of this article hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.190)  
Sec. 110-118. - Provisions cumulative. 
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the city's ordinances. 
(Code 1977, § 3.16.170)  
Secs. 110-119—110-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Municipal tax on utilities, 68 O.S. § 2601 et seq. 
 
Sec. 110-141. - Tax levied. 
There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of two percent upon the gross receipts from residential and commercial sales of power, light, heat, gas or electricity in the city, which tax shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax levied by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 3.20.010) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy above tax, 68 O.S. § 2601.  
Sec. 110-142. - Exemption of persons operating under franchise. 
The tax levied under this article shall, when levied, apply to all persons engaged in the business of furnishing power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water within the city limits, except it shall not apply to any person operating under a valid franchise from the city. 
(Code 1977, § 3.20.020) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 2602.  
Sec. 110-143. - Term; payment; disposition of revenue. 
The tax levied under this article shall be levied for a term of not less than one year and shall be payable quarterly and placed in the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 3.20.030) 
State Law reference— Term of tax, 68 O.S. § 2603.  
Sec. 110-144. - Failure to pay tax. 
Any person failing or refusing to pay the tax levied under this article when levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the city, and in addition thereto an action may be maintained against such person for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting the tax, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Code 1977, § 3.20.040) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 2604.  
Sec. 110-145. - Tax constitutes lien. 
The tax imposed by this article shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets located within the city of any person engaged in the business of selling power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water within the city limits. 
(Code 1977, § 3.20.050) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 2605.  
Sec. 110-146. - Gas companies. 
(a)  Any person in the business of furnishing gas within the city limits, not operating under a valid franchise from the city, and upon whom the tax provided under this article is imposed, is deemed to be operating under a revocable permit by the city for so long as this article remains in effect or unless otherwise amended, and the taxes are paid in accordance with the terms of this article to acquire, construct, erect, install, extend, repair, remove, relocate, replace, operate and maintain a system of works, pipes, pipelines, apparatus, structures and appurtenances in, across, upon and under the streets, alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, parks, parkways, sidewalks, parkings, driveways, rights-of-way, utility easements and other public ways, places, areas and grounds, all being referred to in this section as "streets, alleys, avenues and other public ways, places, areas and grounds," in the city, as now constituted and as may be added to hereafter, for the purpose of transporting, distributing and selling gas to the city, its inhabitants and the public generally and for other purposes for which gas, during the period of this revocable permit, may be used, together with the right to enter upon the streets, alleys, avenues and other public ways, places and grounds of the city for the purpose of constructing, erecting, installing, extending, relocating, operating, maintaining, removing and repairing such works, pipes, pipelines and all necessary apparatus, machinery, structures and appurtenances. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to amend the terms and conditions for operations as contained and set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1977, §§ 3.20.060, 3.20.070)  
Secs. 110-147—110-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - HOTEL TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1105, § 1, adopted July 15, 2014, enacted new provisions designated as ch. 106, art. VI, §§ 106-181—106-209. At the editor's discretion and to maintain similar subject matter, said provisions have been redesignated as ch. 110, art. VI, §§ 110-181—110-209. 
 
Sec. 110-181. - Citation. 
This article shall be known and cited as "City of Mustang Hotel Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-182. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings described to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Finance director shall mean the finance director of the City of Mustang. 
Hotel shall mean any building or building structure, trailer, or other facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in which five or more rooms are used for the accommodation of such guests, whether such rooms are in one or in several structures. This term shall include hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory space where bed space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by "permanent residents," and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. The term shall not include hospitals, sanitariums, assisted living centers or nursing homes, nor shall this term affect permanent resident facilities as defined below for residents for terms in excess of 30 days. 
Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms in a hotel, or the right to use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant shall mean a person, who for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms in a hotel under lease, concession, permit, right to access, license to use, or other agreement. 
Operator shall mean any person operating a hotel in this city, including but not limited to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, manager or similar agent, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room in a hotel/motel for at least 30 consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year. 
Rent shall mean the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any reduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return shall mean any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Room shall mean any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of the hotel which is available for or let out for the use of or possessed for any purpose other than a place of assembly. As used herein, "place of assembly" means a room or space which is capable of being occupied by 75 or more persons and which is used for educational, recreational or amusement purposes and shall include: dance halls, cabarets, nightclubs, restaurants, any room or space for public or private banquet, feasts, socials, card parties or weddings, lodge and meeting halls or rooms, skating rinks, gymnasiums, swimming pools, billiard, bowling and table tennis rooms, halls or rooms used for public or private catering purposes, funeral parlors, markets, recreational rooms, concert halls, broadcasting studios, and all other places of similar type of occupancy. 
Tax shall mean the tax levied pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-183. - Levied amount. 
There is hereby levied and imposed an excise tax of five percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel in this city. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-184. - Exemptions; acknowledgment required; records required. 
(a)  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the tax levied in this article: 
(1)  Permanent residents; 
(2)  The United States Government or any agency or division thereof when paid directly by the United States Government; and 
(3)  The State of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof when paid directly by the State of Oklahoma or any political subdivision. 
(b)  Acknowledgment required. Every hotel shall submit a monthly exemption form, as provided by the finance director, with each monthly room tax report. This exemption form will indicate the name of the person seeking exemption, the exempt organization with which they are affiliated, the period of occupancy, number of rooms occupied and any other information required by the finance director. Every exemption form shall be signed by the hotel manager or authorized agent, so that the signature shall serve as an acknowledgment that all information contained in the exemption form is true and correct. Upon submission of these forms to the city, the finance director shall make a final determination as to the validity of all claimed exemptions. Should the finance director determine that a claimed exemption is not valid, the hotel shall be assessed the then current percentage of tax applicable, within three months of the date that the exemption is claimed. The hotel claiming such exemption shall become liable for payment of the tax and shall submit the same with their next monthly tax remittance. 
For purposes of this section, an exemption will not be validated by the finance director unless the exemption is claimed for the month in which it accrues. For good cause shown, the finance director may grant an extension for claiming an exemption. 
(c)  Records required. Every operator shall be required to maintain copies of monthly room reports, monthly exemption forms and individual exemption forms upon the business premises of the hotel for a period of three years. Such records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the finance director, or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city. For purposes of this section, individual exemption forms shall be available from the finance director and shall include the following: 
(1)  A statement declaring the reason for exemptions; 
(2)  The name, signature, address, home telephone and work telephone numbers of the person claiming the exemption; 
(3)  The date on which the exemption form is completed; and 
(4)  An acknowledgment, by signature, of the exemption by an employee or agent of the hotel. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-185. - Tax to be separately designated on bills. 
The operator shall separately designate, charge and show the tax on all bills, statements, receipts or any other evidence of charges or payments of rent for occupancy issued or delivered by the operator. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-186. - Operator responsible for collection. 
The operator shall be responsible for the collection of the tax from the occupant and shall be liable to the city for the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-187. - Certificates of registration. 
(a)  Prior to commencement of business or opening, every hotel operator shall file with the finance director: 
(1)  A certificate of registration; 
(2)  An affidavit and designation of operator. 
The required filings shall be made on forms prescribed by the finance director. 
(b)  The finance director shall, within five days after receipt of the required registration and affidavit, issue without charge, to each operator, a certificate of authority empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant and duplicates thereof for each additional hotel. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the finance director upon the cessation of business at the hotel named, or upon its sale or transfer, or upon the change of designated operator. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-188. - Records required. 
Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy of all rent paid, charged or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon in such form as the finance director may by regulation require. Such records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the finance director, or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city; and shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the finance director may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-189. - Returns. 
(a)  Every operator shall file with the finance director a return of occupancy and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon for the period ending the last day of every month of each year. Said returns shall be filed on a monthly basis and are due no later than the fifteenth day of the month directly following the reporting period. 
(b)  The finance director may permit or require returns to be made by shorter or longer periods and upon such dates as the finance director may specify. The form of the return shall be prescribed by the finance director and shall contain such information as the finance director may deem necessary for the proper administration of this article. The finance director may require amended returns to be filed within ten days after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-190. - Payment of tax. 
At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall pay to the finance director the taxes imposed by this article upon the rents included in such return, as well as all other monies collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this article. All taxes for the period for which a return is required to be filed shall be due from the operator and payable to the finance director on or before the date fixed for the filing of the return for such period without regard to whether a return is filed or whether the return which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents and the taxes due thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-191. - Delinquent taxes. 
The tax levied by this article shall be due and payable when the return is filed. All taxes not paid within 15 days following the last day of the period shall be delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-192. - Interest on unpaid/delinquent taxes. 
If any tax levied by this article becomes delinquent, the person responsible and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid tax at the rate of one and one-half percent per month on the unpaid balance from the date of delinquency. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-193. - Collection by suit. 
Such taxes and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claim of unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-194. - Bond required. 
Where the finance director believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave the state, or remove or dissipate assets, or for any other similar reason the finance director deems it necessary in order to protect revenues under this article, the finance director may require such operator to file with the city a bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state in such amount as the finance director may fix to secure the payment of any tax or penalties and interest due, or which may become due from such operator. In the event the finance director determines that an operator is to file such bond, the finance director shall give notice to such operator specifying the amount of bond required. The operator shall file such bond within five days after the giving of such notice unless, within such five days, the operator shall request in writing, a hearing before the city council or its designee, at which the propriety and amount of the bond shall be determined by the city council or its designee. Such determination shall be final and shall be complied with, within 15 days thereafter. In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the finance director, or cash in such amount as the finance director may prescribe, may be deposited with the finance director, who may at any time after five days' notice to the depositor, apply then to any tax and/or penalties due, and for that purpose the securities may be sold at a public or a private sale. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-195. - Assessment and determination of tax. 
If a return required by this article is not filed, or if a return when filed is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the finance director from such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices such as number of rooms, location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types of accommodations and services, number of employees, or other factors. Written notice of such assessments shall be given to the person liable for the collection and payment of the tax. Such assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine that tax unless the person against whom it is assessed, within 90 days after the giving of notice of such assessment, shall apply in writing to the city council or its designee for a hearing or unless the finance director on his/her own motion shall reassess the same. After such hearing, the city council or its designee shall give written notice of its determination to the person against whom the tax is assessed and such determination shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-196. - Refunds. 
(a)  The finance director shall refund or credit any tax erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally collected if written application to the finance director for such refund shall be made within two years from the date of payment thereof. For like causes, and in the same period, a refund may be so made upon the initiative and the order of the finance director. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing. Such application may also be made by the person who has collected and paid such tax to the finance director, providing that the application is made within one year of the payment of the occupant to the operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator until he has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund is made. The finance director, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow credit thereof on payment due from the applicant. 
(b)  Upon application for a refund, the finance director may receive evidence with respect thereto, and make such investigation as he deems necessary. After making a determination as to the refund, the finance director shall give notice thereof to the applicant. Such determination shall be final unless the applicant, within 90 days after such notice, shall apply in writing to the city council or its designee for a hearing. After such hearing, the city council, or its designee, shall give written notice of the decision to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-197. - Notices. 
Notices provided for under this article shall be deemed to have been given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or deposited in the United States Mail, addressed to the last known address of the operator. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-198. - Remedies exclusive. 
The remedies provided in this article shall be exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-199. - Failure to file; submitting fraudulent returns; failure to post a bond; penalties. 
The failure or refusal of any operator/taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this article or failure to post a bond, shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending taxpayer shall be subject to costs and to a fine of not more than $200.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and is subject to all penalties herein. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-200. - Operator's discount for keeping records. 
In order to remunerate an operator for keeping tax records, filing reports, and remitting the tax when due, a two-percent discount shall be allowed upon all taxes paid prior to the time they become delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-201. - Records confidential. 
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the hotel tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the tax as if herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-202. - Use of funds. 
All taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be deposited into the city's general fund. The city council shall determine on a yearly basis the apportionment and use of the room tax funds. Each year, a review will be conducted on the prior year's use of funds subsequent to distribution. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-203. - General powers of finance director. 
In addition to all other powers granted to the finance director, he/she is hereby authorized and empowered: 
(1)  To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the carrying out of this article for the purposes thereof. 
(2)  To extend for cause shown, the time for filing and return for a period not exceeding 60 days; and for cause shown to waive, remit, or reduce penalties or interest. 
(3)  To delegate his/her functions hereunder to an assistant or other employee or employees of the city. 
(4)  To assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed by this article. 
(5)  To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-204. - Administration of oaths and compelling testimony. 
The finance director, or his/her designated representative, shall have the power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of their powers and duties under this article. The finance director shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the performance of his/her duties hereunder and all the enforcement of this article and to examine them in relation thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-205. - Proceedings to recover tax. 
(a)  Whenever any taxpayer or other person shall fail to collect and pay over any tax or any tax penalties due and owing, or interest imposed by this article as herein provided, the city attorney shall, upon request of the finance director, take appropriate action to enforce the payment of same. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority of 68 O.S. § 2701 et seq., all taxes, interest and penalties imposed by this article, are hereby declared to constitute a lien in favor of the City of Mustang, upon all franchises, property and rights to property, whether real or personal, then belonging to or thereafter acquired by the person, firm or corporation owing the tax, whether such property is employed by such person, firm or corporation in the conduct of its business or in the hands of an assignee, trustee, or receiver, for the benefit of a creditor, from the date said taxes are due and payable under provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-206. - Amendments. 
The citizens of Mustang, by their approval of this article at the election herein provided, hereby authorize the city council, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this article as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness; except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not exceed five percent without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-207. - Provisions cumulative. 
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-208. - Provisions severable. 
The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article is for any reason held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-209. - Effective date. 
This article shall become and be effective on the first day of December, 2014, subject to the approval of the majority of registered voters of the City of Mustang voting on the same in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 7-15-2014)  
Chapter 114 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 62; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 78; throwing litter from vehicles, § 98-35; vehicles scattering load or depositing materials from tires, § 98-36; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Traffic generally, 47 O.S.; power of local authorities, 47 O.S. §§ 15-101, 15-102. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 114-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means any narrow highway ordinarily located in the interior portion of platted blocks and ordinarily used for service or delivery purposes at the rear of stores, dwellings or buildings. 
Ambulance means a motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed or arranged for the purpose of transporting ill, sick or injured persons. 
Bicycle means a device having two tandem wheels, propelled by human power, upon which any person may ride. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-104. 
Business district means the territory contiguous to, and including a highway if there are buildings within 600 feet of the highway in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the highway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-106. 
Commercial vehicle means a vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
Commission means the traffic and transportation commission of the city. 
Crosswalk means: 
(1)  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; and 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection, or elsewhere distinctly designated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-111. 
Director means the community development director. 
Double park means parking or stopping a vehicle on the roadway side of another vehicle already parked adjacent to the edge or curbing of the roadway. 
Driver or operator means a person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
State Law reference— Driver or operator defined, 47 O.S. § 1-140. 
Emergency means an unforeseeable occurrence of temporary duration causing or resulting in an abnormal increase of traffic volume, cessation or stoppage of traffic movement, including fire, storm, accident, riot or spontaneous assembly of large numbers of pedestrians in such a manner as to impede the flow of traffic. 
Emergency vehicles means vehicles of the fire and police departments and legally authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations. 
State Law reference— Authorized emergency vehicle defined, 47 O.S. § 1-103. 
Intersection means the following: 
(1)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict; and 
(2)  If a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing or each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If the intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-126. 
Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-127. 
Limit lines means boundaries of parking areas, loading zones and nontraffic areas and lines indicating the proper place for stopping where stops are required. 
Limited access highway means a highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-110. 
Loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Motor vehicle means a vehicle which is self-propelled or propelled by electric power obtained from overhead wires, but not operated upon rails. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle defined, 47 O.S. § 1-134. 
Motorcycle, motor scooter and motor bicycle mean a motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or saddle for the use of the driver, and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground. 
State Law reference— Minibike defined, 47 O.S. § 1-133.1; motorcycle defined, 47 O.S. § 1-135; motor-driven cycle defined, 47 O.S. § 1-136; motorized bicycle defined, 47 O.S. § 1-136.1. 
Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, provided such loading and unloading is in an authorized place. 
State Law reference— Park or parking defined, 47 O.S. § 1-142(a). 
Pedestrian means any person on foot. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-143. 
Police officer means an officer of the police department, or any person authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
State Law reference— Police officer defined, 47 O.S. § 1-147. 
Private road or roadway means a way or place in private ownership or leading to property in private ownership, and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner. 
State Law reference— Private road or driveway defined, 47 O.S. § 1-148. 
Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-149. 
Railroad train means a locomotive or engine, with or without cars attached, which is operated upon fixed rails, and is not a streetcar. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-151. 
Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district. 
State Law reference— Residence district defined, 47 O.S. § 1-154. 
Right-of-way means the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision, unless one grants a precedence to the other. 
State Law reference— Right-of-way defined, 47 O.S. § 1-156. 
Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, "roadway," as used in this chapter, means any one of the roadways included in the highway and not all such roadways collectively. 
State Law reference— Roadway defined, 47 O.S. § 1-158(a). 
Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is marked or indicated by adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times. 
State Law reference— Safety zone defined, 47 O.S. § 1-159. 
School zone means any street or highway, or portion thereof, officially designated and marked as a school zone. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a highway between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-163. 
Standing means any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not. 
State Law reference— Standing defined, 47 O.S. § 1-167. 
Stop, when required, means the complete cessation of movement. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-169. 
Stop or stopping, when not required, means any stopping of a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic signal. 
State Law reference— Stop or stopping (when prohibited) defined, 47 O.S. § 1-170. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 1-122, 1-171. 
Through street or boulevard means a street or highway, or portion thereof, at the entrances to which: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to come to a full stop before entering or crossing; and 
(2)  Stop signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
State Law reference— Through highway defined, 47 O.S. § 1-175. 
Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-177. 
Traffic control device means any device legally authorized and used for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
U-turn means a turn by which a vehicle reverses its course of travel on the same street. 
Vehicle means a device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails and tracks. 
State Law reference— Vehicle defined, 47 O.S. § 1-186. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10.08.010—10.08.410) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 114-2. - Controlling code. 
Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling in the use of all boundary line roads, streets and highways, and city streets, alleys, thoroughfares, parks, parkways or any other public right-of-way or municipally owned land, by pedestrians and by vehicles of every kind, whether self-propelled or otherwise, and whether moving or at rest. 
(Code 1977, § 10.04.020) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic on boundary lines, 47 O.S. § 108.1.  
Sec. 114-3. - Application of chapter to private roads. 
Pursuant to the police power granted municipalities in the state and for the preservation and enforcement of good government and order, for the protection of health, life, morals and property, for the prevention, summary abatement and removal of nuisances, and otherwise for the promotion of the common welfare, all private roads within the city shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 10.20.010(B))  
Sec. 114-4. - Riding of animals, animal-driven vehicles. 
Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-driven vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this article, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1977, § 10.04.040) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-104.  
Sec. 114-5. - Exemptions. 
Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this article, except those contained in article VI, division 2, shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway, or to persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance or repair of public utilities, provided that all highway and public utility operations shall be protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices or flagmen, but the provisions of this chapter shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
(Code 1977, § 10.04.030) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-105.  
Sec. 114-6. - Military forces. 
The military forces of the United States and organizations of the National Guard, performing any military duty, shall not be restricted by this chapter, and shall have the right-of-way on any street or highway through which they may pass against all vehicles, except carriers of the United States mail, fire engines, ambulances and police vehicles in the necessary discharge of their respective duties. Such mounted military forces and organizations moving in convoy shall have lights burning, with lead and trail vehicles prominently marked, and shall travel, while inside the corporate limits of the city, in compliance with such speeds as are legally posted within the corporate limits of the city, and shall maintain a closed interval of not more than 75 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 10.04.030) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-107.  
Sec. 114-7. - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section and other provisions of this chapter, but subject to the conditions stated in this section. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the prima facie speed limits up to ten miles per hour so long as he does not endanger life or property. The ten miles per hour limitation shall not be applicable to police and fire department vehicles; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver sounds an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, as may be reasonably necessary, and displays at least one lighted lamp emitting a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle. An authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1977, § 10.80.030) 
State Law reference— Privileges of authorized emergency vehicles, 47 O.S. § 11-106.  
Sec. 114-8. - Adoption of O.S. title 47; violation. 
No person shall violate any provision of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Such title is adopted by reference.  
Sec. 114-9. - Failure to appear. 
No person shall fail to appear in response to a traffic violation regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the citation was originally issued. 
(Code 1977, § 10.92.020) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 16-112.  
Sec. 114-10. - Owner's security verification form. 
(a)  Every owner of a motor vehicle registered in the state shall carry in such vehicle at all times a current and valid owner's security verification form, as defined in 47 O.S. § 7-601.1, listing the vehicle, or a current and valid equivalent form which has been issued by the department of public safety, which shall be produced by any driver thereof upon request for inspection by any law enforcement officer; and in case of a collision, the form shall be shown upon request to any person affected by such collision. 
(b)  Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in the state shall, while operating or using such vehicle, carry either a current and valid operator's or a current and valid owner's security verification form as defined in 47 O.S. § 7-601.1 issued by an insurance carrier, providing the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon, or an equivalent form issued by the department of public safety reflecting liability coverage. 
(c)  The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or operator's security verification form or an equivalent form issued by the department of public safety: 
(1)  Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or any agency or political subdivision thereof; 
(2)  Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business, corporation or utility on the exterior, and which is in compliance with 47 O.S. §§ 7-600—7-610 according to the records of the department of public safety, which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance or fleet policy; 
(3)  Any vehicle authorized for operation under a permit number issued by the Interstate Commerce Commission or Oklahoma Corporation Commission; 
(4)  Any licensed taxicab; and 
(5)  Any vehicle owned by a licensed used motor vehicle dealer. 
(d)  Any owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department of public safety upon request of any police officer or other authorized person shall be guilty of an offense. Any person producing proof in court that a current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department of public safety reflecting liability coverage for such person was in force at the time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of the charge upon payment of court costs. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10.14.010—10.14.040) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 7-601.1, 7-602; authority to require possession of security verification form, 11 O.S. § 22-117.1.  
Sec. 114-11. - License plates. 
Every motor vehicle is required to display on the rear thereof the current year's license plates issued by the state or any other state in the United States or the United States government. Any plate placed on the rear of any vehicle shall be so placed that they may be read or seen at all times during the day or night. All license plates shall be kept reasonably clean and clear of mud, grease, dirt or any other substance in order that they may be easily seen, discerned and read. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.130) 
State Law reference— Display of license plates, 47 O.S. § 115.1.  
Sec. 114-12. - Official inspection sticker requirement. 
No person shall drive or move on any road, street or highway of this city any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers, semitrailers or pole trailers, which are licensed by the state tax commission and operated on the roads, streets or highways of this city, or any combination thereof, unless the vehicle is bearing a valid official inspection sticker issued by an official inspection station licensed by the department of public safety. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any house trailer which requires a permit in order to be moved upon the highways of this state. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.190) 
State Law reference— Inspection stickers, 47 O.S. § 851.  
Sec. 114-13. - Speed contests. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, aid or abet any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed on any street or highway. 
(b)  No person shall, for the purpose of facilitating or aiding, or as an incident to any motor vehicle speed contest upon any street or highway, in any manner obstruct or place any barricade or obstruction upon any street or highway. 
(c)  When three or more persons assemble to witness or participate in an unlawful speed contest, such assembly is an unlawful assembly, and any person who participates in such unlawful assembly is guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 10.40.040) 
State Law reference— Speed generally, 47 O.S. § 11-801 et seq.  
Sec. 114-14. - Entry on private property; trespass. 
(a)  Entry on private property without consent constitutes trespass. No person shall make an entry with any vehicle or leave any vehicle parked upon real property owned or legally occupied by another without such owner's or occupant's consent, except where such private property is provided as public parking and the general use of the property is not restricted by signs or proper markings. 
(b)  If a violation of the provisions of this section occurs, the owner or legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint against the person parking the vehicle, or if the identity of the person is unknown, then the complaint may be filed against the registered owner of the vehicle. The complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the complaining party is the owner or legal occupant of the property. 
(c)  In all cases where an entry has been made which constitutes a trespass and is complained of by the owner or legal occupant of the premises, the burden of proof is upon the person making the entry to show that consent for such entry was given. 
(d)  Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant, and if there appears to be reasonable cause to believe the provisions of this section have been violated, the police department shall cause the vehicle to be impounded and stored. 
(e)  When a vehicle has been impounded pursuant to this section, the owner shall be notified by the police department if the identity of the owner can be ascertained by reasonable diligence. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.240) 
State Law reference— Parking vehicles on posted private property, 47 O.S. § 11-1006.  
Secs. 114-15—114-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 114-51. - Traffic and transportation commission. 
(a)  There is established a traffic and transportation commission which shall serve as an advisory body to the city manager and shall have the duties and responsibilities as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Membership of the traffic and transportation commission shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Director of community development who shall also serve as director of traffic and transportation. 
(2)  Chief of police. 
(3)  City engineer. 
(4)  Chairperson of the city planning commission or, at the option of such chairperson, some other member of the planning commission nominated by the chairperson and approved by the planning commission. 
(5)  Member of the city council as elected by the councilmembers. 
(6)  Representative of PSG or other company or department performing public works services for the city. 
(c)  If any member cannot attend any meeting of the traffic and transportation commission, the city manager may approve a designate for the member not attending. Membership is determined by office, position or title. If any member ceases to hold the office or position constituting membership in the traffic and transportation commission, membership on the traffic and transportation commission shall automatically terminate. The members of the traffic and transportation commission shall elect a chairperson who shall call the meetings as deemed necessary or as requested by the city manager. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities of the traffic and transportation commission shall be as set forth in this Code and shall include, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Recommend speed limits. 
(2)  Recommend locations of stop signs and other traffic control devices and indicators on city streets. 
(3)  Conduct studies as necessary and appropriate with prior approval of the city manager and, as appropriate with regard to the expenditure of funds, with approval of the city council or the city improvement authority as required by law. 
(4)  Perform other duties and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter, subject to the terms and conditions contained in this chapter. 
(5)  Forward written recommendations, as approved by a majority of the members of the traffic and transportation commission, to the city manager who shall have final authority to approve or deny the recommendations. Upon final approval by the city manager, the traffic and transportation commission or the director, as applicable, shall have the authority to take action necessary to implement the recommendations, subject to the following exception: In those cases where implementation of the recommendations would require the expenditure of public funds, then the expenditure shall be approved by the city council or the city improvement authority as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 698, § 1(10.10.010—10.10.030), 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 1073, § 1, 6-19-2012)  
Sec. 114-52. - Inspection authority. 
Police officers shall have authority to inspect and test any vehicle upon the streets of the city at any time to determine whether it is safe, whether it is properly equipped and/or whether its equipment is in proper adjustment and repair. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.180) 
State Law reference— Inspections authorized, 47 O.S. § 852.  
Secs. 114-53—114-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114-66. - Basis for decisions. 
Except as otherwise stated in this chapter, decisions of the director made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be consistent with ordinances, state law, public safety and the orderly flow of traffic.  
Sec. 114-67. - Studies and surveys. 
The director of community development shall make such studies and surveys and gather such information concerning vehicular traffic as he deems necessary or as the commission may direct. Any estimates or computations used in such studies or surveys shall be prepared in accordance with applicable standards recommended by the National Association of State Highway Officials. 
(Code 1977, § 10.20.040)  
Secs. 114-68—114-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES AND MARKINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic signs, signals and markings generally, 47 O.S. § 11-201 et seq.; authority to regulate traffic by means of traffic control signals, 47 O.S. § 15-102(a)(2). 
 
Sec. 114-101. - Obedience to traffic control devices; exceptions. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with traffic laws of the city, unless otherwise directed by an authorized person, or excepted under the provisions relating to drivers of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.090) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-201.  
Sec. 114-102. - Device required to be seen for enforcement. 
No provision of this chapter where official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official traffic control device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. If a particular section of this chapter does not state that official traffic control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no traffic control devices are erected or in place. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.100) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-201(b).  
Sec. 114-103. - Location of devices. 
Whenever the commission records the finding based upon a traffic engineering survey and investigation that normal movement of traffic within legal limitations is or has become impeded or dangerous at any intersection or crossing because of increased use of such street or changed conditions, and that the increased use or change in conditions requires the installation at the intersection of suitable traffic control devices reasonably found from the data reported in the survey to be necessary to restore normal movement of traffic within legal limitations, or to provide greater safety and efficiency in the use of streets entering and leaving the intersection, the commission shall designate the intersection or location for installation of traffic control devices, and the director shall initiate necessary steps to obtain and install such traffic control devices. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.010)  
Sec. 114-104. - Schedule XI, traffic control devices. 
The director shall prepare and maintain a schedule of each intersection and location where a traffic control device is installed and the kind of traffic control device installed. The schedule shall be designated as "schedule XI, traffic control devices." The original of schedule XI shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.070)  
Sec. 114-105. - Traffic lane markings. 
When the commission finds that a paved roadway of sufficient width to allow two or more vehicles to pass abreast requires, for the safety of traffic movement, regular traffic alignment or guidelines to facilitate the positioning of moving vehicles in proper lanes for passing, turning or stopping, the commission is authorized to instruct the director to mark traffic lane lines on the roadway surface and to place marks, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning there. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.020)  
Sec. 114-106. - Reversible traffic lanes. 
When the commission finds that vehicular traffic moving over any street or portion thereof, or specific lanes without regard to the center of the specific street, should proceed in one direction during one period of the day, and the opposite direction during another period of the day, for purposes of facilitating traffic movement or to make more efficient use of the designed capacity of the street, the commission is authorized to instruct the director to place signs, barriers, lane signals or other devices to give notice of such purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.030)  
Sec. 114-107. - Offset street centerlines. 
When the commission finds that the relation of traffic volume moving in one direction over any street is greatly disproportionate to the volume of traffic moving in the opposite direction on the same street, the commission is authorized to instruct the director to align or realign the traffic lanes without regard to the center of the street or roadway, and designate the lanes to be used by traffic moving in either direction and install and maintain appropriate lines, signals, barriers, markings or other devices to give notice. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.040)  
Sec. 114-108. - Mid-block pedestrian crossings. 
When the commission finds that pedestrian congestion requires the installation of a crosswalk at a location other than intersections, the commission is authorized to instruct the director to install and maintain official traffic control signals and appropriate devices, markings or signs, and crosswalk markings on the surface of the roadway at such location. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.050)  
Sec. 114-109. - Uniformity required. 
All signs, signals and devices required under this article for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and relative location throughout the city. All traffic control devices erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this article shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.080) 
State Law reference— Traffic control devices to conform to state standards, 47 O.S. § 15-106.  
Sec. 114-110. - Meaning of signal indicators. 
The display of signal lights, arrows and words is deemed to have the following meanings and require the appropriate response on the part of vehicular traffic and pedestrians: 
(1)  Green alone, "go": 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless an official sign at such place prohibits such turn, but any vehicle and any pedestrian lawfully within the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal displays green shall have the right-of-way over such vehicular traffic. 
b.  Pedestrian traffic facing a green signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless a "walk" signal indicator is operating. 
(2)  Yellow or amber alone, "caution": 
a.  The showing of such signal color following green shall constitute a warning that the red or "stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter. 
b.  Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the near side crosswalk or at the limit line, if it is marked, unless the vehicle is so near the limit line when the "caution" signal first flashes that a stop cannot be made in safety, in which event vehicles may proceed cautiously through the intersection and clear such intersection before the red signal flashes. 
c.  Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter the roadway until the green or "go" signal is shown alone, unless authorized to proceed by a pedestrian "walk" signal. 
(3)  Red alone, "stop": 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "go" is shown alone. Where official signs are erected so indicating, vehicles in the right traffic lane shall stop before making a right turn, but such vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians or other traffic in the intersection and the turn shall not be made so as to interfere in any way with traffic proceeding on a green signal indication on the cross street. 
b.  Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or cross the roadway when such movement interferes with traffic proceeding on a green signal indication on the cross street, or when the movement cannot be made in safety. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "go" is shown alone, unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian "walk" signal. 
(4)  Red with green arrow: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing such signal when in the proper traffic lane may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. If the movement indicated by the green arrow is a left turn, the left turn shall be made only on the red with green arrow signal. 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "go" is shown alone, unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian "walk" signal. 
(5)  Green arrow alone: Whenever vehicular traffic movements are controlled by green arrows alone and not displayed with any other signal indication, vehicles facing such signals may make the movements indicated by the green arrows and the movements shall be made only when the green arrows are displayed. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.110) 
State Law reference— Traffic control signal legend, 47 O.S. § 11-202.  
Sec. 114-111. - Reversible lane street. 
Where official traffic control lane signals are installed on streets, parts of streets or lanes duly authorized to be marked as reversible lane streets, colored lights overhanging a lane shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Green. Vehicles facing the signal shall use the lane over which the signal is displayed for normal driving purposes. 
(2)  Red. Vehicles facing the signal shall not enter or travel on the lane over which the signal is displayed. 
(3)  Flashing yellow (amber). Vehicles facing the signal shall use the lane over which the signal is displayed for passing movements only, and shall return to a lane controlled by a green signal as soon as feasible. Lanes controlled by flashing yellow signals may be used by vehicles at intersections for turning movements. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.120) 
State Law reference— Lane use control signals, 47 O.S. § 11-204.1.  
Sec. 114-112. - Pedestrians. 
Special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "walk," "wait" or "don't walk" shall regulate pedestrian movement as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Wait or don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross a roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "wait" signal is showing. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.130) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-203.  
Sec. 114-113. - Flashing signal regulations. 
(a)  Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red, "stop signal". When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow, "caution signal". When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past the signal only with caution. The drivers shall obey any signs posted in addition to the signal device denoting the rate of speed either for approaching or passing through the intersection or zone governed by such caution signal. 
(b)  This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.140) 
State Law reference— Flashing signals, 47 O.S. § 11-204.  
Sec. 114-114. - Location of school signs and warnings. 
(a)  School signs shall be erected only at locations where school buildings or grounds are adjacent to the highway and shall remain in place during school season. On two-lane streets, there shall be one sign on the right as vehicles approach the school zone. On four-lane streets, there will be two signs, one on the right and one on the left as vehicles approach the school zone. On a divided street, there shall be two signs, one on the right and one in the median on the left as vehicles approach the school zone. For streets where speed limits have been established up to and including 35 miles per hour, the properly designated signs shall be erected not less than 150 feet from the crosswalk. For speeds in excess of 35 miles per hour, the distance shall be not less than 200 feet from the crosswalk. 
(b)  School crossing specifications and placement of school crossing signs shall be the same as those prescribed for school signs in subsection (a) of this section. Such school crossings shall be established only after being so designated by resolution adopted by the commission, which shall make its determination on the basis of an engineering and traffic study performed by the director. 
(c)  Crosswalks shall be designated by white lines extending from curb to curb, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway at each school crossing. 
(d)  Approach lines shall be white zig-zag lines installed in advance of all crosswalks, extending 100 feet beyond the school or school crossing sign. One approach line shall be installed in each lane approaching a crosswalk. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.160) 
State Law reference— Ordinances regulating school zone speed limits, 11 O.S. § 22-117.  
Sec. 114-115. - Posting of handicapped parking spaces. 
Each parking space designed for handicapped use shall be marked with a sign which incorporates the international symbol of accessibility to inform all drivers that the spaces are reserved for use by the handicapped. Each sign shall be of sufficient height so as not to be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.190)  
Sec. 114-116. - Unauthorized devices. 
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.170) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-206.  
Sec. 114-117. - Defacement of devices. 
(a)  No person shall alter, destroy, deface, molest, interfere, tamper, injure, knock down, remove or have in his possession any traffic control device. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to any of the following persons when acting within the scope and duty of their employment: 
(1)  Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or trustee of any governmental agency; 
(2)  Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or trustee of any contractor, public utility or railroad company. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.180) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-207.  
Sec. 114-118. - Golf cart crossing zones. 
(1)  The community development director, as recommended by the traffic commission, may establish golf cart crossing zones, for use by golf carts on any city street, other than a state highway, that has a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less and that is immediately adjacent to a golf course and an established golf cart rental facility. 
(2)  Established golf cart crossing zones shall be at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the roadway and be properly marked with warning signs. The warning signs shall state that golf carts may be crossing the roadway and that motor vehicle operators shall take special precautions to be alert for the presence of golf carts. The roadway shall be marked as any other pedestrian crossing. 
(Ord. No. 865, § 1, 10-7-2003)  
Sec. 114-119. - Pedestrian signalization required. 
Any traffic control signal light erected within the city limits of the City of Mustang shall, upon the recommendation of the Traffic and Transportation Commission and approval of the city council, be equipped with pedestrian control signals in addition to vehicular traffic signalization. 
All such devices shall conform to section 114-112 and to any additional requirements of the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices approved by the American Association of State Highway Officials and adopted by the Oklahoma State Highway Commission. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 2-6-2007)  
Secs. 114-120—114-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ACCIDENTS AND ACCIDENT REPORTS 
 
Sec. 114-151. - Accidents resulting in damage to a vehicle. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to the scene of the accident, and in every event, shall remain at the scene of such accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 114-153. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(Code 1977, § 10.100.010) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-103.  
Sec. 114-152. - Duty to give information and render aid. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his correct name, address and registration number of the vehicle he is driving, and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit his driver's license and his security verification form, as required in section 114-10, to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with. 
(Code 1977, § 10.100.020; Ord. No. 1134, § 3, 12-15-2015) 
State Law reference— Duty to give information and render aid at accident, 47 O.S. § 10-104.  
Sec. 114-153. - Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. 
The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the correct name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, and provide the operator or owner of the struck vehicle with information from his security verification form, as required by section 114-10, or shall leave in a conspicuous place on the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and the owner of the vehicle doing the striking, and providing information from his security verification form, as required by section 114-10, and a statement of the circumstances of such accident. 
(Code 1977, § 10.100.030) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-105.  
Sec. 114-154. - Duty upon striking fixtures upon a highway. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a roadway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact, and of his name and address, and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving, and shall exhibit his driver's license and his security verification form, as required in section 114-10. 
(Code 1977, § 10.100.040; Ord. No. 1134, § 4, 12-15-2015) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-106.  
Sec. 114-155. - Immediate notice of accident. 
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the city police department if the accident occurs within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 10.100.050) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-107.  
Sec. 114-156. - When driver is unable to report. 
(a)  An accident report is not required under this division from any person who is physically incapable of making a report during the period of such incapacity. 
(b)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an accident as required in section 114-155, and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of giving such report, such occupant shall make or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver. 
(Code 1977, § 10.100.060) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-111.  
Sec. 114-157. - False reports. 
Any person who gives information in reports as required in section 114-152, knowing or having reason to believe that such information is false, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1977, § 10.100.070) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-112.  
Sec. 114-158. - Public inspection of reports relating to accidents. 
(a)  All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting, and shall be for the confidential use of the police department or other state agencies having use for the records for accident prevention purposes, or for the administration of the laws of this city relating to the deposit of the owner of motor vehicles, except that the police department may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies the presence at such accident. 
(b)  All accident reports and supplemental information filed in connection with the administration of the laws of this city relating to the deposit of security or proof of financial responsibility shall be confidential and not open to general public inspection, nor shall copying of lists of such reports be permitted, except, however, that such reports and supplemental information may be examined by any person named therein or by his representative designated in writing. 
(c)  No reports or information required in this section shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the department shall furnish, upon demand of any party to such trial, or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the department in compliance with law. 
(Code 1977, § 10.100.080) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-115.  
Secs. 114-159—114-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DRIVER'S LICENSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Driver's licenses, 47 O.S. § 6-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114-171. - Possession of valid driver's license required. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the highways without having in his possession at all times when operating such motor vehicle an unrevoked or unsuspended driver's license, of the appropriate class and with any necessary endorsements, as required by the laws of the state, unless such person is specifically exempted from such laws by the provisions thereof. However, no person charged with violating this section shall be convicted if he produces in court a driver's license, of the appropriate class and with any necessary endorsements, issued to him and valid at the time of his arrest. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of any restriction that may be imposed in a restricted license issued to him with respect to the type of, or special mechanical control devices required on, a motor vehicle, or any other restrictions applicable to the licensee, as the state may determine. 
(Code 1977, § 10.12.010; Ord. No. 1134, § 1, 12-15-2015) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 6-113, 6-303.  
Sec. 114-172. - Operation of vehicle on invalid license. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle when his privilege to do so is cancelled, suspended, revoked or denied. 
(b)  Each act of driving on the streets or highways as prohibited by this section constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 10.12.020) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 6-303.  
Sec. 114-173. - Renting to unlicensed operators. 
No person shall rent or offer any self-propelled or motor driven cycle to any person who does not have in his possession a validly issued driver's license, of the appropriate class and with any necessary endorsements, or who is not authorized under the provisions of the laws of the state to operate such vehicles. 
(Code 1977, § 10.12.030; Ord. No. 1134, § 2, 12-15-2015) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 6-306.  
Sec. 114-174. - Permitting unauthorized person to drive. 
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any highway by any person who is not authorized under the provisions of the laws of the state to operate such vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 10.12.040) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 6-305.  
Secs. 114-175—114-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RULES OF THE ROAD[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, 47 O.S. § 11-101 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 114-201. - Operation of vehicle on approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle responding to an emergency call, the driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in that position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  While responding to an emergency call, the authorized emergency vehicle shall be equipped with and have in operation at least one lighted lamp exhibiting a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and the driver shall give an audible signal by siren or bell. 
(c)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1977, § 10.80.010) 
State Law reference— Operation of vehicle on approach of authorized emergency vehicle, 47 O.S. § 11-405.  
Sec. 114-202. - Driving on sidewalk. 
No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any sidewalk area, except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1977, § 10.44.020)  
Sec. 114-203. - Private service drives. 
No vehicle or animal shall be driven through any private service driveway or private service area except for the purpose of obtaining service or merchandise. 
(Code 1977, § 10.44.050)  
Sec. 114-204. - Blocking of intersection or crosswalk. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1977, § 10.44.060)  
Sec. 114-205. - Processions. 
(a)  Driving through prohibited. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while such procession is in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in subsection (c) of this section. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. 
(b)  Drivers in a procession. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical, and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(c)  Identification. A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle such identifying insignia as may be determined and designated by the police department. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10.64.010—10.64.030) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate processions, 47 O.S. § 15-102(a)(3).  
Secs. 114-206—114-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RECKLESS DRIVING, DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED AND RELATED OFFENSES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Reckless driving, driving while intoxicated, etc., 47 O.S. § 11-901 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114-221. - Prohibited. 
No person shall drive any vehicle or animal in a manner which is calculated to endanger the rights, lives or property of others, or which is without due caution or circumspection, or which is at a careless, heedless or dangerous rate of speed. 
(Code 1977, § 10.40.010) 
State Law reference— Reckless driving, 47 O.S. § 11-901.  
Sec. 114-222. - Negligent or careless driving. 
No person shall drive, use, operate, park, cause to be parked or stop any vehicle in: 
(1)  A careless manner, which shall include, but not be limited to, excessive acceleration; 
(2)  A negligent manner; 
(3)  Such manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or use of the street; 
(4)  Such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person or property; or 
(5)  Such a condition as to endanger or interfere with lawful traffic or use of the streets. 
(Code 1977, § 10.40.011) 
State Law reference— Reckless driving, 47 O.S. § 11-901.  
Sec. 114-223. - Attention to driving required. 
While driving, the operator of every vehicle shall devote his full time and attention to such driving. 
(Code 1977, § 10.40.030) 
State Law reference— Reckless driving, 47 O.S. § 11-901.  
Sec. 114-224. - Driving under influence of alcohol or drugs—Prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to drive, operate or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within the city who: 
(1)  Has a blood or breath alcohol concentration of ten-hundredths or more at the time of a test of such person's blood or breath administered within two hours after the arrest of such person; 
(2)  Is under the influence of alcohol; 
(3)  Is under the influence of any other intoxicating substance to a degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving or operating a motor vehicle; 
(4)  Is under the combined influence of alcohol or any other intoxicating substance to a degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving or operating a motor vehicle; or 
(5)  Whose ability to operate such vehicle is impaired by alcohol to the extent that the public health and safety is threatened, or that the person so impaired has violated a state law or ordinance in operation of a motor vehicle. 
(b)  The fact that any person charged with a violation of this section is or has been lawfully entitled to use alcohol or a controlled dangerous substance, or any other intoxicating substance, shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "other intoxicating substance" shall mean any controlled dangerous substance as defined in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act and any other substance, other than alcohol, which is capable of being ingested, inhaled, injected or which is absorbed into the human body and is capable of adversely affecting the central nervous system, vision, hearing or other sensory or motor functions. 
(Code 1977, § 10.40.015) 
State Law reference— Driving under influence of alcohol or drugs, 47 O.S. § 11-902.  
Sec. 114-225. - Same—Tests and evidence. 
Upon the trial of any criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or any other intoxicating substance, or the combined influence of alcohol and any other intoxicating substance, evidence of the alcohol concentration in the person's blood or breath as shown by analysis of such person's blood or breath performed in accordance with the provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 752, 759, is admissible. For the purpose of this section: 
(1)  Evidence that there was, at the time of the test, an alcohol concentration of five-hundredths or less is prima facie evidence that the person was not under the influence of alcohol; 
(2)  Evidence that there was, at the time of the test, an alcohol concentration in excess of five-hundredths but less than ten-hundredths is relevant evidence that the person's ability to operate such vehicle was impaired by alcohol. However, no person shall be convicted of the offense of operating or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while such person's ability to operate such vehicle was impaired by alcohol solely because there was, at the time of the test, an alcohol concentration in excess of five-hundredths but less than ten-hundredths in the person's blood or breath in the absence of additional evidence that such person's driving was affected by alcohol to the extent that the public health and safety was threatened or that such person had violated a state statute or ordinance in the operation of a motor vehicle; 
(3)  Evidence that there was, at the time of the test, an alcohol concentration of ten-hundredths or more shall be admitted as prima facie evidence that the person was under the influence of alcohol; 
(4)  The term "alcohol concentration" shall mean grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, if the blood was tested, or grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath, if the breath was tested; 
(5)  To be admissible, such evidence must first be qualified by establishing that such test was administered to the person within two hours after the arrest of such person. 
(Code 1977, § 10.40.020) 
State Law reference— Chemical tests for intoxication, 47 O.S. § 751 et seq.  
Secs. 114-226—114-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROAD, PASSING, ETC.[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Driving on right side, passing, etc., 47 O.S. § 11-301 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114-241. - Changing lanes. 
(a)  Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, in addition to all other rules consistent with this chapter, a vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as practical, entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety and has signalled for a change of course. 
(b)  Where streets or roadways do not have marked traffic lanes, vehicles shall nevertheless keep in line or follow a straight course, as nearly as practical, and shall not weave in and out or turn from side to side unnecessarily. Vehicles shall move to the right or left only as necessary in slowing or stopping adjacent to the curb, in passing slow-moving vehicles or making a proper approach for a turn, and only after the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made safely and has signalled for a change of course. 
(Code 1977, § 10.32.010) 
State Law reference— Driving with traffic lanes, 47 O.S. § 11-309(1).  
Sec. 114-242. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven to the right of the center of the roadway, except as follow: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)  When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; 
(4)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, all slow-moving vehicles shall be driven as closely as possible to the right curb of the street or roadway, except when overtaking and passing other vehicles as provided in this division. Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the direction of such signs. 
(b)  All vehicles shall keep to the right roadway on all streets or highways which are divided into two roadways. 
(c)  At the intersection of streets or highways with a railroad right-of-way, all vehicles shall keep to the right of the center of the street or highway. 
(Code 1977, § 10.32.020) 
State Law reference— Driving on right side of roadway, 47 O.S. § 11-301.  
Sec. 114-243. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. 
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having a width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half the main traveled portion of the roadway, as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1977, § 10.32.030) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-302.  
Sec. 114-244. - Schedule XIV, no-passing zones. 
The director shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those locations designated as no-passing zones. The schedule shall be designated as "schedule XIV, no-passing zones." The original of schedule XIV shall be kept in the office of the city clerk as a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 10.32.060)  
Sec. 114-245. - Overtaking a vehicle on the left. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the street or roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(b)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle, on audible signal, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 10.32.070) 
State Law reference— Overtaking vehicle on left, 47 O.S. § 11-303.  
Sec. 114-246. - Limitations on overtaking on the left. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the street or roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completed without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. 
(b)  No vehicle at any time shall be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade, or upon a curve in the street or highway where the driver's view along the street or highway is obstructed; 
(2)  When approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel, or when approaching within 50 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(Code 1977, § 10.32.080) 
State Law reference— Limitations on overtaking on left, 47 O.S. §§ 11-305, 11-306.  
Sec. 114-247. - When overtaking on the right permitted. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle either upon the left or upon the right of a street or roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for four or more lanes of moving traffic when such movement can be made safely. 
(c)  No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the street or roadway in overtaking or passing on the right, except in the event of an emergency. 
(Code 1977, § 10.32.090) 
State Law reference— Overtaking on right, 47 O.S. § 11-304.  
Sec. 114-248. - No-passing zones. 
The commission, within the limitations prescribed by this chapter, is authorized to determine those portions of any highway where overtaking and passing would be especially hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones. When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver shall obey the directions thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 10.32.050) 
State Law reference— No passing zones, 47 O.S. § 11-307.  
Sec. 114-249. - Overtaking and passing in school zones. 
(a)  No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in motion and being driven in the same direction in any school zone between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on all days when school is in session. 
(b)  Wherever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which is divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, or where the right half of the roadway has been divided into two or more lanes, or on one-way streets, vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving vehicles being driven in the same direction where passing does not involve a change of lane movement. 
(Code 1977, § 10.32.100)  
Sec. 114-250. - Driving on divided highways. 
Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic control devices or police officers. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space, or at a crossover or intersection established by public authority. 
(Code 1977, § 10.32.040) 
State Law reference— Driving on divided highway, 47 O.S. § 11-311.  
Sec. 114-251. - One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands. 
(a)  The commission, or other authorities within their jurisdiction, may designate any road, street or highway, or any separate roadway under their jurisdiction, for one-way traffic, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. 
(c)  A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1977, § 10.36.010) 
State Law reference— One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands, 47 O.S. § 11-308.  
Sec. 114-252. - Schedule II, one-way streets. 
The director shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those streets, alleys, or portions thereof, designated as "one-way streets." The schedule shall be designated as "schedule II, one-way streets." The original of schedule II shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk as a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 10.36.030) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, 47 O.S. §§ 11-308(a), 15-102(a)(4); signs required, 47 O.S. § 15-102(c).  
Sec. 114-253. - Placement of signs on one-way streets. 
The director shall place and maintain signs giving notice of streets and alleys designated by law as one-way, and no regulation shall be effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 10.36.020) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, 47 O.S. §§ 11-308(a), 15-102(a)(4); signs required, 47 O.S. § 15-102(c).  
Sec. 114-254. - Change of direction streets. 
(a)  The director is authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day, and shall place and maintain appropriate signs, markings, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The director may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. 
(b)  No person shall operate any vehicle in violation of markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1977, § 10.36.040)  
Sec. 114-255. - Entering and leaving controlled access highways. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access highway, except at entrances and exits established by public authority. 
(Code 1977, § 10.44.040) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-312.  
Sec. 114-256. - Following too closely. 
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. 
(Code 1977, § 10.44.010) 
State Law reference— Following too closely, 47 O.S. § 11-310.  
Secs. 114-257—114-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SPEED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Speed, 47 O.S. § 11-801 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114-271. - Generally. 
No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than 25 miles per hour upon any street or highway within the city except: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this chapter; 
(2)  When a different speed limit is otherwise posted; 
(3)  When there exists an established speed limit on a street which is incorporated into the city street system as a result of annexation, and has not been changed in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1977, § 10.20.010(A)) 
State Law reference— Authority to alter speed limits, 47 O.S. §§ 11-803, 15-102(a)(10); signs required, 47 O.S. § 15-102(c).  
Sec. 114-272. - Change of speed limits. 
When, as a result of a traffic engineering survey, the commission determines that the movement of vehicular traffic upon the roadway, intersection or location so surveyed could be controlled with greater safety to life and property or with greater efficiency in the use of the roadway, intersection or location, if the speed limit were increased or reduced, the commission shall specify the speed limit in terms of miles per hour, and it shall become effective upon the placing of proper signs and markers giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 10.20.050) 
State Law reference— Local alteration of speed limits, 47 O.S. § 11-803.  
Sec. 114-273. - Schedule XII, speed limits. 
The director shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those streets, or portions thereof, upon which a specific speed limit has been designated. The schedule shall reflect the speed limit so designated and the exact locations upon which it is applicable. The schedule shall be designated as "schedule XII, speed limits." The original of schedule XII shall be kept in the office of the city clerk as a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 10.20.060)  
Sec. 114-274. - Obedience to maximum and minimum speed limits. 
Where official signs and markings give notice of both maximum and minimum speed limits in effect on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in excess of the maximum, nor slower than the minimum, except as required by an authorized officer or in obedience to posted official signs. 
(Code 1977, § 10.20.090)  
Sec. 114-275. - School zones. 
No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than 20 miles per hour between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. in any designated school zone, unless a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted. 
(Code 1977, § 10.20.020) 
State Law reference— School zone speed limits, 11 O.S. § 22-117(B); authority to alter speed limits, 47 O.S. §§ 11-803, 15-102(a)(10); signs required, 47 O.S. § 15-102(c).  
Sec. 114-276. - School crossings. 
No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than 20 miles per hour between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.; 11:00 a.m. and 1:30 p.m.; and 2:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. in any designated school crossing not in a school zone, unless a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted. 
(Code 1977, § 10.20.030) 
State Law reference— School zone speed limits, 11 O.S. § 22-117(B); authority to alter speed limits, 47 O.S. §§ 11-803, 15-102(a)(10); signs required, 47 O.S. § 15-102(c).  
Sec. 114-277. - Drivers to heed reasonable speed. 
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater or less than is reasonable or prudent under the conditions then existing, taking into consideration, among other things, the condition of the vehicle, roadway and weather, the amount of light or darkness, the amount of traffic, presence of pedestrians in or near the roadways, and the obstruction of view. 
(Code 1977, § 10.20.070) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-801(a).  
Sec. 114-278. - Minimum speed requirements. 
No vehicle shall be driven at such an unreasonably slow speed in relation to the effective maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere with the normal movement of other traffic, except when the slow speed is unavoidable. 
(Code 1977, § 10.20.080) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-804.  
Secs. 114-279—114-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RIGHT-OF-WAY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Right-of-way generally, 47 O.S. § 11-401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114-291. - Vehicle approaching or entering intersection. 
(a)  When two vehicles enter or approach an uncontrolled intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(b)  The right-of-way rule declared in subsection (a) of this section is modified at through highways as otherwise stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 10.28.010) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-401.  
Sec. 114-292. - Vehicle turning left at intersection. 
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. After so yielding and having given a signal when and as required by this section, the driver may make the left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
(Code 1977, § 10.28.020) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-402.  
Sec. 114-293. - Approaching a yield sign. 
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield right-of-way sign shall slow to a reasonable speed for existing conditions or traffic and visibility, yielding the right-of-way to all vehicles on the intersecting street or highway which have entered the intersection or which are so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Code 1977, § 10.28.030) 
State Law reference— Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection, 47 O.S. § 11-403.  
Sec. 114-294. - Schedule I, through streets. 
The director shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those streets, or portions thereof, designated as "through streets." The schedule shall be designated as "schedule I, through streets." The original schedule I shall be kept in the office of the city clerk as a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 10.48.010) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate through streets, 47 O.S. §§ 15-102(a)(6), 15-108; signs required, 47 O.S. § 15-102(c); stop signs and stop intersections, 47 O.S. § 11-703.  
Sec. 114-295. - Installation of stop signs on through streets. 
(a)  The director shall place and maintain a stop sign on every street intersecting a through street, or intersecting that portion thereof, described and designated as such by ordinance, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals. 
(b)  At the intersection of two such through streets, or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be determined by the director upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(Code 1977, § 10.48.020)  
Sec. 114-296. - Entering through highway. 
(a)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this chapter at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway, or which are approaching so closely on the through highway as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(b)  If two or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or signals at an intersection and are approaching so as to enter the intersection at the same time, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  If each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. 
(2)  If each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. 
(3)  If one vehicle is required to stop and the other to slow or take caution, the one slowing or taking caution shall have the right-of-way. 
(4)  If one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution, the one required to take caution shall have the right-of-way. 
In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the intersection shall have the right-of-way over one which has not entered the intersection. 
(Code 1977, § 10.28.040) 
State Law reference— Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection, 47 O.S. § 11-403.  
Sec. 114-297. - Entering highway from private road or driveway. 
The driver of a vehicle about to enter, leave or cross a highway from or into a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the highway. 
(Code 1977, § 10.28.050) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-404.  
Sec. 114-298. - Entering traffic from parallel parking. 
Any vehicle attempting to reenter traffic while parked parallel with the curb shall yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic in the street approaching from the rear. The parked vehicle shall proceed into the line of traffic only after the driver has given the appropriate signal which indicates his intention of turning from the curb and into the line of traffic. The vehicle shall in no event enter the line of traffic until the driver has ascertained that no hazard exists. 
(Code 1977, § 10.28.060)  
Secs. 114-299—114-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - TURNING AND STARTING, AND STOPPING AND TURNING SIGNALS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Turning movements, etc., 47 O.S. § 11-601 et seq.; authority to regulate turns, 47 O.S. § 15-102(a)(9). 
 
Sec. 114-311. - Designation of restricted turns. 
(a)  The commission is authorized to determine those street intersections at which drivers of vehicles: 
(1)  Shall not make right or left turns; 
(2)  May be permitted to make a U-turn on streets not equipped with divider strips; or 
(3)  May be prohibited from making a U-turn at specific intersections on streets having divider strips. 
(b)  The determinations of the commission shall specify each intersection or location affected, the particular restriction or relaxation of prohibition applicable thereto, and the hours of applicability. 
(c)  The determinations of the commission shall be made on the basis of a competent traffic engineering survey and investigation. 
(d)  Each intersection or location regulated under this chapter shall be plainly marked with signs indicating such regulations and the hours applicable, if any. 
(Code 1977, § 10.24.020)  
Sec. 114-312. - Schedule XIII, restricted turns. 
The director shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those locations where turns are restricted. The schedule shall reflect the turn location at which turning movements are restricted, the restrictions placed on such turning movements and the times, if any, when such restrictions are effective. The schedule shall be designated as "schedule XIII, restricted turns." The original of schedule XIII shall be kept in the office of the city clerk as a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 10.24.030)  
Sec. 114-313. - Turning markers or indicators. 
The director is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. The course to be traveled, as so indicated, may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1977, § 10.24.010) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate turning, 47 O.S. §§ 11-601(4), 15-102(a)(9); signs, etc., required, 47 O.S. § 15-102(c).  
Sec. 114-314. - Position and method of turning. 
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Both the approach for a right turn and the execution of a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  For left turns from a two-way into a two-way street, the approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the street nearest the center thereof, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center of the roadway being entered. 
(3)  The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the street nearest to the center thereof and by passing to the right of such center where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the center of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection. 
(4)  If both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and the execution of a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(Code 1977, § 10.24.050) 
State Law reference— Required position and method of turning at intersections, 47 O.S. § 11-601.  
Sec. 114-315. - U-turns. 
(a)  No person shall make a U-turn at the following locations: 
(1)  Any place other than an intersection; 
(2)  Intersections controlled by traffic control devices, unless such turns are specifically authorized; 
(3)  Any other location when such turns are specifically prohibited. 
(b)  No person shall make a U-turn, except in the following manner: 
(1)  By approaching the intersection as closely as practical to the right curb or edge of the roadway, the driver giving and continuing to give a signal for a left turn until the turn is completed, proceeding to make the turn across the intersection; 
(2)  In one continuous movement without stopping or backing the vehicle; 
(3)  By yielding the right-of-way at all times to all vehicles until such turn is completed; 
(4)  Without constituting a hazard to or interfering with any other vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 10.24.040) 
State Law reference— Restrictions on turning so as to proceed in opposite direction, 47 O.S. § 11-602.  
Sec. 114-316. - Turning movements and required signals. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in section 114-272, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn right or left, slow or stop, when required, shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning or stopping. 
(Code 1977, § 10.24.060) 
State Law reference— Turning movements and required signals, 47 O.S. § 11-604.  
Sec. 114-317. - Means of giving turn signals. 
(a)  Any stop or turn signal, when required in this division, shall be given either by means of the hand and arm, by a signal lamp or by a mechanical device of a type approved by the state department of public safety, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  When the body of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects 24 inches or more to the left of the center of the steering wheel, or under any condition where a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be equipped with, and the required signal given by, signal lamps or devices. 
(Code 1977, § 10.24.070) 
State Law reference— Signals by hand and arm or signal lamps, 47 O.S. § 11-605.  
Sec. 114-318. - Method of giving hand and arm signals. 
All signals required in this division, given by hand and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn, hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward with palm to the rear. 
(Code 1977, § 10.24.080) 
State Law reference— Method of giving hand and arm signals, 47 O.S. § 11-606.  
Secs. 114-319—114-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PEDESTRIANS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Pedestrians, 47 O.S. § 11-501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114-331. - Drivers to exercise due care. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper caution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1977, § 10.88.090) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-504.  
Sec. 114-332. - Subject to traffic control signals. 
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as provided for in this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this division. 
(Code 1977, § 10.88.010) 
State Law reference— Pedestrians subject to traffic regulations, 47 O.S. § 11-501.  
Sec. 114-333. - Crosswalk markings. 
The director may at any time install pedestrian crosswalks at any street intersection. Such pedestrian crosswalks shall be plainly marked on the surface of the roadway, and protected by means of signs posted and maintained on the roadway approaching the crosswalk. 
(Code 1977, § 10.16.060)  
Sec. 114-334. - Right-of-way in crosswalk. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way when traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(c)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 10.88.020) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-502.  
Sec. 114-335. - To use right half of crosswalk. 
Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a crosswalk, shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk. 
(Code 1977, § 10.88.030) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-505.  
Sec. 114-336. - Crossing at right angles to curb. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1977, § 10.88.040)  
Sec. 114-337. - When to yield right-of-way. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall yield the right-of-way upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  The rules in this section have no application when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at designated places. 
(Code 1977, § 10.88.050) 
State Law reference— Pedestrians crossing at other than crosswalks, 47 O.S. § 11-503.  
Sec. 114-338. - Obedience to bridge and railroad signals. 
(a)  No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach thereto beyond the bridge, signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation signal indication has been given. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1977, § 10.88.060) 
State Law reference— Authority to require obedience to traffic control signals, 47 O.S. § 15-107.  
Sec. 114-339. - Walking along roadways. 
(a)  No pedestrian shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway where sidewalks are provided. 
(b)  Pedestrians walking along and upon a highway where sidewalks are not provided shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1977, § 10.88.070) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-506.  
Sec. 114-340. - Soliciting rides. 
(a)  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, donations, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall stand in any street, roadway or park and stop and attempt to stop and engage any person in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting contributions; or sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle; or hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular, advertisement, handbill or any political campaign literature, or any sample, souvenir or gift; or in any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway, attempt to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other similar purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 10.88.080) 
State Law reference— Pedestrians soliciting rides or business, 47 O.S. § 11-507.  
Secs. 114-341—114-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 114-351. - Minibikes. 
No person shall drive or operate any self-propelled or motor-driven cycle, known and commonly referred to as minibikes, trail bikes and other similar trade names, upon, over or across any city street, alley, park, parkway or any other public right-of-way or city owned land, except where permitted by signs posted by the appropriate authority. Minibikes used by regularly organized units of any Shrine Temple or any other similar organization shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while being used in any parade or other function of the organization. 
(Code 1977, § 10.84.010)  
Sec. 114-352. - Coasters, roller skates and similar devices. 
(a)  No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, scooter, toy wagon or similar device, shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street at a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all rights and shall be subject to all duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(b)  This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street when authorized by law. 
(Code 1977, § 10.84.050; Ord. No. 1053, § 1, 10-19-2010) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1053, Adopted Oct. 19, 2010, changed the title of § 114-352 from "Coasters, roller skates, wheelchairs and similar devices" to "Coasters, roller skates and similar devices." 
State Law reference— 47 O.S. §11-501.1.  
Sec. 114-353. - Limitation on use of motorcycles, bicycles and motor scooters. 
(a)  No driver of a two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle or bicycle shall carry any other person upon or within such vehicle on any street or highway, except as follows: 
(1)  If any two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter of 12 inches or greater, or any bicycle, shall have either a double-seating device with double footrests or a sidecar attachment providing a separate seat space within such side car attachment for each person riding therein, so that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of the side car, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of 16 or older to carry a passenger; 
(2)  A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is permissible. 
(b)  No motorcycle, bicycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any city sidewalk. 
(c)  Handlebars on bicycles, motorcycles and motor scooters shall not exceed 12 inches in height, measured from the crown or point of attachment. 
(d)  No rider of a motorcycle, bicycle or motor scooter shall hold onto any moving vehicle for the purpose of being propelled. 
(Code 1977, § 10.84.020) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 40-103.  
Sec. 114-354. - Special speed limitation on motorcycles and motor scooters. 
No person shall operate any motorcycle or any motor scooter at a speed greater than the speed limit legally posted. In no event, nor at any time, may an operator under the age of 16 years operate a motorcycle or motor scooter at a speed greater than 35 miles per hour. 
(Code 1977, § 10.84.030) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 40-104.  
Sec. 114-355. - Clinging to vehicles. 
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach such bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle, or himself, to any moving vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1977, § 10.84.040) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1203.  
Sec. 114-356. - Reserved.  
Sec. 114-357. - Prohibitions on operation of electric personal assistive mobility device. 
(a)  An electric personal assistive mobility device, as defined in subsection D of this section, shall not be operated on any highway, turnpike or city street with a speed limit greater than 25 miles per hour. 
(b)  An electric personal assistive mobility device may be operated upon the sidewalks, walking trails, bikeways, and municipal streets where the speed limit is not greater than 25 miles per hour. 
(c)  A person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device shall: 
(1)  Not be required to have an Oklahoma driver license to operate the device. 
(2)  Obey all speed limits. 
(3)  Yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and human powered devices at all times. 
(4)  Give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian. 
(5)  Wear or equip the electric personal assistive mobility device with reflectors and a headlight when operating at night. 
(d)  An "electric personal assistive mobility device" is defined as a self-balancing, two nontandem-wheeled device, designed to transport only one person, having an electric propulsion system with an average of 750 watts (1 h.p.), and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such a propulsion system while ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds. 
(e)  Electric personal mobility devices are not required to be registered pursuant to the Oklahoma Vehicle License and Registration Act. 
(f)  Failure to comply with any requirement set forth in this section shall result in a warning for the first offense, a fine of $10.00 for the second offense, and impoundment of the electric personal assistive mobility device for up to 30 days for subsequent offenses. Each act of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 1, 10-7-2003)  
Secs. 114-358—114-365. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - SPECIAL STOPS 
 
Sec. 114-366. - Railroad grade crossing. 
Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing in the city, the driver of such vehicle shall bring such vehicle to a stop not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad track, and while so stopped, shall both look and listen in both directions along such track for approaching railway traffic, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The requirements of this section shall apply when: 
(1)  A train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the grade crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; or 
(2)  An approaching train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing; or 
(3)  A stop sign has been erected at any such crossing. 
(Code 1977, § 10.48.060) 
State Law reference— Obedience to signal indicating approach of train, 47 O.S. § 11-701.  
Sec. 114-367. - Vehicles to stop at stop signs. 
Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign, or near the entrance to any intersection, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection. If no crosswalk exists, he shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection, except where directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.400) 
State Law reference— Stop signs, 47 O.S. § 11-703.  
Sec. 114-368. - Intersections where stop required. 
The director is authorized to determine and designate intersections upon other than through streets where particular hazards exist, and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection. 
(Code 1977, § 10.48.030) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate stop intersections, 47 O.S. § 15-108; stop signs and stop intersections, 47 O.S. § 11-703.  
Sec. 114-369. - Stop signs designated. 
There is authorized the erection and maintenance of stop signs at each of the following railroad grade crossings in the city: 
(1)  West side of County Line Road. 
(2)  East and west side of Morgan Road. 
(3)  East and west side of Sara Road. 
(4)  East and west side of Mustang Road. 
(5)  East and west side of Czech Hall Road. 
(6)  North side of Southwest 89th Street and Czech Hall Road. 
(Code 1977, § 10.48.070) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate stop intersections, 47 O.S. § 15-108; stop signs and stop intersections, 47 O.S. § 11-703.  
Sec. 114-370. - Vehicles emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residential district emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving on the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway. The driver shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1977, § 10.48.050) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-704.  
Sec. 114-371. - Overtaking and passing school bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is stopped to take on or discharge schoolchildren, and on which the red loading signals are in operation, is to stop his vehicle before it reaches the school bus, and not proceed until the loading signals on the school bus are deactivated, and then proceed past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for the safety of such schoolchildren and other occupants. 
(b)  Occupants of the school bus shall have the right-of-way when crossing the roadway, immediately upon leaving the school bus. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be applicable only if the school bus is painted yellow and bears upon the front and rear of such school bus a plainly visible sign containing the words "SCHOOL BUS" in letters not less than eight inches in height, which can be removed or covered when the vehicle is not in use as a school bus. The school bus shall be equipped with four red alternately flashing warning signal lights, two of which shall be located high on the front and two high on the rear of the vehicle. The lights shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter and shall be widely separated. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10.76.010, 10.76.020) 
State Law reference— Meeting or overtaking stopped school bus, 47 O.S. § 11-705.  
Secs. 114-372—114-385. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Off-street parking and loading, § 122-901 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate standing or parking, 47 O.S. § 15-102(a)(1); stopping, standing and parking, 47 O.S. § 11-1001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114-386. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Sundays and holidays mean the following days and dates only: Each Sunday; New Year's Day on January 1; Memorial Day on May 30; Independence Day on July 4; Labor Day on the first Monday in September; Thanksgiving Day on the fourth Tuesday in November; Christmas on December 25; and if any such holiday other than Sunday at any time falls on Sunday, the succeeding Monday shall be a holiday in that year. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 114-387. - Application of standing or parking regulations. 
The provisions of this division shall not be applicable when it is necessary for a vehicle to stop to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.080)  
Sec. 114-388. - Parking time limits not exclusive. 
The provisions of this division imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.090)  
Sec. 114-389. - Sunday and holiday parking time limits. 
All parking limit regulations, unless otherwise specifically provided in this division, shall be in force and effect between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays. The provisions of this division regulating vehicular parking upon the streets shall have no application on Sundays and holidays unless the particular regulation specifically provides that it shall apply at all times. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.020)  
Sec. 114-390. - Illegal parking declared public nuisance. 
Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this division governing, limiting or prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any street or public thoroughfare is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and each separate traffic citation issued as authorized in this division for such violation shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or operator of such vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.070)  
Sec. 114-391. - Erection of parking signs. 
The director shall erect appropriate signs giving notice of any parking time limits or parking regulations imposed by law. No such regulations shall be effective unless the signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.100)  
Sec. 114-392. - Schedule VI, prohibited parking. 
The director shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those locations prohibiting parking. The schedule shall reflect the hours, time limit or other conditions under which parking is prohibited or restricted. The schedule shall be designated as "schedule VI, prohibited parking." The original of schedule VI shall be kept in the office of the city clerk as a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.150)  
Sec. 114-393. - Schedule VIII, angle parking. 
The director shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those locations which have been designated for "angle parking." The schedule shall be designated as "schedule VIII, angle parking." The original of schedule VIII shall be kept in the office of the city clerk as a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.040)  
Sec. 114-394. - Angle parking. 
(a)  Designation of any street or portion thereof for parking vehicles at an angle to the curbing shall, when established, be supported by a traffic engineering survey of such location prepared by the director and approved by the commission, and no such designation may become effective except by ordinance duly passed by the city council. 
(b)  No person shall park or stand a vehicle upon those streets or setback locations which have been signed or marked by the director for angle parking, other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(c)  The director shall determine whether angle or parallel parking shall be permitted in any setback area authorized and constructed in conformity to this Code relating thereto. If angle parking is permitted, the director shall initially establish the authorized angle of parking in such setback area according to the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(d)  Commercial vehicles shall be permitted to park on any street or highway at an angle with the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise only when such angle parking does not interfere with the normal flow of vehicular traffic on the street or highway. 
(e)  Upon the establishment of the authorized angle, the owner or the occupant of the property abutting any such parking location shall paint, or cause to be painted, parking lines six inches in width at the established angle which shall indicate parking stalls. Such stalls shall have a minimum width of 8½ feet measured on a line perpendicular to the established parking angle from the center of one stripe to the center of the next. The owner or occupant of the property abutting any such parking location shall paint the stall stripes at least three times per year. 
(f)  If the owner or the occupant fails to paint or maintain stall stripes, or upon the request of the owner or occupants of the property abutting such parking location, the director shall paint or cause to be painted such stall stripes for the sum established in section 42-114, per stall, per year, to be paid in full at the time of the first painting. 
(g)  At all setback locations where angle parking is permitted, a sidewalk of the minimum width of five feet shall be maintained. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10.52.030, 10.52.050, 10.52.060, 10.52.350) 
State Law reference— Angle parking, 47 O.S. § 11-1004.  
Sec. 114-395. - Reserved parking for official vehicles. 
The city council shall designate and reserve by ordinance such street locations as may be deemed necessary for the use of public employees for parking government vehicles engaged in official business. When signs are erected at such location giving notice thereof, no other vehicle shall be parked therein. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.110)  
Sec. 114-396. - Schedule X, official parking. 
The director shall prepare and maintain a schedule of locations designated for "parking of official government vehicles." The schedule shall be designated as "schedule X, official parking." The original of schedule X shall be kept in the office of the city clerk as a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.120)  
Sec. 114-397. - Right-of-way to parallel parking space. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking space where a backing movement is necessary, and which is being vacated by another vehicle, shall stop his vehicle to the rear of the parking space until the vacating vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic. He then is deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space over any other vehicle attempting to park therein. 
(b)  The first of two or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of an unoccupied parallel parking space where a backing movement is necessary to occupy such parking space, is deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.340)  
Sec. 114-398. - Hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The director is authorized to determine and regulate by proper signs the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles when such stopping, standing or parking would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as authorized in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall violate such signs. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.130)  
Sec. 114-399. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except in emergencies or when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the director has indicated a different length by signs or markings; 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)  Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance, when properly signposted; 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; 
(15)  On any street parking-planting strip or center median. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or an unlawful distance away from a curb. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.140) 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking prohibited in specified places, 47 O.S. § 11-1003.  
Sec. 114-400. - Parking in spaces reserved for the physically disabled. 
It is unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any parking space that is designated and posted as a reserved area for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person unless such vehicle is eligible for a detachable insignia or reflective insignia of a physically disabled person, and such insignia is displayed as provided in accordance with state law or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The provisions of this section shall apply to any such designated and posted reserved area on public property or private property accessible to the public and where the public is invited. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.141) 
State Law reference— Placing or parking vehicle in parking space designated and posted for physically disabled persons, 47 O.S. § 11-1007.  
Sec. 114-401. - One-way roadways. 
(a)  If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, such person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. 
(b)  The director is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway, and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.160)  
Sec. 114-402. - Left side of one-way streets. 
The director is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. When the signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of any such signs. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.170) 
State Law reference— Parking on left side of roadway, 47 O.S. § 11-1004.  
Sec. 114-403. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
The director is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.180)  
Sec. 114-404. - Parking at intersections. 
The parking of vehicles at the curb where streets intersect shall be prohibited 15 feet in advance of the crosswalk on the near side of such intersections. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.190)  
Sec. 114-405. - Parking in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley, except for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading and unloading merchandise. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.200)  
Sec. 114-406. - Night parking in business district. 
No person shall park a vehicle on any street in any business district for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.250)  
Sec. 114-407. - Commercial vehicle parking restrictions. 
No commercial vehicle shall be parked on any street within the business loop between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except in the case of an emergency. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.260)  
Sec. 114-408. - Parking outside business loop. 
No vehicle in excess of seven feet in width or 24 feet in length shall be parked on any street outside of the business loop between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m., except in case of an emergency, and for the necessary time to load and unload. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.270)  
Sec. 114-409. - Double parking. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be permitted to double park or double stop under the conditions set out in this section: 
(1)  Within 50 feet of an intersection, except alley intersections, or within ten feet of an alley intersection; 
(2)  Opposite a double parked or double stopped vehicle across the street; 
(3)  When such double parking or double stopping would or does block or interfere materially with the normal movement of traffic; 
(4)  When parking space adjacent to the curb is available; 
(5)  When directed by a police officer to move on. 
(b)  Vehicles not used ordinarily for the transportation of merchandise may double stop for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, subject, however, to all the general conditions set out in this section. 
(c)  Vehicles used ordinarily for the transportation of merchandise may double park for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of merchandise, subject, however, to all the general conditions set out in this section. No such vehicle shall be double parked longer than ten minutes. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.280)  
Sec. 114-410. - Narrow streets. 
(a)  The director is authorized to erect signs indicating "no parking" upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in violation of any such sign so erected. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.290)  
Sec. 114-411. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or municipally owned property for the purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.300)  
Sec. 114-412. - Parking close to curb. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway, other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.310) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1004(a).  
Sec. 114-413. - Commercial truck parking on city streets. 
All commercial trucks which exceed a gross vehicle weight (GVW) of five tons (10,000 pounds GVW) are prohibited from parking on any streets within the city limits with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Designated truck routes; 
(2)  Commercial and industrial areas; 
(3)  For the explicit purpose of loading and unloading; 
(4)  In those zoning districts where such activities are permitted. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.450)  
Sec. 114-414. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.320)  
Sec. 114-415. - Negligent parking. 
No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop or leave unattended any vehicle as follows: 
(1)  In a careless or negligent manner; 
(2)  In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person or property; or 
(3)  In such a manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or use of the streets. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.330)  
Sec. 114-416. - Issuance of citations for illegal parking or standing. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found in violation of any ordinance or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, and the operator is not present, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its operator, and shall conspicuously affix a citation to the vehicle at a place reasonably likely to come to the notice of the operator. 
(b)  The citation shall contain a date, time and specified location for the operator to appear and answer to the charge against him. The officer shall also deliver copies of the citation to the municipal court. 
(c)  The operator of the vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the citation as if it had been issued to him personally. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 10-6-2009)  
Sec. 114-417. - Presumption in prosecutions for parking or standing violations. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance, law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such ordinance, law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking or standing, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(b)  The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed in section 114-416, has been followed. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 2, 10-6-2009)  
Sec. 114-418. - Failure to comply with citation attached to parked vehicle. 
(a)  If a violator of the restrictions on standing or parking a vehicle does not respond in obedience to a traffic citation affixed to the vehicle, on or before the appearance date given in the citation, the citation shall be deemed to be delinquent. 
(b)  The municipal court clerk, after a citation has been deemed to be delinquent, shall send to the registered owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a summons to appear in court to answer for the delinquent citation. 
(c)  In the event any person fails to comply with a traffic citation attached to a vehicle and fails to make an appearance pursuant to a summons directing their appearance in the municipal court of this city, the judge of such court may cause to be issued a warrant for their arrest. 
(Ord. No. 1028, § 3, 10-6-2009)  
Secs. 114-419—114-425. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - LOADING ZONES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Off-street parking and loading, § 122-901 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114-426. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial loading zone means all curb loading zones authorized and regularly used exclusively for the loading and unloading of merchandise for storage, trade, shipment or resale. 
Passenger loading zone means all loading zones authorized and used regularly and exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers, except bus stops, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles. 
(Code 1977, § 10.60.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 114-427. - Public carrier stops and stands. 
The director is authorized and required to approve the establishment of all loading zones on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such loading zone shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1977, § 10.60.070)  
Sec. 114-428. - Schedule XV, loading zones. 
The director shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those locations designated as "loading zones." The schedule shall reflect any time limitations or other conditions placed on the loading zones. The schedule shall be designated as "schedule XV, loading zones." The original of schedule XV shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk as a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 10.60.110)  
Sec. 114-429. - Curb loading zones. 
(a)  The commission is authorized to determine the location of passenger and commercial curb loading zones, and shall cause the director to place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the zones and stating the times during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(b)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of such signs. 
(Code 1977, § 10.60.020)  
Sec. 114-430. - Permit for loading or unloading at curb. 
The director is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading and unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 10.60.030)  
Sec. 114-431. - Restricted use. 
No curb loading zone authorized and established as a passenger loading zone shall be used as a commercial loading zone, and no commercial loading zone shall be used as a passenger loading zone, except as may be specifically provided by law. 
(Code 1977, § 10.60.040)  
Sec. 114-432. - Stopping, standing or parking in passenger curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a passenger curb loading zone for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, during the hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(Code 1977, § 10.60.050)  
Sec. 114-433. - Stopping, standing or parking in commercial curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a commercial curb loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials during hours when the provisions applicable to such zone are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. Vehicles using any commercial loading zone shall be subject to the licensing requirements and regulations provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 10.60.060)  
Sec. 114-434. - Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided in this division. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Code 1977, § 10.60.080)  
Sec. 114-435. - Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and the appropriate signs are in place. The driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Code 1977, § 10.60.090)  
Secs. 114-436—114-450. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - MISCELLANEOUS RULES 
 
Sec. 114-451. - Limitations on backing vehicle. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic; provided, however, that no vehicle shall be backed into an intersection. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be backed upon any street or highway, except for the purpose of entering or leaving a parked position, and then only after the driver of the vehicle has ascertained that such movement can be made without endangering other traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 10.44.030) 
State Law reference— Limitations on backing, 47 O.S. § 11-1102.  
Sec. 114-452. - Following fire apparatus. 
The driver of any vehicle, other than on official business, shall not follow closer than 500 feet, any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1977, § 10.80.020) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1108.  
Sec. 114-453. - Crossing fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1977, § 10.44.070) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1109.  
Sec. 114-454. - Opening side doors of vehicles. 
No person in any automobile, taxicab, bus or truck, when such vehicle is parked, double parked or stopped, shall open any side door on the vehicle unless he first ascertains if any bicycle or motor vehicle is approaching from the rear within such a distance as will render hazardous the opening of the door. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.370) 
State Law reference— Opening and closing vehicle doors, 47 O.S. § 11-1105.  
Sec. 114-455. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 923, § 1, adopted Oct. 5, 2004, repealed § 114-455, which pertained to the removal of ignition keys in unattended motor vehicles and derived from the Code of 1977, § 10.52.380.  
Sec. 114-456. - Child passenger restraints. 
(a)  Every driver, when transporting a child under six years of age in a motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets or highways of the city, shall provide for the protection of such child by properly using a child passenger restraint system. For purposes of this section, the term "child passenger restraint system" means an infant or child passenger restraint system which meets the federal standards as set by 49 C.F.R., Section 571.213. 
(b)  Children at least six years of age but younger than 13 years of age shall be protected by use of a child passenger restraint system or a seat belt. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state or federal laws; 
(2)  The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle; 
(3)  The driver of a vehicle in which all of the seat belts are in use; 
(4)  The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable to be placed in such devices; or 
(5)  The transportation of a child who weighs more than 40 pounds and who is being transported in the back seat of a vehicle while wearing only a lap safety belt when the back seat of the vehicle is not equipped with combination lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and shoulder safety belts in the back seat are being used by other children who weigh more than 40 pounds. Provided, however, for purposes of this paragraph, back seat shall include all seats located behind the front seat of a vehicle operated by a licensed child care facility or church. Provided further, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a child has met the weight requirements of this paragraph if at the request of any law enforcement officer, the licensed child care facility or church provides the officer with a written statement verified by the parent or legal guardian that the child weighs more than 40 pounds. 
(d)  A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to stop a vehicle if it appears that the driver of the vehicle has violated the provisions of this section, and may issue a citation for violation or give an oral warning to the driver. The warning shall advise the driver of the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to install or use a child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor vehicle. 
(e)  Any person convicted of violating subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be punished by a fine of $50.00 and shall pay all court costs thereof. This fine shall be suspended and the court costs limited to a maximum of $15.00 in the case of the first offense upon proof of purchase or acquisition by loan or gift of a child passenger restraint system. 
(Code 1977, § 10.96.050; Ord. No. 951, § 1, 12-6-2005) 
State Law reference— Child passenger restraints, 47 O.S. § 11-1112.  
Sec. 114-457. - Seat belts. 
(a)  Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated in this state shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt system, required to be installed in the motor vehicle safety standard 208. For the purposes of this section, the term "passenger car" shall mean a vehicle as defined in 47 O.S. § 1102, except that the term "passenger car" shall not include trucks, truck-tractors, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, motorized bicycles or vehicles used primarily for farm use and licensed pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 1134. 
(b)  The term "vehicle," as defined in 47 O.S. § 1102, means any type of conveyance or device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported from one location to another upon the avenues of public access within the state. The term "vehicle" does not include bicycles, trailers, except travel trailers and rental trailers, or implements of "husbandry" as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-125. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a passenger car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written verification from a physician licensed in the state that he is unable to wear a safety seat belt system for medical reasons, provided, the issuance of such verification by a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall such physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever, in damages or otherwise, to any person injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt system. This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is a route carrier of the U.S. Postal Service. 
(d)  Fine and court costs for violating this section may be assessed in an amount not to exceed $20.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10.96.010—10.96.040; Ord. No. 678, § 1, 11-18-1997) 
State Law reference— Seat belts, 47 O.S. § 12-416 et seq.  
Sec. 114-458. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
(a)  A vehicle parked upon a street or highway outside of a business or residential district during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise shall be equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white light on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear of such vehicle. 
(b)  Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.390) 
State Law reference— Lamps on parked vehicles, 47 O.S. § 12-214.  
Sec. 144-459. - Loading and unloading prohibited during certain hours. 
All commercial trucks which exceed a gross vehicle weight (GVW) of five tons (10,000 pounds GVW) are prohibited to load or unload between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. within the city limits with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Designated truck routes; 
(2)  Commercial and industrial zones. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.420)  
Sec. 114-460. - Parking of vehicles carrying explosives or flammable materials. 
Vehicles carrying explosives or flammable materials are prohibited from parking within the city limits with the following exceptions: 
(1)  For the explicit purpose of loading or unloading; 
(2)  In those zoning districts where such activities are permitted. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.430)  
Sec. 114-461. - Loading and unloading of explosive and flammable materials prohibited during certain hours. 
Vehicles carrying explosives or flammable materials shall be prohibited from loading or unloading between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. within the city limits, except in those zoning districts where such activities are permitted. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.440)  
Secs. 114-462—114-475. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference— Vehicle size, weight and load, 47 O.S. § 14-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114-476. - Commercial trucks exceeding a gross vehicle weight of five tons. 
All commercial trucks which exceed a gross vehicle weight (GVW) of five tons (10,000 pounds GVW) are prohibited from using or traveling upon any streets and alleys within the city limits with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Designated trucks routes; 
(2)  Section line roads; 
(3)  For the explicit purpose of loading or unloading. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.410)  
Sec. 114-477. - Axle restrictions. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate upon any street so designated any vehicle which has more than two axles; provided, however, that vehicles with more than two axles may be operated on such streets for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise, and then only by entering such street at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding no further than the nearest intersection thereafter. 
(Code 1977, § 10.72.010)  
Sec. 114-478. - Schedule III, weight restrictions. 
The director shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those streets, or portions thereof, upon which weight restrictions have been designated. The schedule shall reflect the gross weight above which is prohibited, the type of vehicles, if any, which are subject to the restriction, and any other effective weight restrictions. The schedule shall be designated as "schedule III, weight restrictions." The original of schedule III shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk as a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 10.72.020)  
Sec. 114-479. - Maximum height of vehicles. 
Except as otherwise provided by this article, no person shall drive or move, or cause or permit to be driven or moved, upon any street, whether paved or otherwise, any vehicle, unladen or with a load, which exceeds a height of 13½ feet. 
(Code 1977, § 10.72.030) 
State Law reference— Vehicle height restrictions, 47 O.S. § 14-103.  
Sec. 114-480. - Permit for oversize vehicles. 
(a)  The director shall have authority to issue, withhold or revoke permits for temporary or emergency operation of vehicles or combinations of vehicles in excess of 13½ feet in height. Special permits shall prescribe the hours of the day when valid, the streets to be used and the route taken, and any other conditions that the director may consider proper under the circumstances. 
(b)  Applications for such permits shall be made to the director a reasonable time in advance of the expected time of movement of such vehicles. In emergencies affecting the safety of persons or property, however, permits may be issued for immediate movement. 
(Code 1977, § 10.72.040)  
Sec. 114-481. - Truck routes. 
The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may make by motion or resolution, may prescribe routes through the city for the use of trucks in general or trucks of particular kinds and/or other vehicles which are not ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing through the city. The city manager shall see that appropriate and adequate signs are placed along such routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes. When such signs are so erected and in place, the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route has been prescribed as herein provided, while passing through the city, shall keep on such route and shall not deviate there from except in case of emergency. Drivers of such vehicles shall follow such routes so far as practicable also when driving within the city and not merely through the city. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 1-6-2009)  
Secs. 114-482—114-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT[16] 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference— Vehicle equipment, 47 O.S. § 12-101 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 114-501. - Brakes. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, operated upon any highway or street shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of such vehicle, to stop and to hold such vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels. 
(b)  On all motor vehicles, except those covered by subsection (e) of this section, equipped with four wheel brakes, the service brake shall be capable of stopping the motor vehicle from a speed of 20 miles per hour within a distance of 25 feet. 
(c)  All motor vehicles, except those covered by subsection (e) of this section, equipped with only two wheel brakes, shall have the service brakes so adjusted as to stop the vehicle from a speed of 20 miles per hour within a distance of 37½ feet. 
(d)  Braking effort on front wheels shall not be less than two-thirds of the braking effort on rear wheels, except in cases where factory specifications call for a greater braking power ratio. In that event, not more than 15 percent variation from factory specifications will be permitted. Braking effort on one front wheel or one rear wheel shall not be less than four-fifths of the braking effort of the opposite front wheel or rear wheel. 
(e)  Buses, trucks, truck-tractors and every combination of motor vehicles shall be equipped with brakes upon one or more of the vehicles, adequate to stop and to hold the vehicles or combination of motor vehicles. Every motor vehicle, or combination of motor vehicles, according to its type, and exceeding 7,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, shall be capable of stopping within the following distances at all times and under all conditions of loading: 
(1)  Where equipped with brakes on all wheels the stopping distance shall be 30 feet at a speed of 20 miles per hour; 
(2)  Where not equipped with brakes on all wheels, the stopping distance shall be 45 feet at a speed of 20 miles per hour. Total braking effort on front wheels shall be not less than one-third of the total of the rear wheels. Variations from side to side shall be the same as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  All tests shall be applied on dry, hard, smooth, level pavement, free from loose material. 
(g)  The pedal on the brakes shall have at least one inch clearance from the floorboard of the vehicle upon the first application of the pedal. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.030) 
State Law reference— Brakes, 47 O.S. § 12-301 et seq.  
Sec. 114-502. - Windshield and windows. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, operated upon any street or highway shall be equipped with a power-operated device in good working condition for cleaning rain, snow or any other moisture from the windshield of the vehicle. The device shall be so constructed as to be controlled and/or operated by the operator of the vehicle. 
(b)  Windshields and windows of vehicles shall be in good condition and kept clean to such a degree that the vision of the driver or occupants of such vehicles shall not be hindered or impaired. 
(c)  No vehicle constructed or enclosed in such a manner as to prevent the driver from having a clear view of the highway ahead and approaches to the side shall be driven on a highway. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.050) 
State Law reference— Windshields and windshield wipers, 47 O.S. § 12-401.  
Sec. 114-503. - Tinted windshields and windows. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on city streets, roads, alleys or state highways within the city when the percentage of tint on the front windshield, the side windows to the immediate right or left of the driver, the side wings forward of and to the left and right of the driver, exceeds the 30 percent tint available as a factory option. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to implements of husbandry, which are defined as follows: 
(1)  Every vehicle designed and adopted exclusively for agricultural, horticultural or livestock-raising operations, or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry, and in either case, not subject to registration if used upon the highways. 
(2)  Farm wagon type tank trailers of not over 1,200 gallons' capacity, used during the liquid fertilizer season as field storage nurse tanks, supplying the fertilizer to a field applicator and moved on a highway only for bringing the fertilizer from a local source of supply to farms or fields, or from one farm or field to another, shall be considered implements of husbandry for purposes of this division. 
(3)  Trailers or semitrailers owned by a person engaged in the business of farming and used exclusively for the purpose of transporting farm products to market, or for the purpose of transporting to the farm material or things to be used thereon, shall also be considered implements of husbandry for purposes of this division. 
(c)  This section does not apply to persons holding an exemption to the requirements of 47 O.S. § 12-421 issued or authorized by the state department of public safety, as provided in 47 O.S. § 12-421.B, which states as follows: On application from a person required for medical reasons to be shielded from the direct rays of the sun, supported by written attestation of that fact from a licensed physician, the department of public safety may issue an exemption from the requirements of this section for a motor vehicle belonging to the person or in which the person is a habitual passenger. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10.98.010, 10.98.020) 
State Law reference— Restrictions on use of glass coating materials or sun screening devices on windshields and windows, 47 O.S. § 12-422.  
Sec. 114-504. - Mirrors. 
Every motor vehicle operated upon any street or highway shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway to the rear of the vehicle. The mirror shall be kept clean at all times. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.060) 
State Law reference— Mirrors, 47 O.S. § 12-403.  
Sec. 14-505. - Horn or warning device. 
Every motor vehicle operated upon any street or highway shall be provided with a warning device which shall produce an abrupt sound sufficiently loud to serve as an adequate warning of danger. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.070) 
State Law reference— Horns and warning devices, 47 O.S. § 12-401.  
Sec. 114-506. - Tires. 
No vehicle which is equipped with pneumatic tires shall be driven, transported or hauled over any street or highway on the metal rim or wheel, or when the tire is flat or uninflated. No vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires shall be driven or transported over any street or highway when the wearing or driving surface of such tires is not full, smooth and round, or when any part of the wearing surface is broken out or removed. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.070) 
State Law reference— Tires, 47 O.S. § 12-405.  
Sec. 114-507. - Exhaust pipes. 
(a)  No vehicle, other than an authorized emergency vehicle, shall be driven over any street or highway with any attachment affixed in any manner to the exhaust pipe of the vehicle that is or may be used as a signal, siren or horn. 
(b)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle, including motor scooters, motorcycles and trucks, over any street or highway with the exhaust pipe of such vehicle open or leaking, or permit any exhaust from the engine to escape, other than through and from a muffler duly maintained on all motor vehicles in good working order to prohibit unnecessary noise. 
(c)  No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle, including motor scooters, motorcycles and trucks, in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted from such exhaust system to a louder level than that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.090) 
State Law reference— Mufflers and prevention of noise, 47 O.S. § 12-402.  
Sec. 114-508. - Bells and sirens. 
No vehicle shall be equipped with a bell, except fire apparatus, police cars and emergency cars belonging to the city. No vehicle belonging to the city shall be equipped with a siren, except upon written order of the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.100) 
State Law reference— Horns and warning devices, 47 O.S. § 12-401.  
Sec. 114-509. - Trailer regulations. 
(a)  Every trailer, semitrailer or house trailer shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed and constructed that the trailer, semitrailer or house trailer will follow substantially in the path of the vehicle drawing it without whipping or swerving from side to side. 
(b)  Every trailer, semitrailer or house trailer, except a semitrailer drawn by a truck-tractor, shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which it is being drawn. The chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and strength to prevent parting from the drawing vehicle should the regular coupling device break or become otherwise disengaged. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.150) 
State Law reference— Trailer coupling device, 47 O.S. § 12-405(F).  
Sec. 114-510. - Overhanging materials, flag required. 
No person shall operate upon any street or highway any vehicle which is loaded with material extending more than two feet in any direction from the body of the vehicle, unless there is attached to the material a red flag by day and a red or ruby light by night at the extreme end of the extended material. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.140) 
State Law reference— Lamp on flag on projecting load, 47 O.S. § 12-213.  
Sec. 114-511. - Motorcycle and motor scooter required equipment. 
In addition to all other requirements, motorcycles and motor scooters shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  Two mirrors containing a reflection surface of not less than three inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and positioned so as to enable the operator of the vehicle to view clearly the roadway for a distance of 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle; 
(2)  A windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect the operator from foreign objects. In lieu of such windshield, the operator shall wear goggles or a face shield of material and design to protect him from foreign objects; 
(3)  Brakes adequate to control the movement of the vehicle, to stop and hold the vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes. One means shall be effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel and one means shall be effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheels; 
(4)  A properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least 35 miles per hour; 
(5)  A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided by the manufacturer; 
(6)  At least one lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at least 300 feet in the direction in which the vehicle is proceeding, and one taillamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible from at least 300 feet to the rear of such vehicle. The lights shall be burning whenever the vehicle is in motion during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, and at any other time when due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance of at least 500 feet ahead of such vehicle; 
(7)  No person under 18 years of age shall operate or ride upon any motorcycle or motor scooter unless such person is equipped with and wearing on his head a crash helmet of a type which complies with standards established by the department of public safety. All crash helmets shall consist of lining, padding and chin strips, and be of the type as not to distort the view of the driver. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10.68.160, 10.68.170) 
State Law reference— Required equipment for motorcycles and motor scooters, 47 O.S. § 40-105.  
Sec. 114-512. - Prohibition on the use of dynamic braking devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged within the city limits of Mustang, Oklahoma, except for the purpose of avoiding imminent danger or in case of wheel brake failure. 
(b)  For purposes of this section a dynamic braking device (commonly referred to as jake brakes, jacobs brake, engine brake, or compression brake) means a device on a motor vehicle, primarily on trucks, for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 1, 10-21-2003)  
Secs. 114-513—114-525. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LIGHTING 
 
Sec. 114-526. - Headlamps and stoplights. 
(a)  All vehicles driven on any street or highway, except motorcycles and bicycles, shall carry two lighted headlamps with a minimum candlepower for each headlamp of 21, one lighted lamp in the rear showing a red light, and a white light on the registration number plate of the vehicle so that it may be clearly read at a distance of 50 feet. Such vehicles shall also be equipped with stoplights having attached thereto red reflectors. 
(b)  All lights shall be kept burning during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise when such vehicles are in motion on the highway. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.010) 
State Law reference— When lighted lamps are required, 47 O.S. § 12-201; headlamps on motor vehicles, 47 O.S. § 12-203; taillamps, 47 O.S. § 12-204; reflectors, 47 O.S. § 12-205.  
Sec. 114-527. - Regulations and restrictions. 
(a)  No vehicle equipped with glaring, blinding or dazzling lights shall be operated or driven over any street or highway. Any light which, when thrown or reflected into the eyes of pedestrians or drivers, is of sufficient intensity or degree as to hinder or impair the ordinary vision of such pedestrian or driver shall be deemed glaring, blinding or dazzling. The use of any mechanical device, fixture, preparation or composition in or about any flame, globule, lamp, reflector or lens of such light, which will in any manner whatsoever limit or diminish, except by diffusion, the candlepower ordinarily produced by such light, is prohibited. 
(b)  Headlamps must have high and low beams. None of the high intensity portion of the upper beam shall project above 42 inches above the level on which the vehicle stands at a distance of 75 feet. The lamps shall be directed along the path in which the vehicle travels. 
(c)  Lenses and reflectors must be clean, in good condition and the right side up. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.020) 
State Law reference— Multiple and single beam lighting equipment, 47 O.S. § 12-221 et seq.  
Sec. 114-528. - Mechanical signal devices. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with an electrical or mechanical signal device which shall indicate that the driver is about to change the course of his vehicle. 
(b)  The signal device shall indicate the direction in which the vehicle proposes to change its course, and shall be so attached to the vehicle that the drivers of any vehicles following or approaching such vehicle shall be able to plainly see the direction indicated. 
(c)  The signal device shall at all times be maintained in a good working condition so that when put into use it will clearly indicate the direction in which the operator of any vehicle proposes to travel. 
(Code 1977, § 10.69.110) 
State Law reference— Stop lamps and turn signals, 47 O.S. § 12-206.  
Sec. 114-529. - Red lamps or lenses. 
(a)  No person shall operate upon any street or highway any motor vehicle which has mounted thereon any headlamp or light equipped with a red or semi-red lens or electric bulbs, other than brake and taillights. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to motor vehicles of the fire and police department, motor vehicles of peace officers operated within their lawful jurisdiction, or any other authorized emergency vehicle provided for by this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 10.68.120)  
Secs. 114-530—114-550. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1102, adopted May 8, 2014, changed the title of art. IX from "Abandoned, Derelict or Junk Vehicles" to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles, 47 O.S. § 901 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114-551. - Purpose and effect. 
The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention and abatement of public nuisance arising from traffic law violations, protection of the public rights in the use of city streets and thoroughfares from obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for safeguarding and protecting stolen vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-552. - Authority to impound vehicles. 
Members of the police department are hereby authorized, within the limits set forth in this chapter, to impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated and as provided elsewhere in this Code. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order of an authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures required in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-553. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Derelict vehicle means a vehicle: 
(1)  Which is in a state of dilapidation and not in operating condition; 
(2)  Upon which a current license plate is not displayed; 
(3)  From which tires or wheels have been removed or deflated; 
(4)  Which has obviously been abandoned and left on any street by the owner of the vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.010; Ord. No. 1102, § 5, 5-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 1102, adopted May 8, 2014, renumbered former § 114-551 as § 114-553. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 114-554. - Derelict vehicles; impoundment. 
(a)  No person shall park, or cause to be parked, any derelict vehicle upon any street or municipally owned property. 
(b)  When any derelict vehicle is discovered by the police department to have been parked upon any street or municipally owned property in the city for a period of 72 hours, the police department is authorized to impound the vehicle, and if the owner of the vehicle may be ascertained by reasonable diligence, the owner shall be notified of such action by the police department. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10.52.230, 10.52.231; Ord. No. 1102, § 4, 5-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 1102, adopted May 8, 2014, renumbered former § 114-552 as § 114-554.  
Sec. 114-555. - Disabled vehicles; impoundment. 
(a)  A disabled vehicle upon a street, highway or any municipally owned property may be impounded by the police department if: 
(1)  Left unattended and improperly parked; 
(2)  Left unattended longer than 48 hours on the shoulder of any street or highway; or 
(3)  The person in charge of the vehicle is incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to arrange for such vehicle's custody or removal. 
(b)  When a vehicle has been impounded pursuant to this section, the owner shall be notified by the police department, if the identity of the owner can be ascertained by reasonable diligence. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.232; Ord. No. 1102, § 3, 5-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 1102, adopted May 8, 2014, renumbered former § 114-553 as § 114-555.  
Sec. 114-556. - Vehicles abandoned on roadways; impoundment. 
(a)  A motor vehicle abandoned on a highway, shoulder or right-of-way may be impounded if after a period of 48 hours there is no evidence of an apparent owner who intends to remove the vehicle. 
(b)  If an officer has reasonable cause to believe a vehicle has been abandoned in a location which would be hazardous to the free flow of traffic or be highly susceptible to damage from vandalism or other harm, he shall have the authority to remove or direct the removal of the vehicle immediately. At the time of ordering the removal of an abandoned vehicle, the authorizing officer shall also determine the sale value of the vehicle and certify that amount on the removal order. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 901, 902.  
Sec. 114-557. - Vehicles on bridges; impoundment. 
An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or within the structure of a grade separation may be impounded. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-558. - Vehicles constituting traffic hazards; impoundment. 
A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley or thoroughfare, and so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, may be impounded. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-559. - Vehicles parked in a prohibited zone; impoundment. 
Any unattended vehicle parked at the street curbing of any zone where parking is prohibited and where official signs are in place giving notice thereof in violation of the prohibition may be impounded. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-560. - Vehicles blocking fire exits or hydrants; impoundment. 
Any vehicle parked in a manner that it blocks a fire escape ladder, device or exit or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant or marked fire lane may be impounded. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-561. - Vehicles parked in intersections; impoundment. 
Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection may be impounded. A disabled vehicle in an intersection, with the person in charge of the vehicle being present, shall be moved out of the intersection and to the nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-562. - Stolen vehicles recovered by police; impoundment. 
(a)  Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered owner cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding 30 minutes, or cannot be determined from the registration or other identifying media in the vehicle or from records or information available from reports of stolen cars, the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place of impoundment and the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the location of the place of impoundment as soon as possible by the police department. 
(b)  If the registered owner is identified, located and notified of the recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make his or her own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the period of 30 minutes from the time he or she is actually notified of its recovery, and if the owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time specified, the vehicle may be impounded. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-563. - Arrest and detention of driver. 
Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which leaves or will leave a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle may be impounded. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-564. - Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section: 
Enforcement officer means the code enforcement officer as designated by the city manager or any police officer of the city. 
Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and the condition of the vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground, and includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, campers and trailers. 
Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property. 
Public property means any street or highway which includes the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and also means any other publicly owned property or facility. 
(b)  Certain vehicles prohibited. No person shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be deposited, stored or kept in the open, upon public or private property, a dismantled, unserviceable, inoperable, junked or abandoned vehicle, or any vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated, for a period exceeding 48 hours, unless such vehicle, or parts thereof, is completely enclosed within a building, or stored in connection with a business lawfully established pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the city, or stored on property lawfully designated under the zoning ordinances of the city as a place where such vehicles may be stored. 
(c)  Nuisance declared. The accumulation and/or storage of one or more vehicles, or parts thereof, as described in subsection (b) of this section, shall constitute a nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. It shall be the duty of the owner of such vehicle, or the parts thereof, and/or the owner of the private property, lessee or other person in possession or control of the property upon which such vehicle is located, to remove the vehicle from such property or have the vehicle housed in a building where it will not be visible from the street or other private property, the removal or enclosure to be made within 48 hours after notice has been given to the owner of the vehicle and/or the owner, lessee or person in control of the property upon which such vehicle is located. The 48-hour time may be extended by the enforcement officer in the case of obvious hardship. 
(d)  Responsibility for removal. Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the owner or occupant of the private property on which such vehicle is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for the removal of such vehicle. In the event of removal and disposition by the city or its designee, the owner or occupant of the private property where such vehicle is located, shall be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(e)  Enforcement. The enforcement officer is empowered to enforce the provisions of this section, including the issuing of citations. 
(Code 1977, § 10.52.241; Ord. No. 1102, § 2, 5-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 1102, adopted May 8, 2014, renumbered former § 114-554 as § 114-564.  
Sec. 114-565. - Place of impoundment. 
Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be removed to the nearest garage or place of safe keeping designated by the city council and to no other place. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-566. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Any police officer is hereby authorized to cause to be impounded any vehicle found upon public roads, highways, streets, private parking lots accessible to the public, other public places or upon any private road, street, alley or lane which provides access to one or more single-family or multifamily dwellings when: 
(1)  Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or taken without the consent of its owner and the owner cannot be located, is unable or unwilling to effect the removal of the vehicle within a reasonable amount of time not to exceed one hour, or the preservation and collection of evidence requires removal; 
(2)  The officer has probable cause that the vehicle has been used in the commission of a felony offense and the officer has obtained a search warrant authorizing the search and seizure of the vehicle; 
(3)  The vehicle bears a license plate which has expired for a period in excess of 90 days, bears a license plate which has been altered or tampered with, or bears a temporary tag issued more than 30 days prior to the impoundment, or bears no license plate which would be in conformance with the Oklahoma Vehicle License Act (47 O.S. § 1101 et seq.); 
(4)  The person driving or in control of the vehicle is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the person arrested or summoned before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay; 
(5)  At the scene of an accident, if the owner or driver is not in a position to take charge of the vehicle and direct or request its proper removal; 
(6)  The officer has probable cause that the person operating the vehicle has not been granted driving privileges or that the driving privileges of the person are currently suspended, revoked, canceled, denied, or disqualified; 
(7)  A police officer effects the arrest of the owner or operator of a vehicle out of the vehicle; 
(8)  The officer has probable cause that the vehicle is not insured as required by the Compulsory Insurance Law of this state; 
(9)  The vehicle is involved in a fatal motor vehicle collision and is needed for evidentiary purposes; 
(10)  The vehicle has any evidentiary value, has directly or indirectly been involved in the commission of a crime, has been used to transport any person who has committed any offense involving the use of a firearm, or was directly or indirectly associated with a drive-by shooting; or 
(11)  Impoundment is authorized by any other provision in this chapter or in this Code. 
(b)  Any police officer who has directed the impoundment of any vehicle, or an authorized person in the employing agency of the officer, shall within 72 hours of the impoundment notify the department of public safety of such impoundment. The notice of impoundment shall contain the name and address of the owner, if known, the make, model, vehicle identification number, registration number, date stored, place stored, and the estimated value of the vehicle as determined by the officer. This section shall not be construed to create any civil liability upon the state, any agency of the state, or employee thereof for failure to provide such notice to the owner or lienholder. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-567. - Seized and impounded vehicle storage. 
(a)  Any vehicle seized or impounded by the city may, at the direction of the police department, be transported to such place as the city may designate. 
(b)  The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible to the city or the city's designee for the following costs prior to the city or the city's designee releasing the vehicle. (The city manager, or his or her designee, may, to meet the best ends of justice or expedite on-going investigations, release the owner of part or all of the cost owed the city or the city's designee.) 
(1)  The actual cost to have said vehicle transported to the place of storage, including the actual towing expenses. 
(2)  A storage charge as allowed by law charged by the city's designee. For purposes of this section, the day of receipt shall constitute the first day and the day of release shall constitute the last day. 
(3)  All fees incurred by the city or the city's designee, including lien filing fees, to either return the vehicle to the owner or sell the vehicle pursuant to statutory authority. Prior to releasing the vehicle, the owner shall obtain an order for release from the Mustang Police Department and pay to the city's designee all costs listed above. If the vehicle is impounded pursuant to any lawful authority, then those provisions shall apply in addition to the requirements of this section. If the vehicle is impounded pursuant to the provisions of subsections 114-566(4) through (10), then the owner of the vehicle, or anyone authorized by the owner of the vehicle, shall show proof of valid security verification, valid operator's license and valid vehicle tag registration before the police department will issue an order for release of the vehicle. If the owner fails to claim the vehicle within the time prescribed by law, then the city manager, or the city's designee, is directed to institute proceedings to have the vehicle sold under the applicable statutes of the State of Oklahoma. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-568. - Duration; release; impound fee. 
(a)  Any vehicle impounded under the authority granted herein shall be stored and held safely at the place of safekeeping designated by the city until a written order for its release, signed by an authorized officer of the city, has been issued. 
(b)  The order for release shall be conditioned upon presentation of sufficient proof of ownership and/or interest in the impounded vehicles, proof of compliance with the compulsory insurance law unless the vehicle is lawfully towed from impound, and the payment of all impound costs and accrued storage charges against the vehicle. 
(c)  For vehicles impounded under the authority of subsections 114-566(4) through (10), such order of release shall be conditioned upon the payment of an impound fee in the amount of $100.00 by the person to whom the release is issued. This impound fee shall be independent of any fines, costs or fees which may be assessed from citations issued to any person for violation of traffic laws or other ordinance violations involving the impounded vehicle and in addition to any fees owed to the towing service for the impoundment and storage. The chief of police is hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations consistent with this chapter to implement this section. 
(d)  There is hereby created within the police fund, a special account into which all impound fees shall be deposited from which expenditures may be used for dispatch, jail, records clerks, training, and enforcement of traffic safety in administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-569. - Redemption of impounded vehicle; contest of impoundment. 
(a)  Presentation of the order of release as provided in section 114-568 at the place of impoundment, together with payment or tender of payment of all impoundment costs and accrued storage charges due, shall entitle the person presenting such release to obtain possession of such vehicle. 
(b)  Contest of impoundment; hearing. 
(1)  Whenever any vehicle has been impounded in the manner provided for by this article, the registered or legal owner of the vehicle may contest the validity of the removal or storage by filing a written request for a hearing. The indication in the appropriate box on the form provided by the police department shall satisfy the written request requirement of this section. 
(2)  The written request may be filed before or after the vehicle is retrieved from the storage operator. Provided, however, the public agency shall not be required to conduct a hearing if the request is received more than ten days following actual or constructive notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle that said vehicle has been so removed or stored. Any such hearing shall be scheduled within 72 hours of the request, excluding weekends and holidays. 
(3)  The public agency may authorize its own officer or employee to conduct the hearing, so long as the hearing officer is not the same person who directed the removal or storage of the vehicle. The hearing may, with the consent of the person requesting the hearing, be scheduled and conducted on the merits by telephone conference call. 
(4)  The hearing officer shall apply the law to the evidence and make a determination whether the vehicle removal and storage was justified. If the removal and storage are deemed justified, the vehicle owner shall bear the cost of reasonable removal and storage. If deemed unjustified, the owner shall not be charged any fees or costs relating to the impoundment or storage of the vehicle. In either case, prior to the release of the vehicle to the owner or agent, information required under section 114-568 shall be furnished to the city. The hearing officer shall also be authorized to reduce the accrued fees and costs as determined appropriate based upon the facts. 
(5)  Failure of either the registered or legal owner, or their agent, to timely request or to timely appear upon a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the hearing requirement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Sec. 114-570. - Penalty. 
Except where a different punishment is prescribed, every person violating any of the provisions of this traffic code shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined or punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 1102, § 6, 5-8-2014)  
Chapter 118 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; electrical code, § 18-61 et seq.; mechanical code, § 18-171 et seq.; plumbing code, § 18-221 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 38; water wells, § 38-101 et seq.; floods, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 54; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70; natural resources, ch. 74; planning, ch. 90; solid waste, ch. 98; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102; subdivisions, ch. 106; utility tax, § 110-141 et seq. 
State Law reference— Utilities, 11 O.S. § 35-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 118-1. - Permit for connection to water or sewer system; connection fee. 
(a)  Permit required. No connection shall be made to the public water supply system or the public sanitary sewer system without the owner or occupant first obtaining a utility connection permit from the office of the chief building official. The application fees to be paid for a utility connection permit shall be as set out in section 42-118. An application fee shall not be charged for temporary water flow meter permits. 
(b)  Connection fees. 
(1)  Fees shall be collected for each new user of the water and/or sewer system. The purpose of the connection fees is to defray costs incurred by the city in expanding and operating the water and sewer utility systems. The fees for single-family, commercial and industrial users shall be as set forth in section 42-118. Multifamily structures and mobile home parks will be charged an additional amount per dwelling unit as set forth in section 42-118 in addition to the connection fee, based on the size of the water meter as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  The connection fees imposed by subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be deposited into the trust fund upon receipt. On an annual basis, thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3 percent) of the connection fees will be budgeted and appropriated for expenses of operating and maintaining the water and sewer utilities system, and sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 percent) of the connection fees will be budgeted and appropriated for the purposes of expanding and upgrading the water and sewer utilities as capital improvements to the utilities system. 
(Code 1977, § 15.20.050; Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 1106, § 2, 8-19-2014)  
Sec. 118-2. - Utility accounts. 
(a)  Security deposits, transfer fees, and application. 
(1)  Every consumer applying for water, sewer, and/or trash collection service shall be required to make a security deposit to guarantee payment of utility service to each location served. The amount of such security deposit shall be as set forth in section 42-118. A written receipt for the security deposit shall be issued to the consumer. 
(2)  The security deposit shall be considered only as a guarantee of the payment of the utility service account and shall not relieve the consumer of the obligation of paying all service charges when the same are due. Security deposits may be applied to the payment of defaulting or delinquent utility service accounts of the consumer who made the deposit, to include sewer, water, and trash collection services. 
(3)  If a service account is terminated at the request of the consumer prior to the establishment of a good payment relationship, which consists of no late payments for a period of one year, the balance of the security deposit in excess of all unpaid utility service charges due the city shall be returned to the consumer. Only the principal amount of the security deposit shall be returned to the consumer. A late payment shall be defined as being those payments made 30 or more days past the due date. 
(4)  No security deposit shall be required of the United States government, the state or any agency or governmental subdivision thereof. 
(5)  A transfer fee of $25.00 will be charged for transfer of an account to a different address. An account must be in a current status prior to requesting a transfer of deposit and service at a new location. 
(b)  Utility billing. 
(1)  Due to the growth of the City of Mustang and the increased number of utility accounts, cycle billing is implemented within the City of Mustang. The billing calendar shall be approved by the city manager. 
(2)  Bills will be mailed each month per the billing calendar and shall be due not earlier than 20 days from the bill date. For public entities, the due date for payment of the utility bills shall be within ten days after the first regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body of the public entity following the city mailing of the bill per the billing calendar approved by the city manager or 20 days after the bill date, whichever is later; provided, that a letter from the public entity establishing such payment schedule is on file with the city clerk and approved by the city manager. 
(3)  Utility bills that are not paid by the due date will be considered delinquent and service will be interrupted and the meter locked as provided in section 118-3. An administrative fee of $25.00 shall be added to any utility bill which is not paid before the cut-off date in any cut-off notice, whether service is discontinued or not. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 2, 7-2-2013; Ord. No. 1106, § 3, 8-19-2014)  
Sec. 118-3. - Remedies for noncompliance with terms and conditions of utility services. 
(a)  Utility bills that are not paid by the due date will be considered delinquent, and service will be interrupted and the meter locked 48 hours after disconnect. A notice of intent to interrupt service shall be mailed to the customer at least eight calendar days prior to the cut-off. The notice shall advise the customer of the cut-off date, and contain provisions for an opportunity for hearing before the city manager or his/her designee. To have service restored, the bill and any related fees must be paid in full. Services which were disconnected for delinquent or non-payment will only be restored during the normal working hours, Monday through Thursday between 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., and Friday between 8:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. If payment is made before the close of business, water service shall be restored the same day. 
(b)  Any time that the city is required to or does post a notice on a customer's property in connection with the provision of utility services, a posted notice fee in the amount of $5.00 shall be added to the customer's utility bill. 
(c)  Any time that the city is required to or does disconnect a water meter on a customer's property, an administrative fee in the amount of $25.00 shall be added to the customer's utility bill. Where the customer's service has been disconnected four or more times during the prior 12 months, a chronic disconnect fee of $75.00 shall be added to the customer's utility bill. 
(d)  If a water meter is pulled, as authorized by the Mustang Code of Ordinances or by state law, a pull meter fee in the amount of $40.00 shall be charged to the account. 
(e)  Customers having difficulty paying their utility bill may arrange for a deferred payment agreement no more than twice in a 12-month period and only prior to actual cut-off of service. Customers must come to the utility billing office to sign a deferral agreement. 
(f)  If outstanding utility bills have not been paid before the cut-off date and time, then utility service will be discontinued and the meter locked within approximately 48 hours. Utility services shall only be discontinued Monday through Thursday between 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., and Friday between 8:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. 
(g)  If utility services are restored on the basis of a check which is returned for any cause determined to be the fault of the customer, the utility service shall be discontinued again, the meter locked and the services will not be restored until a cash payment in the amount of the returned check plus any related fees is made, together with a reconnection fee of $25.00. 
(h)  If any lock is broken or removed in order to turn on water services to the premises after service has been discontinued due to nonpayment, a broken/disconnected lock fee of $110.00 will be added to the delinquent amount for the cost of the lock and a fee for service, and the meter shall remain locked until all charges and penalties are paid. This provision shall be applicable in addition to any other penalties, charges or fines which may apply and be imposed. 
(i)  When a meter is found that has been tampered with, in any manner, the meter may be pulled and a meter reset fee of $40.00 will be assessed before a new meter is installed. Guaranteed monies in the form of cash, cashier's check or money order shall be required, and all past due account balances shall be paid in full prior to water service being restored. This provision shall be applicable in addition to any other penalties, charges or fines which may apply and be imposed. 
(j)  When a meter is found that has a broken curb stop, a fee of $40.00 will be assessed before a new meter is installed or the broken meter repaired. This provision shall be applicable in addition to any other penalties, charges or fines which may apply and be imposed. 
(k)  Should any water or sewer customer cease to be a customer by reason of moving or leaving the district where the city has jurisdiction, and be indebted to the city for water or sewer service in any amount, such customer may not receive service again, should he so apply, until all amounts due the city for previous service are paid. 
(l)  Delinquent utility accounts will be sent for collection with prior approval by the city council. Customers shall be responsible for the costs of collection services as provided in section 2-176 of the Mustang Code of Ordinances. 
(m)  A late fee of $15.00 shall be imposed for failure to pay fees for sanitation service when due. Interest at the rate of five percent shall be charged on the unpaid balance for utility services after 5:00 p.m. on the due date. 
(n)  When a meter has been previously removed, and a replacement meter is installed by someone other than the city, an improper meter fee in the amount of $100.00 will be assessed and the replacement meter removed by the city. The replacement meter fee and all past due account balances shall be paid in full with guaranteed monies in the form of cash, cashier's check or money order prior to water service being restored. This provision shall be applicable in addition to any other penalties, charges or fines which may apply and be imposed. 
(o)  A customer may request that any water meter be physically read, tested, or recalibrated. A fee in the amount of $5.00 shall be charged for any meter reading or test, and a fee in the amount of $15.00 shall be charged for any meter calibration. 
(p)  Utility customers may place their accounts on temporary hold during periods of planned absence, pursuant to policies established by the city manager or his designee. A temporary hold of account fee in an amount of $10.00 shall be charged to the customer's account for each period that an account is placed on temporary hold. 
(q)  Where a lock has been removed from a water meter, or a water meter has otherwise been tampered with, or premises have been connected to the city's water supply system by any means after such supply has been shut off by the city, including but not limited to by by-passing the water meter, an illegal hook-up fee in the amount of $100.00 shall be charged to the customer's account. The water service shall be disconnected, and water service shall not be restored until all charges and penalties are paid. This provision shall be applicable in addition to any other penalties, charges or fines which may apply and be imposed. 
(r)  Where a water meter has been removed by the city and service disconnected, and water service is restored by installing a water meter that was removed from another location, the water meter shall be removed and an illegal water meter fee of $200.00 shall be charged to the customer's account. The water service shall not be restored until all charges and penalties are paid. This provision shall be applicable in addition to any other penalties, charges or fines which may apply and be imposed. 
(s)  Any person, firm, or corporation who willfully fails to pay for sanitation services used, or made available, when the same has become over-due by at least 60 days, shall be guilty of an offense. Upon conviction for the offense of willful failure to pay a utility bill for sanitation services used or made available, the person convicted, shall be fined in accordance with section 1-8 of the Mustang Code of Ordinances. 
(t)  Any person removing or causing to be removed a lock from a water meter, or tampering or causing to be tampered with a water meter or connecting premises to the city's water supply system after it has been shut off by the city, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined in accordance with section 1-8 of the Mustang Code of Ordinances. For purposes of this section, each instance of removing or causing to be removed a lock from a water meter, or tampering or causing to be tampered with a water meter, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(u)  Single-family dwelling residential water meters may be ordered shut off and/or locked during periods of water rationing or to respond to or prevent abuse or waste. 
(v)  In addition to the remedies set forth herein, the city reserves and retains the right to pursue any other remedies available under federal, state or local law to enforce the terms and provisions applicable to utility services or redress violations of federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 2, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 1088, § 1, 7-2-2013; Ord. No. 1106, § 4, 8-19-2014; Ord. No. 1196, § 1, 12-3-2019) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1088, adopted July 2, 2013, amended and renumbered the former § 118-2 as § 118-3.  
Sec. 118-4. - Water rates and charges. 
(a)  Rates for water service. The City of Mustang shall charge and collect for water service at the rates set by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)  Adjustments to water rates. Water rates shall increase in each subsequent year by two percent or the consumer price index as published by the U.S. Department of Labor for the southwest region, whichever is greater. Rate increases shall be effective on October 1 of each subsequent year, beginning with October 1, 2014. 
(c)  Water rate increase for third-party purchases. The City of Mustang purchases some of its water from the City of Oklahoma City. In the event the City of Oklahoma City increases the rate charged to the City of Mustang for water, the rates set forth in subsection (b) shall be increased pro rata based on the projected volume that the purchased water bears to the projected total volume of water used in the City of Mustang. It is the City of Mustang's intention to pass along any future rate increase for third-party purchases of water proportionately across the total volume of water that the City of Mustang provides to its consumers. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 5, 8-19-2014)  
Sec. 118-5. - Capital improvement fee. 
Beginning October 1, 2014, the City of Mustang shall charge and collect for utility service furnished to all consumers and users a monthly capital improvement fee in the amount of $4.50 per month for each utility account. All amounts collected from such capital improvement charge shall be applied to water and wastewater facility and line maintenance and construction. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 6, 8-19-2014)  
Sec. 118-6. - Temporary water flow meters—Terms of use. 
(a)  Every consumer applying for a temporary water flow meter shall be required to complete an application on a form determined by the finance director, and submit a deposit in the amount of $1,100.00, for each requested meter. 
(b)  Permits for temporary water flow meters shall be valid for a period not to exceed six months. Temporary water flow meters shall be returned to the city at the end of the permit period. 
(c)  Temporary water flow meters must be returned to the utility department between the twentieth through twenty-seventh of each month for a meter reading. Failure to return a meter during this period for a monthly reading will result in a penalty of $50.00 for each missed month. If a temporary water flow meter is not returned for a monthly reading, a minimum usage of 100,000 gallons will be billed to the consumer in addition to the penalty. 
(d)  The consumer will be billed on a monthly basis for water usage at rates established by the city from time to time. Monthly billing will be based upon either (1) the monthly meter readings or (2) if the meter is not returned for a monthly reading, a minimum usage of 100,000 gallons will be billed to the consumer in addition to the penalty referenced in paragraph (c). If a temporary water flow meter is not returned for a reading for three consecutive months, the deposit of $750.00 will be forfeited, the customer will be billed for 100,000 gallons for each month, and the permit will be canceled and the account closed. 
(e)  If a temporary water flow meter is lost or stolen, the consumer shall notify the city as soon as practical. For lost or stolen meters, the deposit shall be retained by the city and the minimum usage of 100,000 gallons will be billed to the consumer for the applicable month and the account will be closed. 
(f)  The consumer is responsible for the temporary flow meter. Upon return of a temporary water flow meter, the security deposit will be credited to the consumer, less any amounts to cover the anticipated cost of necessary repairs, on the final water bill. Only the principal amount of the security deposit shall be credited to the consumer. Any refund owed to the consumer shall be mailed to consumer at the billing address. 
(g)  Temporary water flow meters shall at all times be and remain the property of the city, and shall be returned to the city if found or recovered by any person. 
(h)  No person shall be eligible for a temporary water flow meter permit if such person has previously obtained a permit and failed to return the temporary water flow meter on two or more occasions within the previous five years. 
(i)  Any person connecting a temporary water flow meter to the public water supply system without a valid and current permit shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined in accordance with section 1-8 of the Mustang [Code of ] Ordinances. For purpose of this section, each instance of connection without a valid and current permit shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 7, 8-19-2014; Ord. No. 1130, § 1, 8-18-2015)  
Secs. 118-7—118-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 118-31—118-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATIONING 
 
Sec. 118-51. - Authorized; applicability. 
The city may ration outdoor water usage to its residents and water customers upon the terms and conditions stated in this division. For purposes of this division, water rationing shall be defined to mean all outdoor water usage by residents and other water customers of the city. Without limitation, it shall include water used for the purpose of filling swimming pools, all watering of shrubs, flowers and grasses, whether used from a handheld hose or sprinkler system or device, and the watering of lawns, flowerbeds and fields of any kind, and the washing of cars or other vehicles, including recreational vehicles and trailers. It shall not include water obtained form privately owned water wells. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(9.80), 7-14-1998)  
Sec. 118-52. - Authority of city manager. 
The city manager, or in his absence the acting city manager, is authorized to impose water rationing and levels thereof when he determines, within his discretionary authority, that such rationing is necessary in the interests of the health, safety and welfare of the public. Such rationing shall be effective and enforceable upon notice to residents and other water customers by the city. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(9.82), 7-14-1998)  
Sec. 118-53. - Notice of imposition of rationing. 
Notification to the cable television media by the city manager's office of the imposition of water rationing and the levels thereof and publication by the cable television media 12 hours prior to the imposition of rationing shall constitute adequate notice of water rationing, and such rationing shall be effective and enforceable thereafter. In addition, at the time of the imposition of water rationing, the city shall make reasonable attempts to notify all other available media sources of the water rationing; however, failure to do so or failure of the media to publicize such rationing shall have no effect on the imposition of the rationing or the enforceability thereof. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(9.84), 7-14-1998)  
Sec. 118-54. - Levels and conditions. 
(a)  There shall be four levels of water rationing, as follows: 
(1)  Level 1: Voluntary. Water rationing shall be voluntary and water usage shall be based upon an odd/even system of watering. 
(2)  Level 2: Mandatory. Water rationing shall be mandatory and water usage shall be based upon an odd/even system of watering, except for commercial car washing facilities and businesses, which are only subject to Level 4. 
(3)  Level 3: Mandatory. No outdoor water usage is permitted, except for commercial car washing facilities and businesses, which are only subject to Level 4. 
(4)  Level 4: Mandatory. No water usage is permitted. Commercial car washing facilities and businesses will not be excepted from water rationing. 
(b)  Conditions. The following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  Odd/even system. Occupants of houses, buildings or other structures with even-numbered addresses may water from 12:01 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. on even calendar days. Occupants of houses, buildings or other structures with odd-numbered addresses may water from 12:01 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. on odd calendar days. If water rationing at Level 1, 2 or 3 is in effect on the 31st day of any month, there will be no outdoor water usage, as set forth for Level 3. 
(2)  Time limitations. Unless otherwise specified, watering may occur from 12:01 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. on the appropriate odd or even day. However, the city manager or the acting city manager reserves the right to restrict this time from 12:01 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. and from 8:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m. if conditions so require and upon the giving of notice as stated in this division. 
(3)  Responsibility for violations. Lawful occupants of houses, buildings or other structures, or, if unoccupied temporarily or permanently or if there are no habitable structures, then the owner of record, shall be deemed the responsible party for purposes of enforcement of this division. Observation by a law enforcement officer or city code inspector of improper water usage shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this division. 
(4)  Additional powers of city. Nothing in this division shall or is intended to supersede or repeal any provisions by which the city may impose other restrictions on the use of city water during emergencies, nor shall any provision of this division supersede or repeal any provisions or authority by which the city may, without notice, shut off the water supply to any premises for repairs, extensions, nonpayment of rates, or any other reason. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1(9.86), 7-14-1998)  
Secs. 118-55—118-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 118-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approving authority means the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. The building sewer is also called the house lateral and house connection. 
City means the City of Mustang or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
COD (chemical oxygen demand) is a measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in milligrams per liter as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of waste with water or normal wastewater or distinct from normal wastewater. 
Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewer system. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio. The milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 is equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater, excluding industrial wastewater, discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 300 milligrams per liter and BOD is not more than 250 milligrams per liter. 
Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
Public sewer means a pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation. 
Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Stormwater means rainfall or any other form of precipitation. 
Superintendent means the water and wastewater superintendent of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Suspended solids means solids, measured in milligrams per liter, that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Trap means a device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  Not more than an insignificant amount, in milligrams per liter, each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the state water quality board; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods. 
Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
Wastewater treatment plant means any city-owned facilities, devices and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 118-82. - Use of public system required; unlawful deposit of waste. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater. 
(2)  Industrial waste. 
(3)  Polluted liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the state department of health, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property into or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet. 
(2)  Watercourse. 
(3)  Storm sewer. 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify, prior to discharge, that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.100)  
Sec. 118-83. - Right of entry of enforcement officers. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewer system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. 
All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this section may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.200)  
Sec. 118-84. - Authority to terminate water and sewer service to industrial customers. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to the sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of the quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The industrial customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers. 
(b)  If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.210)  
Sec. 118-85. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(b)  No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.220)  
Sec. 118-86. - Failure to discontinue prohibited discharge. 
A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.230)  
Secs. 118-87—118-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 118-101. - Prohibited discharges generally; discharge of septic tank wastes. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  Compliance with article. All discharges shall conform to the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Discharge of septic tank waste. 
(1)  No person may discharge any waste or material from septic tanks into the public sewers or into any other inlet whatsoever for treatment at the wastewater treatment plant. 
(2)  Any violation of this subsection shall be punishable as provided in section 1-8. Each act of violation shall constitute a separate offense. For the purposes of this subsection, each act of discharging waste or material from septic tanks as described in this subsection shall constitute an act of violation. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.020)  
Sec. 118-102. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to a public sewer may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 0.05 milligrams per liter; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 milligrams per liter; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or any other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive COD. 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero and 65 degrees Celsius); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 118-101(a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a Ph lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater or other substances containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste- and odor-producing substances shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.030)  
Sec. 118-103. - Heavy metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges to the public sewers may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than the amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals, stated in terms of milligrams per liter, determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods, are as follows: 
(1)  Arsenic, 0.05 mg/l. 
(2)  Barium, 5.00 mg/l. 
(3)  Boron, 1.00 mg/l. 
(4)  Cadmium, 0.05 mg/l. 
(5)  Chromium (total), 0.5 mg/l. 
(6)  Copper, 0.1 mg/l. 
(7)  Lead, 0.5 mg/l. 
(8)  Manganese, 1.0 mg/l. 
(9)  Mercury, 0.005 mg/l. 
(10)  Nickel, 1.0 mg/l. 
(11)  Selenium, 0.05 mg/l. 
(12)  Silver, 0.1 mg/l. 
(13)  Zinc, 1.0 mg/l. 
(c)  No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Antimony; 
(2)  Beryllium; 
(3)  Bismuth; 
(4)  Cobalt; 
(5)  Molybdenum; 
(6)  Uranylion; 
(7)  Rhenium; 
(8)  Strontium; 
(9)  Tellurium; 
(10)  Herbicides; 
(11)  Fungicides; and 
(12)  Pesticides. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.040)  
Sec. 118-104. - Garbage. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.75 hp metric) or greater. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.050)  
Sec. 118-105. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; or 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with statute, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.060)  
Sec. 118-106. - Temperature limitations. 
No person may discharge to the public sewers any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.070)  
Sec. 118-107. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.080)  
Sec. 118-108. - Discharges causing impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes or facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include but are not limited to materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 milligrams per liter, including but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 500 milligrams per liter, including but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  BOD, COD or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Metal; 
(7)  Shavings; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Unground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure; 
(17)  Hair and fleshings; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slops; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.090)  
Sec. 118-109. - Acceptance of restricted discharges. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes or equipment or receiving waters, create a hazard to life or health, or create a public nuisance, the approving authority shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.110)  
Sec. 118-110. - Pretreatment and flow equalizing facilities. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve the design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow equalizing or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.120)  
Sec. 118-111. - Traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.130)  
Sec. 118-112. - Sampling equipment and facilities. 
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste; and 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.140)  
Sec. 118-113. - Sampling and testing methods. 
(a)  Sampling of wastewater shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb and property, and shall be conducted in accordance with the standard methods of sampling effluents and wastewater which are employed by the state department of health. 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges. 
(d)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD and suspended solids. 
(e)  The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.150)  
Sec. 118-114. - Acceptance of industrial waste. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing for: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the city; and 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.160)  
Sec. 118-115. - Existing industrial waste dischargers; discharge permit. 
(a)  A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article may continue without penalty so long as he: 
(1)  Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge without permission of the approving authority; 
(2)  Has discharged the industrial waste at least 12 months prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article; and 
(3)  Applies for and is granted a permit no later than 365 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. 
(b)  The city may grant such a permit provided that the person: 
(1)  Submits an application within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article on forms supplied by the approving authority; 
(2)  Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when required; and 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements, including but not limited to provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; and 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength; and 
(4)  Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this article and approval of the approving authority. 
(c)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Code 1977, §§ 13.08.180, 13.08.190)  
Secs. 118-116, 118-117. - Reserved.  
Sec. 118-118. - Backflow prevention valves. 
(a)  Requirements. Backflow prevention valves shall be required on all new residential, commercial, industrial, and public building structures, and for new hookups to public sewer of existing residential, commercial, industrial, and public building structures. 
(b)  Regulations and standards. The city engineer shall establish appropriate requirements, regulations, and standards for backflow prevention valves. 
(c)  Exceptions. The community development director, or his designee, shall retain the discretionary authority to make exceptions to this requirement if it is determined that a backflow prevention valve is not appropriate to a particular structure and/or would not substantially serve the purpose of aiding in the prevention of sewer backups for a particular structure. In such cases, the community development director, or his designee, shall issue a written exception to this requirement. 
(d)  Requirement applicability. This requirement shall be effective for all designated structures for which building permits are issued after the effective date of this section. 
(Ord. No. 768, § 1, 2-6-2001)  
Secs. 118-119—118-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 118-131. - Establishment of charges for industrial users. 
The user charge shall be determined for any industrial user connecting to the city sanitary sewer system and shall be based on the actual cost of treatment based on quantity and quality of waste product, in accordance with regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.170(A))  
Sec. 118-132. - Establishment of charges for domestic users. 
At least biannually, the city council shall review total operation and maintenance costs of the treatment works and set sewer user fees to recover all such costs. Operation and maintenance costs shall include replacement of the treatment works. For the purpose of providing funds for the maintenance of the sanitary sewage system of the city and for other purposes, each respective user thereof shall pay a domestic wastewater user's charge based on the following formula: 
Sewer cost/ 
1,000 gallons = 	      Operation and Maintenance Cost (annual) × 1,000       
3 months (winter) water consumption by sewer customer × 4 
 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.170(B))  
Sec. 118-133. - Proration. 
The sewer costs shall be prorated to all domestic and commercial users on the basis of water consumed by the users during the three winter months using the following formula: 
Sewer cost/ 
1,000 gallons = 	      Operation and Maintenance (annual) × 1,000       
3 months (winter) water consumption for city × 4 
 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.170(C))  
Sec. 118-134. - Amount of user charge. 
The sewer user charge shall be based upon the quantity of water used or consumed by said premise or facility therein or thereon as the same is measured by the water meters in use. The sewer user charge shall be $4.74 per 1,000 gallons of water as determined from the meter records of the City of Mustang. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.170(D); Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 5-19-2009; Ord. No. 1106, § 7, 8-19-2014)  
Sec. 118-135. - Calculation of residential charges. 
Residential sewer user charges shall be calculated in the following manner: 
(1)  A "winter period consumption base" shall be calculated for each residential or housekeeping unit. Said consumption base shall be the average amount of the water consumed each period by a residential or housekeeping unit during the three billing cycles which occur between December 1 and March 1 this will represent the bills mailed on or about December 15, January 15 and February 15, which should reflect water used or consumed in the month of November, December and January. The "winter period consumption base" shall be recalculated annually and shall become effective after the last billing period of the above described three-month base setting months. The domestic sewer user charge shall be $4.74 per 1,000 gallons of the "winter period consumption base." 
(2)  If a residential user does not have a "winter period consumption base" established at his current residential or housekeeping unit, for whatever reason, water consumption will be estimated at 7,500 gallons per month. The domestic user without an established current winter period consumption base shall be charged $4.74 per 1,000 gallons based on 7,500 gallons (or $35.66) per month, until such time as a "winter period consumption base" is established. This section shall apply until a winter period consumption base is established for the user at the residential or housekeeping unit. 
(3)  Any customer relocating within the service area during or after his winter period consumption base has been established shall be charged on the basis of his previously established winter period consumption base at his previous premises or facility, or a non-winter month consumption base shall be established at the customer's new residential or housekeeping unit as stated in subsection (2) of this section until such time as a new winter period consumption base is established for the new residential or housekeeping unit. The city shall determine which base will provide a reasonable sewer charge for the customer's new residential or housekeeping unit. 
(4)  Water used from private sources shall be metered as required in this section, and the sewer service charges shall be billed accordingly. 
(5)  If a lot, parcel of land, premises or facility discharging sewage, water or other liquids directly into the city's sewer system is supplied either in whole or in part with water from wells or any sources other than the city, then such well or other source of supply shall be registered with the city, and if the water from the well or other supply is not measured by a water meter, the owner or occupant shall, at his own cost, install and maintain a meter on the supplies in such a location and in such a manner as is satisfactory to the city. These meters shall serve as a control for the establishment of the sewer service charge and shall be read as provided by subsection (1) of this section. If, at the option of the customer, the installation of a meter would be impractical, water consumption will be estimated at 7,500 gallons per month per residential or housekeeping unit. 
(6)  The basis for determining the sewer user charge shall be reviewed as needed and shall be adjusted to reflect any increase or decrease in wastewater treatment costs based on previous experience. 
(7)  Any commercial or industrial sewer user installing a meter to measure its actual sewer flow shall be charged $4.74 per 1,000 gallons of actual sewage flow. 
(8)  Sewer rates shall increase in each subsequent year by two percent or the consumer price index as published by the U.S. Department of labor for the Southwest Region, whichever is greater. Rate increases shall be effective on October 1 of each subsequent year beginning October 1, 2010. 
(9)  For residential users establishing new service that do not have a "winter period consumption base" established at their current residential or housekeeping unit, water consumption will be estimated at the following rates until a winter period consumption base is established for the user at the residential or housekeeping unit: 
Number of People 
in Household 	Estimated Water 
Consumption Amount 
1 	2,500 gallons 
2—3 	5,000 gallons 
4 or more 	7,500 gallons 
 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.170(E); Ord. No. 632, § 2, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 1022, § 3, 5-19-2009; Ord. No. 1106, § 8, 8-19-2014; Ord. No. 1154, § 1, 10-17-2017)  
Sec. 118-136. - Minimum charge. 
(a)  Resident sewer users shall be charged a minimum sewer charge regardless of use which shall be $9.51 based upon a minimum water consumption of 2,000 gallons. 
(b)  The city does not obligate itself to furnish sanitary sewer service to any person whomsoever, but will furnish such service as is reasonable within its financial ability to do so. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.170(F); Ord. No. 1022, § 4, 5-19-2009; Ord. No. 1106, § 9, 8-19-2014)  
Sec. 118-137. - Determination of water consumption for users having private water supply. 
If a user of the sanitary sewer system does not use city water, but depends wholly or in part on wells or other private water supplies, estimated water consumption, as set forth in section 118-135(5), shall determine the amount of water used for the purpose of computing the sewer service charge, or such user may install a meter acceptable to the city, and the readings thereof shall govern. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.170(G))  
Sec. 118-138. - Billing. 
Billings for sewer service shall be rendered at the same time and on the same bills issued for water service, but shall be shown as a separate item from the charge for water. If sewer service is commenced or terminated during a billing period, the charge may be prorated on a daily basis. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.170(H))  
Sec. 118-139. - Payment. 
The sewer service charge shall be due and payable from and after the date on the bill on which such charge is shown. Payment shall be made to the city, but the city may, at its option, accept payment for any sewer service charge without payment of the water bill on which the charge is shown, and may, at its option, accept payment of any water bill without payment also of any sewer service charge shown thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.170(I))  
Sec. 118-140. - Use of water deposit to pay delinquent sewer charges. 
All deposits made by users of city water as required to guarantee payment of water bills may also be applied to pay delinquent or defaulting sewer service charges of the user who made the deposit. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.170(J))  
Sec. 118-141. - Remedies for nonpayment. 
Failure to pay a sewer service charge in accordance with this division shall be cause for discontinuing and disconnecting the water connection, or the city may undertake any other appropriate method for collection of delinquent charges. 
(Code 1977, § 13.08.170(K))  
Secs. 118-142—118-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PIPE SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 118-171—118-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - POLYVINYL CHLORIDE (PVC) WATER PIPE 
 
Sec. 118-201. - Scope. 
This standard covers the installation of pressure class 200 PVC (SDR-21) and Schedule 40 pipe complying with AWWA standards. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.010)  
Sec. 118-202. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Contractor means the person entering into the contract with the owner for the installation of PVC (SDR-21 Schedule 40) water pipe and fittings. 
Engineer means the person or government agency acting for the owner as his duly authorized agent within the scope of the duties entrusted. 
Inspector means an authorized representative of the city or the engineer representing the owner to make any and all necessary inspections of the work performed, materials and equipment furnished by the contractor. 
Owner means the person or government subdivision entering into contract with the contractor for the installation of the PVC water pipe and accessories. 
Whenever in the specifications or drawings the words "directed," "required," "permitted," "ordered," "designated," "prescribed" or words of like import are used, it shall be understood that a direction, requirement, permission, order, designation or prescription of the engineer is intended, and similarly, the words "approved," "accepted," "acceptable," "satisfactory" or words of like import shall mean approved by, or acceptable or satisfactory to, the engineer, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.020) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 118-203. - Required materials. 
Within the city when PVC water pipe is used, Class C-900 shall be used for all 12-inch water lines. All water lines of ten-inch through six-inch PVC shall be SDR-21 200 PSI, and all water lines from four inches through three-fourths inch shall be Schedule 40. When 12-inch C-900 PVC water lines are used under streets, highways, driveways and crosses water lines they shall be encased in ductile iron pipe as required by AWWA standards. All crossings shall be placed as indicated in the adopted ductile water line standards. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.030)  
Sec. 118-204. - Responsibility for materials. 
The contractor shall be responsible for all material furnished by him and shall replace at his own expense all such materials found damaged or defective in manufacture. This shall include the furnishing of all material and labor required for the replacement of installed material discovered defective prior to the final acceptance of the work. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.040)  
Sec. 118-205. - Alignment and grade. 
All pipe shall be laid to and maintained at the required lines and grades approved by the city. Fittings, valves, air vents and fire hydrants shall be installed at the required locations with valve and hydrant stems plumb. No deviation shall be made from the approved line or grade without approval in writing from the city engineer or the chief building official. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.050)  
Sec. 118-206. - Deviations occasioned by other structures. 
Temporary support, adequate protection and maintenance of all underground and surface utility structures, drains, sewers and other structures encountered in the progress of the work shall be furnished by the contractor at his own expense. The contractor shall be responsible to call Oklahoma One-Call System at 1-800-522-6543, 48 hours prior to any excavation. The contractor shall bear all expense arising from obstructions encountered. All pipe shall be laid to a depth of three feet, six inches cover, the depth of cover shall be measured from the established street grade or the top of curb, whichever is the highest. In no case shall hydrants be set lower than four feet. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.060)  
Sec. 118-207. - Excavation and preparation of trench. 
The trench shall be dug to the required alignment and depth as shown on the approved plans. Where necessary to prevent caving, trench excavation in unstable soil shall be adequately supported. As backfill is placed and sheeting is withdrawn, the void left by the withdrawn sheeting shall be filled and compacted before withdrawing the next increment. The trench bottom shall be constructed to provide a firm, stable and uniform support for the full length of the pipe. In no case shall the trench be excavated deeper than to allow the required cover of three feet six inches. When an unstable subgrade condition is encountered and, in the opinion of the city engineer or chief building official, it cannot support the pipe, an additional depth shall be excavated and refilled and compacted and approved by the city engineer and/or the chief building official. Bell holes at each joint location shall be provided to permit the joint to be made properly and to lay properly. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.070)  
Sec. 118-208. - Rock excavation. 
Ledge rocks, boulders and large stones shall be removed to provide six inches of soil cushion on each side of and below all PVC pipe and accessories. Blasting for excavation will have to be cleared and approved by the fire department. Blasting will only be allowed when no other process of rock removal is available and practical. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.080)  
Sec. 118-209. - Stockpiling of excavated material. 
All excavated material shall be stockpiled in a manner that will not endanger the work and that will void obstructing sidewalks and driveways. Hydrants under pressure, valve pit covers, valve boxes or other utility controls shall be left unobstructed and accessible until the work is com pleted. Gutters shall be kept clear or other satisfactory provisions made for street drainage, and natural watercourses shall not be obstructed. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.090)  
Sec. 118-210. - Laying of pipe. 
(a)  All pipes, fittings, valves, hydrants and accessories shall be carefully placed into the trench using suitable equipment in such a manner as to prevent damage to pipes and fittings. Under no circumstances shall the pipes or accessories be dropped or dumped into the trench. 
(b)  All pipes and accessories shall be inspected for defects prior to placement into the trench. All defective, damaged or unsound material shall be repaired or replaced as directed by the city engineer or chief building official. 
(c)  All foreign matter or dirt shall be removed from the interior of the pipes before lowering them into position in the trench. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.100)  
Sec. 118-211. - Joining pipe sections. 
(a)  The sealing surface of the pipe, the bell to be joined and the elastomeric gaskets shall be cleaned immediately before assembly. When pipe laying is not in progress, the open ends of installed pipe shall be closed to prevent entrance of trench water into the pipe. Whenever water is excluded from the interior of the pipe, enough backfill shall be placed on the pipe to prevent floating. Any pipe that has floated shall be removed from the trench and the bedding restored. No pipe shall be laid when the trench conditions or the weather is unsuitable for proper installation as determined by the city engineer or chief building official. 
(b)  The pipe shall be cut in a neat and workmanlike manner without damage to the pipe so as to have a smooth end at right angles to the axis of the pipe. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.110)  
Sec. 118-212. - Pipe assembly. 
(a)  Valves, hydrants or fittings connected to PVC plastic pipe shall be equipped with bells having a profile that permits a seal to be made directly between the pipe end and the bell of the fitting with an elastomeric gasket. 
(b)  Pipe ends shall be cut square, deburred and beveled in accordance with manufacturer standards. 
(c)  The push on joints is an elastomeric gasketed joint. It is assembled by positioning the elastomeric gaskets in the annular grooves of the bell or coupler and inserting the spigot end of the pipe into the bell or coupler. The spigot end of the pipe compresses the gasket radially to form a positive seal. The gasket and annular groove are designed, sized and shaped so that the gasket will resist displacement. Care shall be taken so that only the correct elastomeric gasket, compatible with the annular groove, must be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(d)  The mechanical joint is a bolted joint of the stuffing box type. Each joint shall consist of: 
(1)  A bell provided with an exterior gland having bolt holes or slots and a socket with an annular recess for the sealing gasket and the spigot end of the plastic pipe; 
(2)  A sealing gasket; 
(3)  A follower gland with bolt holes matching those in the fitting; and 
(4)  Tee bolts and hexagonal nuts. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.120)  
Sec. 118-213. - Air valves. 
(a)  Air valves shall be furnished and installed complete in place with all appurtenances, in sizes, number and arrangement as approved for installation at each specified location. Air valves shall be designed for a working pressure of not less than 150 pounds per square inch. The air valve shall be completely automatic in operation. Complete construction and installation drawings, specifications, descriptive data, photographs, operating characteristics and capacities shall be submitted to the city engineer or the chief building official for approval prior to purchase and installation. 
(b)  Air valves, regardless of type, shall be designed for maximum durability and minimum of maintenance. The valves seats, pivots, levers, air orifices, floats (unless made of glass), bearing guides, tailrods, guide bushings, and all other moving and rubbing surfaces and parts, shall be made of monel metal, silicon bronze, phosphorus bronze or other equally durable and corrosion resisting metal, as approved by the city engineer or chief building official. 
(c)  Check valves shall be cast iron bodies with full bronze mountings and conform to current AWWA/ANSI standards. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.120)  
Sec. 118-214. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  All fire hydrants shall be dry-top traffic model design, conforming to the AWWA C-502-80 standard. Hydrants shall be round-valved bell compression type (open against—closed with pressure) with two, 2½-inch nozzles and one 4½-inch steamer nozzle. Nozzle threads shall be national standards. All fire hydrants shall be single barrel for four feet bury and 5¼-inch valve opening, six-inch mechanical joint. All fire hydrant extensions shall be at the contractor's expense. All operating nuts and nozzle cap nuts shall be 1½-inch pentagon. All nozzles shall be equipped with chained caps, provided with gaskets made of suitable plastic or neoprene. O-ring seals and oil sealed ball bearings may be used in place of AWWA packing gland and multiple packing rings. All threads shall be used between the valve and the tee. 
(b)  Fire hydrants shall be classified in accordance with their rated gallons per minute (gpm) capacities, using data from actual flow testing of the hydrant after installation, as follows: 
(1)  Class AA—Rated capacity of 1,500 gpm or greater. 
(2)  Class A—Rated capacity of 1,000—1,499 gpm. 
(3)  Class B—Rated capacity of 500—999 gpm. 
(4)  Class C—Rated capacity of less than 500 gpm. 
(c)  Fire hydrants shall be powder coated with a color as specified by the fire chief. The tops and nozzle caps shall be painted after installation with the following capacity-indicating color scheme: 
(1)  Class AA—Light blue; 
(2)  Class A—Green; 
(3)  Class B—Orange; 
(4)  Class C—Red. 
Fire hydrants that are inoperative or unusable shall be marked as "out of service" until the hydrant is either repaired or removed from service. 
(d)  The back side of the hydrant opposite the pipe shall have concrete blocking. Blocking is to be formed and poured in place. Blocking is to be from hydrant to undisturbed soil. The back side of the tee fitting coming off the main line shall also be blocked. When soil is soft and unstable a clamping device shall be used. Blocking or clamping is to be in accordance with the standard detail drawing. 
(e)  Around the drain of the hydrant shall be placed not less than five cubic feet of crushed stone or gravel. Backfill around the hydrant shall be firmly tamped to the surface of the ground, to a distance of five feet in front of the hydrant and back of the hydrant to the end of the hydrant, trench excavation. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.140; Ord. No. 730, § 1(13.20.140(B)), 4-4-2000; Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 1167, § 3, 7-3-2018; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 3-5-2019)  
Sec. 118-215. - Plugging of dead ends. 
Plugs shall be inserted into the bells of all dead end fittings. Spigot ends of accessories and fittings and plain ends of plastic pipe shall be capped, except as otherwise provided by the city water system policy. A reaction of trust blocking shall be provided at all dead ends of pipe that are capped or plugged. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.150; Ord. No. 1184, § 3, 3-5-2019)  
Sec. 118-216. - Service connections. 
Service connections for all pipe diameter and classes may be made by means of a suitable saddle, tapped coupling or service connector for plastic pipe. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.160)  
Sec. 118-217. - Hydrostatic test of completed lines. 
(a)  All PVC water lines shall be tested by means of hydrostatic pressure of not less than 100 pounds per square inch for three hours. If test plugs are used, they shall be furnished and installed by the water line contractor at his own expense, together with all necessary anchors, braces and other devices necessary to withstand the hydrostatic pressure on such plug without placing any hydraulic thrust on the pipe line or any part thereof. The contractor shall be solely responsible for any and all damages to the pipe line and public and private property which might be caused by the failure of such test plugs or supports thereof. The allowable leakage shall not exceed ten gallons per 24 hours per inch diameter per mile of 42 inches and smaller pipe; and 7½ gallons on 48-inch pipe and larger. 
(b)  After the section of line to be tested has been filled with water, the specified test pressure shall be applied by means of a force pump of such design and capacity that such pressure can be applied and maintained for the duration of the test period, which shall not be less than three hours for 24 inches and smaller pipe. 
(c)  All water supplied to the line, after the initial filling thereof, shall be metered by means of a tested water meter as furnished and installed by the city. 
(d)  Any and all leaks as evidenced by visual inspection of the soil at any point on the line constructed by the contractor, which appear during the specified hydrostatic test or at any subsequent time before final acceptance of the whole works, shall be located and repaired by and at the expense of the contractor. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.170)  
Sec. 118-218. - Disinfection. 
(a)  Before being placed into service, all new water lines shall be disinfected by adding chlorine to the water to bring the strength up to 50 ppm and let stand in the lines for a period of four hours. The line shall then be drained and flushed. The disinfection of the water lines shall be done under the supervision of the water department or the city engineer. 
(b)  Water samples will be collected and tested by the state health department and found safe for human consumption before lines are turned into system. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.180)  
Sec. 118-219. - Cover on pipe. 
Where the drawings do not show a profile or indicate cut, the cover on the pipe shall be three feet six inches below the top of the curb, or where there is no curb, three feet six inches below the established grade of the centerline of the street. The minimum cover shall be not less than two feet below the bottom of the ditch at crossings or parallel runs. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.190)  
Sec. 118-220. - Embedment materials. 
All Class 200-900-40 water (PVC) pipe shall be bedded in sand, except under the following conditions. The following three material classifications will be allowed as bedding materials when the soil type has been classified by an approved testing laboratory: 
(1)  Class I. Angular, one-fourth to 1½ inches (six to 40 mm) graded stone, including a number of fill materials that have regional significance such as coral, slag, cinders, crushed shell and crushed stone. 
Note: The size range and resulting high voids ration of Class I material make it suitable for use to dewater trenches during pipe installation. This permeable characteristic dictates that its use be limited to locations where pipe supports will not be lost by migration of fine grained natural material from the trench walls and bottom or migration of other embedment materials into the Class I material. When such migration is possible, the material's minimum size range could be reduced to finer than one-fourth inch (mm) and the gradation properly designed to limit the size of the voids. 
(2)  Class II. Coarse sands and gravels with maximum particle size of 1½ inches (40 mm), including variously graded sands and gravels containing small percentages of fines, generally granular and noncohesive, either wet or dry. Soil types GW, GP, SW and SP are included in this class. 
Note: Sands and gravels which are clean or borderline between clean and with fines should be included. Coarse-grained soils with less than 12 percent but more than five percent fines are neglected in ASTM D2487 and the USCS and should be included. The gradation of Class II material influences its density and pipe support strength when loosely placed. The gradation of Class II materials may be critical to the pipe support and stability of the foundation and embedment if the material is imported and is not native to the trench excavation. A gradation other than well graded, such as uniformly graded or gap graded, may permit loss of support by migration into void spaces of a finer grained natural material from the trench wall and bottom. 
(3)  Class III. Fine sand and clayey (clay filled) gravels, including fine sands, sand-clay mixtures and gravel-clay mixtures. Solid types GM, CG, SM and SC are included in this class. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.200)  
Sec. 118-221. - Methods of placing embedment materials. 
The following compaction methods are recommended as the optimums which will achieve desirable densities with the least effort: 
(1)  Manufactured angular, granular materials. Manufactured materials which are angular, granular such as broken coral, crushed stone or rock, crushed shells, crushed slag or cinders which have a maximum size of 1½ inches (40 mm) may be placed on loose dumping with a maximum of compactive effort, except that care shall be taken to assure proper placement of material under pipe haunches. 
(2)  Clean granular soils. With coarse-grained soils containing less than five percent fines such as GW, GP, SW, SP, GW-GP and SW-SP, the maximum density will be obtained by compacting by saturation or vibration. If internal vibrators are used, the height of successive lifts or backfill shall be limited to the penetrating depth of the vibrator. If surface vibrators are used, the backfill should be placed in lifts of six to 12 inches (150 to 300 mm). This material may also be compacted by tamping or other means provided that the desired relative density is obtained. 
(3)  Coarse-grained soils with little to no fines. Coarse-grained soils which are borderline between clean and with fines containing between five to 12 percent fines, such as GW-GM, SW-SM, GW-GC, SW-SC, GP-GM, SP-SM, GP-GC and SP-SC, should be compacted by either hand or mechanical tamping, saturation or vibration, or whichever method meets the required density. 
(4)  Coarse-grained soils with fines. Coarse-grained soils containing more than 12 percent fines, such as GM, GC, SM, SC and the borderline cases in the group (e.g. GM-SM), should be compacted by hand or mechanical tamping. The backfill should be placed in lifts of four to six inches (100 to 150 mm). 
(5)  Fine-grained soils. Fine-grained soils such as MH, CH, ML, CL, SC-CL, SM-ML and ML-CL, should be compacted by hand or mechanical tamping in lifts of four to six inches (100 to 150 mm). 
(6)  Tamping and vibrating. Soils which require compaction by tamping or vibrating generally reach maximum density with a minimum of effort when controlled to optimum moisture content. 
(7)  Saturation. If flooding, jetting or puddling is employed for compaction, care should be taken to provide drainage and prevent flotation of the pipe. Saturation shall not be permitted during freezing weather. Erosion of support at the pipe sides and bottom by water jetting shall be prevented. Apply only enough water to give complete saturation. Allow time for the saturated soil in each layer to dewater and solidify until it will support the weight of workers. 
(8)  Use of compaction equipment. Take care to avoid contact between the pipe and compaction equipment. Do not use compaction equipment directly over the pipe until sufficient backfill has been placed to assure that such equipment will not damage or disturb the sewer pipe. 
(9)  Bedding. Sand is preferred but Class I, II or III soil is required primarily to bring the trench bottom up to grade. Bedding materials shall be placed to provide uniform and adequate longitudinal support under the pipe. Blocking shall not be used to bring the pipe to grade. Bell holes at each joint shall be provided to permit the joint to be assembled properly while maintaining uniform pipe support. A compacted depth of four to six inches (100 to 150 mm) is generally sufficient bedding thickness. In trenches which have natural materials of fine grains, and in conditions where migration of trench wall material into bedding material can be anticipated, either wide trench construction or well graded bedding material without void shall be used. 
(10)  Haunching. The most important factor affecting water pipe performance and deflection is the haunching material and its density. Place and consolidate the material under the pipe haunch to provide adequate side support to the pipe while avoiding both vertical and lateral displacement of the pipe from proper alignment. Where coarse materials with voids have been used for bedding, coarse materials shall also be used for haunching and consideration shall be given to using wide trench construction. Place haunching up to the pipe spring line. 
(11)  Initial backfill. Initial backfill begins above the spring line of the pipe. Use little or no tamping of the initial backfill since this area will provide little or no additional side support. The only purpose of extending the initial backfill to levels over the top of the pipe shall be to protect the pipe from impact damage resulting from any large objects in the final backfill. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.200)  
Sec. 118-222. - Laying and joining pipe and fittings. 
Before setting any water pipe in place, each component of piping shall be inspected for damage and cleaned. Damaged components shall be rejected or repaired. Pipe bells shall be laid on the upstream end. Water pipe laying shall commence at the lowest elevation, which shall remain plugged until the water line is accepted by the city, and shall terminate only at manholes, service branches or cleanouts. Trenches shall be dewatered, if necessary, and pipe shall be laid under water only when approved by the city engineer. Whenever water pipe laying is interrupted, the end of the pipe shall be temporarily plugged to prevent the entrance of water, mud or foreign matter, and the pipe shall be secured to prevent being dislodged or floating. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.221)  
Sec. 118-223. - Location and alignment. 
Pipe and fittings shall be embedded in the trench with the invert conforming to the required elevations, slopes and alignment, and with the pipe bottom uniformly and continuously supported by a firm bedding and foundation. 
(Code 1977, § 13.20.230)  
Secs. 118-224—118-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DUCTILE IRON WATER PIPE 
 
Sec. 118-251. - Scope. 
These specifications shall include the furnishing and installation complete of all ductile iron water main, complete with the necessary valves, hydrants, fittings and appurtenances. Ductile iron pipe may be required on 12-inch lines and shall be required under all streets, driveways and where water lines are crossed by sewer lines. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.010)  
Sec. 118-252. - Ductile iron pressure pipe. 
(a)  Ductile iron pressure pipe, sizes six inches through 12 inches inclusive, shall be manufactured in accordance with the latest issue of any one of the following specifications or standards: 
(1)  Ductile Iron Pipe ANSI-A-21.51 (AWWA-C151). 
(2)  Cement Lining ANSI-A-21.4 (AWWA-C104). 
(b)  Pipe shall be designed for 350 psi working pressure, laying condition two feet and five feet maximum depth of cover in accordance with Part 1 of the Manual of Computation of Strength and Thickness of Ductile Iron Pipe, ANSI 421, 50-1976 (AWWA C-150-76). 
(c)  The minimum nominal wall thickness and standard thickness class for each size pipe shall be as follows: 
Pipe Size 
(inches) 	Nominal Wall 
(inches) 	Use Class 
 6 	0.25 	50 
 8 	0.27 	50 
10 	0.29 	50 
12 	0.31 	50 
 
(d)  All ductile iron pressure pipe shall be furnished with one of the following types of joints and as described in the proposal or bid request: 
	Type Joint 	Reference Specification 
(1) 	Push-on Joint (Bell-Tite, Tyton, Fastitle or Approved Equal) 	ANSI A21.11-72 (AWWA C111-72) 
(2) 	Mechanical Joint 	ANSI A21.11-72 (AWWA C111-72) 
 
(e)  All ductile iron pipe shall be bituminous coated outside and cement-mortar lined inside with seal coat, all in accordance with ANSI A21.4 (AWWA C104). 
(f)  Ductile iron pipe shall be approved by the Underwriters' Laboratory and shall be accepted by the state fire insurance commission for use in water distribution systems, without penalty. All pipe shall be new and made in the United States. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.020)  
Sec. 118-253. - Fittings. 
Mechanical joint gray or ductile iron fittings in sizes two inches through 12 inches shall conform to ANSI specifications ANSI AWWA C110, shall be Class 250, and the joint shall conform to ANSI specifications A21.11 (AWWA C111). The 14-inch through 48-inch mechanical joint fittings shall meet the same general requirements as the two-inch through 12-inch fittings, except they shall be Class 150. All gray or ductile iron fittings, regardless of size, shall be cement lined. Thickness is to be the same as the cement coating specified for ductile iron pipe, except coating may be applied by hand brush. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.030)  
Sec. 118-254. - Mill test reports. 
All manufacturers of ductile iron pipe and fittings shall furnish the city and project engineer certified mill test reports that the material conforms in all respects to the latest requirements of the specifications set forth in section 118-253. The city reserves the right through its employees or agents to observe mill tests and other tests recognized by ANSI. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.040)  
Sec. 118-255. - Joints. 
Joints shall be made in accordance with the recommendations of the pipe manufacturer for the various classes of joints. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.050)  
Sec. 118-256. - Excavation and backfilling. 
(a)  Definition. The terms "excavation" and "trenching," as used herein or in any other reference to the work under contract, shall refer to and mean any and all material excavated, for whatever purpose, in accordance with the terms of the specifications, plans, proposal and contract, and shall include all subsequent handling, backfilling, compacting, disposal of excess excavation materials, and the preparation of all subgrades, etc., necessary for a first class job. 
(b)  Excavation work. Excavation work shall include clearing and preparation of the trench or excavation site, including the removal of all surface vegetation, stumps and debris; all sheeting, shoring, bracing, protection of adjacent property, preparation of all subgrades, storage of excavated materials off of the excavation site where necessary, backfilling, tamping and otherwise compacting of backfill and specified embankments, grading and surfacing; moving, hauling or otherwise transporting excavated materials from whatever source, where such materials are to be returned to the excavation site for backfill purposes, as directed by the city engineer; and all other excavation stipulated in this specification. 
(c)  Classification of excavation. There shall be no classification of excavation materials, except as otherwise provided for in the proposal as extra excavation made as ordered by the city engineer, and the term "excavation" shall include all materials excavated or removed on the several sites of the work regardless of the type, character, composition or condition of the materials so excavated; and shall further include all debris, junk, broken concrete and all other materials within the excavation limits. 
(d)  Pipe trench excavation. Pipe lines shall be installed to the alignment, grades and elevations shown on the drawings. Grade and alignment of pipe and pipe subgrades will ordinarily be obtained from offset (hub) stakes. Trenches shall be dug by means of a trenching machine wherever practicable. The use of any other type of power excavating equipment such as drag line, trench hoe or power shovel will not be permitted except with special authorization by the city engineer and under such requirements relative to uniformity of trench width and vertical trench banks as they may require. Hand digging will be required where the operation of trench machinery will damage trees, buildings, surface or subsurface structures. The minimum width of trench cut for each size of pipe shall be as follows: 
Size of 
Pipe 
(inches) 	Width of 
Trench 
(inches) 
 6 	20 
 8 	22 
10 	24 
12 	28 
16 	32 
18 	34 
20 	36 
 
The trenching machine shall be maintained on a sufficiently level roadbed to provide substantially vertical trench walls. The maximum horizontal offset of the trench bottom from the trench top (undercutting) shall be two inches. 
(e)  Soft foundation Where soft foundation is encountered in the trench bottom, the contractor shall excavate below grade and provide either a gravel cushion or a concrete cradle for the purpose of supporting the pipe, as directed by the city engineer. 
(f)  Bell holes. All bell holes shall be of ample size. 
(g)  Deposit of excavated material. All excavated materials shall be deposited on the sides of trenches at such a distance that no additional load due to surcharge is placed on the bank, and shall also be deposited or moved after original deposit in such a manner that the pipe laying crew and the public, when the trench is in a highway or city street, will be inconvenienced as little as possible. 
(h)  Trench banks; maintenance. It will be the contractor's responsibility to maintain the trench banks in a stable and vertical position by use of all necessary bracing or sheeting required for safety. 
(i)  Dewatering of pipe trenches. The contractor will be required to keep the pipe trenches free from water and shall keep the natural groundwater table or surface not less than four inches below the elevation of the finished subgrade, from the time subgrade preparation is started until the pipe has been backfilled, at all points where such groundwater is within four inches of the elevation of the pipe subgrade. No work shall be done in trenches after rough excavation is completed if the subgrade is submerged in the dewatering of trenches and other excavations shall be disposed of in a satisfactory manner. The contractor shall be liable for all damages to private property caused by such disposal of water. 
(j)  Rock excavation. In rock excavation, the contractor shall over-excavate six inches and place six inches of sand in the trench upon which the pipe is laid. The contractor shall further backfill over the pipe with the same earth or earth free from stone or rocks, to a depth of six inches. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.060)  
Sec. 118-257. - Backfilling trenches. 
Except where water mains cross under drainage channel drives, streets, or alleys, or lie under streets or alleys, backfill shall be brought up around the pipe in six-inch loose measurement layers from materials selected from the trench excavation, compacted by means of mechanical or hand tampers to 12 inches above the top of the pipe. Compaction shall be to 90 percent standard proctor density. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.070)  
Sec. 118-258. - Disposal of excess excavation materials. 
(a)  In general, excess excavated materials from trenches located in open fields and unimproved property will be distributed directly back over the pipe line and within the pipe line right-of-way, to a maximum depth above the original ground elevation at any point of six inches, at and across the trench, and sloping uniformly each way therefrom. Materials so wasted shall be carefully finished with a drag or blade machine to have a neat and uniform appearance without obstructing drainage at any point. 
(b)  Except as stated in subsection (a) of this section, all excess excavated material remaining after final settlement of the trenches has occurred shall be removed and disposed of by and at the expense of the contractor, and to the satisfaction of the engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.080)  
Sec. 118-259. - Replacement of sod. 
Where shown on the plans, the contractor shall replace sod removed or destroyed in the excavation of pipe trenches with new sod of a quality and condition and from a source approved by the city engineer. All such sod furnished shall be equal to or better than the original sod removed. Sod replaced shall be kept watered for a period of one month after installation. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.090)  
Sec. 118-260. - Trees and shrubbery. 
The contractor shall use every possible precaution to prevent injury to trees and shrubbery on and adjacent to the site of the work. He shall replace, at his own expense, any such trees or shrubbery damaged or destroyed by him, unless the removal thereof is required by the plans or is authorized by the city engineer. When tree roots 1½ inches or larger are encountered in making the excavation, the roots are not to be cut. Hand excavation shall be used, and any damaged root 1½ inches or larger shall be treated with a creosote paint as directed by the city engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.100)  
Sec. 118-261. - General pipe line installation requirements. 
The work to be done under these standards consists in general of the installation of pipe, fittings, specials, valves and other pipe line appurtenances, shall include unloading such material from cars at the point of delivery, hauling, distribution and installation thereof; the furnishing and installation of all jointing materials, gauge valves, air valves and appurtenances, structure, concrete and all other materials required by the plans and specifications; making all specified and necessary connections with existing mains; making all required tests; restoration of all roadways, streets, driveways, sidewalks, crosswalks and street crossing surfaces; and replacement or repair of all drains, sewers, conduits, water, oil and gas lines, fences, culverts, bridges and other structures which may be damaged in the prosecution of the work; maintenance of traffic across sites of the work where required, with all necessary bridges, barricades, red lights and other safety provisions; making of all repairs to coatings and linings of pipe under the supervision of a representative of the pipe manufacturer; and the performance of all other work required by the plans and as specified in this division, all as directed and to the approval of the engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.110)  
Sec. 118-262. - Length of ditch to be opened. 
In no case shall more than 300 feet of ditch be opened at one time in advance of the pipe laid without consent of the city engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.120)  
Sec. 118-263. - Driveways, streets and highways. 
(a)  When the water main passes underneath any private concrete driveway, streets and highways tunnelling shall not be used, unless special permission is given by the city engineer. The contractor shall bore and encase under driveways, streets and highways. If the concrete is cut, it shall be cut to the pipe trench width to allow the main to be laid and for the proper backfilling of the ditch. After the main is laid and the ditch is properly backfilled, the driveway shall be restored to as good a condition as found, at the expense of the contractor. 
(b)  Where driveways are cut to private residences, they shall be cut, the pipe installed and trench properly backfilled all in the same day. 
(c)  Where the water main passes underneath any private or public driveway, where the driveway is used for parking cars such as at shopping centers, large business buildings, stores, etc., the contractor shall confer with the engineer for an approved method of procedure in doing work in order to minimize the interference of traffic to and from the parking area. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.130)  
Sec. 118-264. - Hydrostatic tests of completed lines. 
(a)  All pipe lines shall be tested by means of hydrostatic pressure of not less than 100 pounds per square inch for three hours. If test plugs are used, they shall be furnished and installed by the contractor at his own expense, together with all necessary anchors, braces and other devices necessary to withstand the hydrostatic pressure on such plug without placing any hydraulic thrust on the pipe line or any part thereof. The contractor shall be solely responsible for any and all damage to the pipe line and public and private property which might be caused by the failure of such test plugs or supports therefor. The allowable leakage shall not exceed ten gallons per 24 hours per inch diameter per mile of 42-inch and smaller pipe; and 7½ gallons on 48-inch pipe and larger. 
(b)  After the section of line to be tested has been filled with water, the specified test pressure shall be applied by means of a force pump of such design and capacity that such pressure can be applied and maintained for the duration of the test period, which shall be not less than three hours for 24-inch and smaller pipe. 
(c)  All water supplied to the line, after the initial filling thereof, shall be metered by means of a tested water meter approved by the city engineer. 
(d)  Any and all leaks as evidenced by visual inspection of the soil at any point on the line constructed under this contract, which appear during the specified hydrostatic test or at any subsequent time before final acceptance of the whole works, shall be located and repaired by and at the expense of the contractor. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.140)  
Sec. 118-265. - Disinfection. 
Before being placed into service, all new water lines shall be disinfected by adding chlorine to the water to bring the strength up to 50 ppm and let stand in the lines for a period of four hours. The line shall then be drained and flushed. The disinfection of the water lines shall be done under the supervision of the water department personnel or the city engineer. The method of disinfection of water lines must be approved by the city engineer. Water samples will be collected and tested and found safe for human consumption before lines are turned into the system. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.150)  
Sec. 118-266. - Cover on pipe. 
Where the drawings do not show a profile or indicate cut, the cover on the pipe shall be three feet six inches below the top of the curb, or where there is no curb, three feet six inches below the established grade of the centerline of the street. The minimum cover shall be not less than two feet below the bottom of the ditch at crossings or parallel runs. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.160)  
Sec. 118-267. - Handling pipe and accessories. 
(a)  Pipe, fittings, specials and other accessories shall be unloaded at the point of delivery, hauled to and distributed at the site of the project by the contractor, and shall at all times be handled with extreme care to avoid damage thereto. Pipe, fittings, specials and other accessories are to be hauled on equipment equipped with pneumatic tires. Equipment, tools and methods used in unloading, reloading, hauling and laying pipe and accessories shall be such that no damage is done to the pipe or the cement lining therein. Hooks used for insertion in the ends of a pipe shall have broad, well-padded contact surfaces and shall be of such design and length that they will provide uniform support for a distance back from the end of the pipe of not less than one-third of the internal pipe diameter. In general, pipe tongs (padded) shall be used in the handling of all ductile iron pipe. 
(b)  Cement lining in pipes or fittings which are broken or loosened in unloading or subsequent handling shall be repaired by and at the expense of the contractor, who may employ the pipe manufacturer to make such repairs, but in any case the repairs shall be made under the direct supervision of the representative of the pipe manufacturer. All outside pipe coating which is damaged by the contractor shall be repaired, prior to laying the pipe or placing the backfill, by removing all damaged coating, wire brushing the exposed metal and applying two coats of a permanently elastic coal tar paint of a type and quality equal to that used in originally coating the outside of the pipe and preferably of the same brand and formula. This paint shall be sufficiently hard before backfilling so that it will not be damaged thereby. 
(c)  Where pipe is to be laid in front of or adjacent to business houses or manufacturing establishments, or where homes have well kept front yards, the pipe shall be delivered to the site of the work as the pipe is laid. Local storage of the pipe at the site of the work will not be permitted. By permission of the city engineer, 12 joints of pipe may be allowed on the site of the work at any one time, but it is to be laid before stopping work at night, and all trench backfilling shall closely follow the pipe laying. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.170)  
Sec. 118-268. - Alignment of ductile iron pipe lines. 
(a)  Pipe lines shall be accurately installed to the alignment and profile indicated on the approved pipe installation drawings furnished for the purpose. Grades and elevations shall be determined by the pipe subgrade prepared as specified in horizontal alignment of all pipe 30 inches and larger in nominal internal diameter shall be by means of batter boards at each joint on curves and from lines supported on batter boards where on tangents. 
(b)  The maximum deflection of any pipe joint, made necessary by vertical and horizontal curves or offsets, shall not exceed the amount as recommended by the manufacturer of the pipe. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.180)  
Sec. 118-269. - Placing pipe in trench. 
Proper equipment, implements, tools and facilities satisfactory to the city engineer shall be provided and used by the contractor for the safe and convenient prosecution of the work. All pipe, fittings, hydrants and valves shall be carefully lowered into the trench, piece by piece, by means of cranes, derricks, tongs, slings, ropes or other suitable tools and equipment, in such a manner that no damage occurs to the pipe, pipe coating, pipe lining or to the trench subgrade. Under no circumstances shall pipe or accessories be dropped or dumped into the trench. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.190)  
Sec. 118-270. - Pipe to be kept clean. 
All earth, rubbish, dirt and other foreign matter shall be removed from the inside of all pipe and other appurtenances, and from the outside of spigots, before lowering into the trench, and shall be kept clean by approved means during and after laying. At times when pipe laying is not in progress, all open ends of the pipe and fittings shall be closed by approved means, and no trench water shall be permitted to enter the pipe. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.200)  
Sec. 118-271. - Inspection of pipe. 
Before lowering, and while still suspended, the pipe shall be inspected for defects and rung with a light hammer to detect cracks. Any defective, damaged or unsound pipe shall be rejected. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.210)  
Sec. 118-272. - Cutting pipe. 
Cutting of pipe for closure pieces or for other reasons shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner by a method which will not damage either the pipe or the pipe lining. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.220)  
Sec. 118-273. - Flanged joints. 
Flanged joints will be required where indicated on the plans. Care shall be taken in making up flanged joints so that there is no restraint on the opposite end of the pipe or fitting which would prevent pressure from being evenly and uniformly applied upon the gasket. The pipe or fitting must be free to move in any direction while bolting. Bolts shall be gradually tightened, each in turn, at a uniform rate around the entire flange. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.230)  
Sec. 118-274. - Gate valves. 
(a)  Gate valves shall conform to AWWA specifications C500-71 or latest applicable revision and shall be Mueller, Iowa or approved equal. 
(b)  Valves shall be iron body, bronze mounted and shall open turning to the left. Operators shall be as shown on the plans. Except where otherwise called for on the drawings, valves shall be nonrising stem, with joints to shut pipe with which the valve is to be used and shall be for 175 pounds water working pressure unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.240)  
Sec. 118-275. - Valve boxes. 
(a)  All valve boxes shall be four-piece Ducan Standard of cast iron of the extension type suitable for a depth of cover over the pipe line as required by the backfill requirements at each valve. Each valve box shall be provided with a suitable cast iron base and cover. Covers shall have cast thereon an appropriate name designating the service for which the valve is to be used. 
(b)  All parts of valve boxes, bases and covers shall be coated by dipping in hot bituminous base material such as used for pipe dip. All valve boxes shall be installed to the final grade and set in concrete. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.250)  
Sec. 118-276. - Air valves. 
(a)  Air valves shall be furnished and installed complete in place with all appurtenances, in sizes, number and arrangement as approved for installation at each specified location. Air valves shall be designed for a working pressure of not less than 150 pounds per square inch. The air valves shall be completely automatic in operation. Complete construction and installation drawings, specifications, descriptive data, photographs, operating characteristics and capacities shall be submitted to the engineer for approval prior to purchase and installation. 
(b)  Air valves, regardless of type, shall be designed for maximum durability and minimum of maintenance. The valve seats, pivots, levers, air orifices, floats (unless made of glass), bearings, guides, tailrods, guide bushings and all other moving and rubbing surfaces and parts, shall be made of monel metal, silicon bronze, phosphorus bronze or other equally durable and corrosion resisting metal, as approved by the engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.260)  
Sec. 118-277. - Check valves. 
Check valves shall be cast iron bodies with full bronze mountings and conform to current AWWA/ANSI standards. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.270)  
Sec. 118-278. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  All fire hydrants shall be Mueller A-423 Super Centurion, American - Darling B-84-B, M and H Styles 129 and Clow Medallion, and shall be of dry-top traffic model design, conforming to the AWWA C-502-80 standard. Hydrants shall be round-valved bell compression type (open against—closed with pressure) with two 2½-inch nozzles and one 4½-inch steamer nozzle. Nozzle threads shall be national standard. All fire hydrants shall be single barrel for four-foot bury and 5¼-inch valve opening, six-inch mechanical joint. All fire hydrant extensions shall be at the contractor's expense. All operating nuts and nozzle cap nuts shall be 1½-inch pentagon. All nozzles shall be equipped with chained caps, provided with gaskets made of suitable plastic or neoprene. O-ring seals and oil sealed ball bearings may be used in place of AWWA packing gland and multiple packing rings. 
(b)  Fire hydrants shall be painted at the plant with two coats of fire hydrant red paint. 
(c)  The back side of the hydrant opposite the pipe shall have concrete blocking. Blocking is to be formed and poured in place. Blocking is to be from hydrant to undisturbed soil. The back side of the tee fitting coming off the main line shall also be blocked. When soil is soft and unstable a clamping device shall be used. Blocking or clamping shall be in accordance with the standard details drawing. 
(d)  Around the drain of the hydrant shall be placed not less than five cubic feet of crushed stone or gravel. Backfill around the hydrant shall be firmly tamped to the surface of the ground, to a distance of five feet in front of the hydrant and back of the hydrant to the end of the hydrant trench excavation. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.280; Ord. No. 1167, § 4, 7-3-2018; Ord. No. 1184, § 2, 3-5-2019)  
Sec. 118-279. - Blocking thrust. 
All tees, turns and fire hydrants shall be blocked in accordance with the standard detail drawing. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.290)  
Sec. 118-280. - Maintenance bond. 
The contractor shall provide a good and sufficient maintenance bond in an amount equal to 110 percent of the cost of completed water line, guaranteeing the maintenance against any failure due to defective materials or workmanship of such improvement for a period of two years from and after the time of its completion and acceptance by the city. All bonds shall be acceptable to the city and shall be executed by surety companies licensed to do business in the state. 
(Code 1977, § 13.24.300)  
Secs. 118-281—118-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - POLYVINYL CHLORIDE (PVC) SEWER PIPE 
 
Sec. 118-301. - Scope. 
(a)  These recommended specifications include requirements for trench excavation, pipe embedment, joining and installing pipe and accessories, backfill placement and installation testing. These recommended practices specify detailed procedures for construction with PVC sewer pipe products. 
(b)  SDR-35 and Schedule 40 plastic sewer pipe shall be used within the city limits, however, on special exceptions as approved by the city engineer and/or the chief building official, ductile sewer pipe may be used. In no case shall clay tile sewer pipe be permitted within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.010)  
Sec. 118-302. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Contractor means the person entering into the contract with the owner for the installation of PVC (SDR-35) Schedule 40 water pipe and appurtenances. 
Engineer means the person or government agency acting for the owner as his duly authorized agent in designing and engineering the project. 
Inspector means an authorized representative of the city or the engineer assigned to make any and all necessary inspections of the work performed, materials and equipment furnished by the contractor. 
Owner means the person or government subdivision entering into contract with the contractor for the installation of the PVC sewer pipe and appurtenances. 
Whenever in the specifications or drawings the words "directed," "required," "permitted," "ordered," "designated," "prescribed" or words of like import are used, it shall be understood that a direction, requirement, permission, order, designation or prescription of the engineer is intended, and similarly, the words "approved," "acceptable," "satisfactory" or words of like import shall mean approved by, or acceptable or satisfactory to, the engineer, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.020) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 118-303. - Terminology. 
The Figure #1 below shows a trench cross-section which identifies the meaning and limits ofterminology used in this specification for the terms foundation, bedding, haunching, initial backfill, pipe embedment and pipe zoning. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.030) 
TRENCH CROSS SECTION SHOWING 
TERMINOLOGY 
FIGURE 1  
Sec. 118-304. - Responsibility for materials. 
The contractor shall be responsible for the acceptability and storage of all material furnished by him and shall assume responsibility for the replacement of all such material found damaged in shipping or on the job site or defective in manufacture. This shall include the furnishing of all material and labor required for the replacement of installed material discovered to be defective prior to the final acceptance of the work. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.040)  
Sec. 118-305. - Trench construction; generally. 
Trenches shall be excavated to the alignment and elevations as indicated on the sewer plans, any deviations must be approved by the city engineer. All trench excavation shall comply with applicable regulations, laws and ordinances. Specified in this division are standard construction requirements covering a broad range of both normal and unusual conditions that can be anticipated in sewer trench excavation and construction. Some items or work are specified as options to the contractor which does not need city engineer approval, however, some options do require the city engineer's approval. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.050)  
Sec. 118-306. - Conflicting obstructions. 
Conflicting obstructions may be encountered when excavating the construction sewers without deviations from the location established by the sewer system drawings. The contractor shall be responsible for all conflicting surface and subsurface structures, utilities and obstructions. The contractor shall be responsible to call Oklahoma One-Call System at 1-800-522-6543, 48 hours prior to any excavation. The contractor shall bear all expense arising from obstructions encountered. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.060)  
Sec. 118-307. - Removal of improved surfaces. 
Unless specified otherwise, the contractor shall remove all pavement or other improved surfaces which require removal for the excavation. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.070)  
Sec. 118-308. - Stockpiling excavated materials. 
All excavated material shall be stockpiled in a manner that will not endanger the work. Hydrants under pressure, water and gas valves, manhole covers, fire and police call boxes or other utility controls shall be left unobstructed and accessible until the work is completed. Gutters shall be kept open or other satisfactory provisions made for street drainage, and natural watercourses shall not be obstructed adjacent to streets, walks or driveways. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.080)  
Sec. 118-309. - Disposal of debris, removed pavement and waste excavation. 
No debris shall be disposed of in the trench backfill. Debris, removed pavement and excavation which is surplus or unsuitable for backfill shall be disposed of by the contractor in a manner suitable to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.090)  
Sec. 118-310. - Dewatering. 
Where conditions are such that running or standing water occurs in the trench bottom, or the soil in the trench bottom displays a quick tendency, the water shall be removed by pumps and suitable means such as well points or pervious underdrain bedding until the pipe has been installed and the backfill has been placed to a sufficient height necessary to prevent flotation of the sewer line. Care shall be taken that any underdrain is of proper gradation and thickness to prevent migration of material between the underdrain, pipe, embedment and native soils in the trench below at the sides of the sewer pipe. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.100)  
Sec. 118-311. - Trench excavation and support. 
The maximum earthload on flexible pipe results from the consolidated prism of earth directly over the pipe, which is only as wide as the pipe. The load on flexible pipe does not increase in excess of the prism load as it does with rigid pipe. If the design load on the pipe is calculated based on embankment conditions (prism load), the contractor may excavate a trench which is as wide as is dictated by practical and economical construction. Types of construction for various anticipated conditions are described as follows: 
(1)  Narrow unsupported, vertical-walled trench. The amount of pavement to be removed and replaced, amount of rock excavation or the amount of embedment material used may dictate that the most economical installation uses narrow, vertical-walled trenches. The width of narrow trenches as determined by the minimum working room for a man to place haunching material shall provide a minimum of 18 inches (450 mm) for four-inch to six-inch (100 and 150 mm) size pipes and not less than six-inch to nine-inch (150 to 230 mm) clearance on each side of the pipe for eight-inch (200 mm) and larger sizes. The resulting narrow trench minimum widths shall comply with Table 1. In narrow trenches the pipe embedment shall be compacted all the way to the trench walls. 
TABLE 1 
NARROW TRENCH WIDTH, MINIMUM 
	Trench Width, Minimum 
Nominal 
Pipe 
Sizes 
Diameter, 
Inches 	Number 
of Pipe 
Diameter 	Inches 
 6 	2.9 	18 
 8 	2.9 	24 
10 	2.5 	26 
12 	2.4 	30 
15 	2.0 	30 
18 	1.8 	32 
21 	1.6 	34 
24 	1.5 	36 
27 	1.5 	40 
30 	1.4 	42 
33 	1.4 	46 
36 	1.4 	50 
40 	1.4 	56 
48 	1.3 	62 
 
Note: Minimum trench widths are intended to provide adequate spacing between the pipe and trench wall for proper placing and compaction of haunching material and may vary somewhat depending on construction procedures being used. 
(2)  Unsupported subditch trench. A variation of the narrow vertical-walled trench is to lay the pipe in a subditch and backcut or slope the sides of the excavation above the top of the pipe, as shown in Figure 2. This type of construction may be permitted by the city engineer where no inconvenience to the public or damage to the property, building, subsurface structures or pavements will result. In such case, width of the subditch below the top of the pipe shall comply with Table 1. 
EXAMPLE OF SUBTRENCH 
FIGURE 2 
(3)  Wide trench. Wide trenches are classified as trenches whose width at the top of the pipe is greater than 2½ pipe diameters on each side of the pipe or a total of six pipe diameters. Although there is no width of trench beyond which the load on a flexible pipe exceeds the prism load, accepted installation practices usually dictate narrow trench construction. In isolated circumstances it may be more cost effective to use wide trench construction i.e., in areas where narrow trench walls cannot be maintained. If trench width at the top of a small diameter pipe (six inches—ten inches diameter) must exceed six pipe diameters, the embedment up to the pipe springline should be compacted to a point approximately 2½ pipe diameters from each side of the pipe. For large diameter PVC (SDR-35) pipe (12 inches—48 inches diameter) installed in wide trenches, the embedment up to the pipe springline should be compacted to a point at least one pipe diameter or two feet (600 mm) from each side of the pipe, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Supported trench. Where an unstable or flowing soil condition is encountered in the trench wall, such as may be found by excavation below groundwater or in weak or noncohesive soils, stabilize this condition before laying the pipe. Depending upon the severity of the condition, the city engineer or contractor may elect to use tight sheeting, skeleton sheeting, stay bracing, trench jacks or a trench shield or box to support the trench during pipe laying operations. If the condition is too severe, it may be necessary to leave any sheeting in place or to use chemical or cement grouting of the soil adjacent to the excavation to prevent migration between the material used beneath and around the pipe and trench wall material. To allow sufficient working room plus trench wall supports the minimum excavated trench width to the outside of the sheeting or shield box shall be as shown in Table 2. 
TABLE 2 
Supported Trench Widths, Minimum 
	Trench, Width, Minimum 
Nominal 
Pipe 
Sizes 
Diameter, 
Inches 	Number of Pipe 
Diameter 	Inches 
 6 	5.7 	36 
 8 	4.3 	36 
10 	4.0 	42 
12 	3.4 	42 
15 	3.1 	48 
18 	2.7 	48 
21 	2.4 	50 
24 	2.2 	52 
27 	2.1 	56 
30 	2.0 	60 
33 	1.9 	63 
36 	1.9 	68 
40 	1.8 	72 
48 	1.7 	81 
 
Table 2 widths are based upon eight to ten inches (200 to 250 mm) clearance on each side of the pipe to the inner face of trench supports. The trench supports are assumed to be six-inch (150 mm) thick trench box or shield walls or four-inch (100 mm) walls inside of two-inch (50 mm) sheeting. Exceptionally deep trenches with thicker sheeting and bracing or other systems of trench support may require the city engineer to vary these trench widths. Timber sheeting, where used below the top of the pipe, shall be driven approximately two feet (60 cm) below the bottom of the pipe and be left in place approximately 1½ feet (45 cm) above the top of the pipe. In supported trenches, compaction of foundation and embedment materials should extend to the trench wall or sheeting left in place. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.110)  
Sec. 118-312. - Trench bottom. 
The soil surface at the trench bottom shall be free of any protrusions which may cause point loading on any portion of the pipe or bell, and shall provide a firm, stable and uniform support for the pipe. 
(1)  Special trench foundation. Where an unsuitable trench bottom condition is encountered, it must be stabilized by a method approved by the city engineer and/or chief building official. 
(2)  Over-excavation. During the course of construction, should the contractor inadvertently over-excavate the trench more than six inches (150 mm) below the bottom of the pipe, but less than 12 inches (300 mm) below the bottom of the pipe, he shall fill that area of over-excavation with acceptable embedment material and compact to a density approximately equal to the native soil. 
(3)  Rock subgrade. Ledge rock, hard pan, cobbles, boulders or stones larger than 1½ inches (40 mm) shall be removed from the trench bottom to permit a minimum bedding thickness of four to six inches (100 to 150 mm) under pipe. Sharp stones and crushed rock, larger than three-fourths inch, which could cause significant scratching or abrasion of the pipe, should be excluded from the embedment material. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.120)  
Sec. 118-313. - Embedment materials. 
All SDR-35 and Schedule 40 sewer pipe shall be bedded in river sand as approved by the city engineer and/or chief building official. 
(1)  Use of compaction equipment. Take care to avoid contact between the pipe and compaction equipment. Do not use compaction equipment directly over the pipe until sufficient backfill has been placed to ensure that such equipment will not damage or disturb the sewer pipe. 
(2)  Bedding. Sand is required to bring the trench bottom up to grade. Bedding materials shall be placed to provide uniform and adequate longitudinal support under the pipe. Blocking shall not be used to bring the pipe to grade. Bell holes at each joint shall be provided to permit the joint to be assembled properly while maintaining uniform pipe support. A compacted depth of four to six inches (100 to 150 mm) is generally sufficient bedding thickness. Compaction of the sand bedding around and over PVC sewer lines shall be 80 percent to 95 percent density as required by ASTM 698 Standard. 
(3)  Haunching. The most important factor affecting sewer pipe performance and deflection is the haunching material and its density. Place and consolidate the material under the pipe haunch to provide adequate side support to the pipe while avoiding both vertical and lateral displacement of the pipe from proper alignment. 
(4)  Initial backfill. Initial sand backfill begins above the spring line of the pipe. Use little or no tamping of the initial backfill since this area will provide little or no additional side support. The only purpose of extending the initial backfill to levels over the top of the pipe shall be to protect the pipe from impact damage resulting from any large objects in the final backfill. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.130)  
Sec. 118-314. - Laying and joining pipe and fittings. 
Before setting any sewer pipe in place, each component of piping shall be inspected for damage and cleaned. Damaged components shall be rejected or repaired. Pipe bells shall be laid on the upstream end. Sewer laying shall commence at the lowest elevation, which shall remain plugged until the sewer line is accepted by the city, and shall terminate only at manholes, service branches or cleanouts. Trenches shall be dewatered, if necessary, and pipe shall be laid under water only when approved by the city engineer. Whenever sewer pipe laying is interrupted, the end of the pipe shall be temporarily plugged to prevent the entrance of water, mud or foreign matter, and the pipe shall be secured to prevent being dislodged or floating. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.140)  
Sec. 118-315. - Location and alignment. 
Pipe and fittings shall be embedded in the trench with the invert conforming to the required elevations, slopes and alignment, and with the pipe bottom uniformly and continuously supported by a firm bedding and foundation. 
Curved alignment. In special cases where curved alignment is required, the recommended allowable minimum curve radii for SDR-35 PVC sewer pipe shall be based on the following formula: 
R 	= 	300 D, where 
R 	= 	Minimum allowable radius of curvature from bending, 
D 	= 	Pipe diameter, where R and D are in the same dimensional units. 
 
This formula results in an insignificant amount 0.06 percent of ellipsing or diametric pipe deflection. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.150)  
Sec. 118-316. - Cutting and beveling pipe. 
For shorter than standard pipe lengths, field cuts may be made with either hand or mechanical saws or plastic pipe cutters. Ends shall be cut square and perpendicular to the pipe axis. Spigots shall have burrs removed and ends smoothly beveled by a mechanical beveler or by hand with a rasp or file. Field spigots shall be stop marked with a felt tip marker or wax crayon for the proper length of assembly insertion. The angle and depth of field bevels and lengths to stop marks shall be comparable to factory pipe spigots. 
(1)  Bell holes for elastomeric seal joints. The bell hold shall be no larger than necessary to accomplish proper joint assembly. When the joint has been made, the void under the bell should be filled with bedding or haunching material to provide adequate support to the pipe throughout its entire length. 
(2)  Assembly of joints. Assemble all joints in accordance with recommendations of the manufacturer. If a lubricant is required to facilitate assembly it shall have no detrimental effect on the gasket or on the pipe when subject to prolonged exposure. Proper jointing may be verified by rotation of the spigot by hand or with a strap wrench. If unusual joining resistance is encountered or if the insertion mark does not reach the flush position, disassemble the joint, inspect for damage, reclean the joint components and repeat the assembly steps. Note that fitting bells may permit less insertion depth than pipe bells. ( Note: When mechanical equipment is used to assemble joints, care should be taken to prevent over insertion.) 
(3)  Branch fittings. Fittings for service branches in new construction shall be molded or fabricated with all gasketed connections. Taps into existing lines shall use a gasketed fitting in conjunction with a repair sleeve coupling or a gasketed saddle wye or tee with all stainless steel clamps. Saddles may be mounted on pipe with solvent cement or gasket but shall be secured by metal banding. Install saddles in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. Holes for saddle connections shall be made by mechanical hole cutters or by keyhole saw or sabre saw. Holes for wye saddles shall be laid out with a template and shall be deburred and carefully beveled where required to provide a smooth hole shaped to conform to the fitting. The contractor will be permitted to use fittings which are prefabricated using pipe sections, molded saddles and PVC solvent cement, provided the solvent cement used in fabrication has cured at least 24 hours prior to installation. Cemented mitered connections without socket reinforcement shall not be permitted. Only PVC primer and solvent cement shall be used in cementing in accordance with the cement manufacturer's recommendations and ASTM D2855, "Making Solvent-Cemented Joints with PVC Pipe and Fittings." Quickly place temporary band clamps both upstream and downstream of the saddle and tighten. 
(4)  Service lines. Unless required otherwise by the drawings, service lines from the property line to the collection sewer shall be at a minimum depth of three feet (one m) at the property line and shall be laid on a straight alignment and uniform slope of not less than one-fourth inch per foot (20 mm/m) for four-inch (100 mm) pipe and one-eighth inch per foot (100 mm/m) for six-inch (150 mm) pipe. Where collection sewers are deeper than seven feet (two m) a vertical standpipe or stack shall be required. The standpipe or stack does not require concrete encasement; however, it shall be uniformly supported by compacted backfill. 
(5)  Pipe caps and plugs. All caps and plugs shall be braced, staked, anchored, wired on or otherwise secured to the pipe to prevent leakage under the maximum anticipated thrust from internal abnormal operation conditions or test pressures from water to air. 
(6)  Manholes. Details of manhole construction shall be as shown on attached drawings from walls, bottoms, tops, castings, ladders and drop structures. Unless the drawings require otherwise, the pipe may first be laid through and beyond the manhole location followed by over-building the manhole, grouting the bench and cutting out the top of the pipe in the manhole. All manhole connections should be made using proper water stops. If portland cement grout is incorporated in the manhole connection, the grout shall be of a type that expands, rather than shrinks, upon curing. Water stops shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. Hinged connections which use short pipe bell stubs outside the manhole face will not be required to prevent shear breakage in SDR-35 PVC sewer pipe because of its flexibility. Excessive manhole settlement can cause excessive deflection and should be prevented. All sewer connections shall remain plugged until the entire sewer system being installed has been accepted by the city. The entire outside of all brick manholes shall be coated with 1:2 Portland cement and sand mortar, all other manholes shall be coated with tar. 
(7)  Installing pipe through casings. Encasements for pipes under highways, streets, railroads, water lines and driveways shall have runners or cradles to support the pipe in the casing. A minimum of two supports shall be used per joint of pipe providing a maximum span of 6½ feet (1.9 m) for SDR-35 PVC pipe lengths of 12½ feet (3.8 m). The maximum span between supports for pipe lengths of 20 feet (6.1 m) shall not exceed that shown in Table 3. All encasements of SDR-35 PVC sewer pipe shall be in ductile iron pipe. 
TABLE 3 
Maximum Recommended Support Spacing For 20-Foot Lengths of SDR-35 PVC Sewer Pipe At Maximum Temperature of 73.4 Degrees Fahrenheit (23 Degrees Celsius) 
Nominal 
Pipe 
Size 
(Inches) 	Unsupported 
Span 
(Feet) 
 6 	 6.3 
 8 	 7.4 
10 	 8.5 
12 	 9.6 
15 	11.0 
18 	12.0 
21 	12.0 
24 	12.0 
27 	12.0 
30 	12.0 
36 	12.0 
40 	12.0 
48 	12.0 
 
Note: Each joint must be supported. Therefore, the maximum unsupported span will always be limited by pipe length. 
(8)  Backfill material. The material used in the final backfilling operation need not be as carefully selected as was the bedding, haunching and initial backfill. In selection of final backfill material, exclude boulders, frozen clumps of dirt and rubble which could damage the pipe. 
(9)  Backfill compaction. Unless specified otherwise, the final backfill shall use special compaction under improved surfaces and shoulders of streets, roads, aprons, curbs and walks, and natural compaction shall be used under open fields, lawns and wide shoulders or neutral grounds which are free of traffic. Natural compaction is attained by the loose placing of material, usually pushed or bladed, into the trench, rolling the surface layer with the placement equipment, mounding the surface and filling and maintaining all sunken trenches until final acceptance of the work trenches. In natural compaction, the main consolidation results from rainfall and groundwater fluctuations. 
(10)  Minimum cover for load applicant. Provide at least 30 inches (760 mm) of cover over the top of the pipe before the trench is wheel-loaded. Provide for at least 48 inches (1,200 mm) of cover before using mobile trench compactors of the hydrohammer or impactor type. Depth of cover may be reduced to 36 to 42 inches (915 to1,070 mm) under some cases. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.160)  
Sec. 118-317. - Restoration of surfaces and/or structures. 
The contractor shall restore and/or replace shrubbery, fences, sod or other disturbed surfaces or structures to a condition equal to that which existed before the work began, to the satisfaction of the chief building official. 
Clean up. Surplus pipeline materials, tools and temporary structures resulting from the work shall be removed by the contractor. All debris and excess earth from excavations shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor in compliance with applicable regulations, laws and ordinances. The construction site shall be left clean, to the satisfaction of the chief building official. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.170)  
Sec. 118-318. - Field performance and acceptance test. 
All sewer projects shall be tested upon completion of construction. The city engineer or chief building official shall designate the locations of tests and the extent of the sewer system to be tested, optional methods of testing leakage, alignment and deflection, and the extent of recording test results. All equipment for performing tests and making measurements shall be furnished by the contractor. All sections of the sewer system which fail to pass the tests shall have defects located and repaired or replaced and be retested until it is approved for acceptance. 
(1)  Cleaning. Prior to other tests, all sanitary sewer lines shall be cleaned and inspected for major defects. Precleaning by an appropriately sized sewer cleaning ball or by high velocity jet or other method may be necessary. 
(2)  Visual test. All sanitary sewer lines shall be inspected visually to verify accuracy of alignment and freedom from debris and obstructions. The full diameter of the pipe for straight alignments shall be visible when viewed between consecutive manholes. The method of test shall be visually lamping with mirrors and lights. 
(3)  Air testing. The low pressure air test is a test which can be used for acceptance or leak location. The section of sewer line to be tested is plugged. Low pressure air is introduced into the plugged line. The sewer line should be flushed and cleaned prior to testing. The air test shall, as a minimum, conform to the test procedure described in ASTM C-828-80 entitled "Low-Pressure Air Test of Vitrified Clay Pipe Lines" or latest revision. 
(4)  Leakage test. Leakage tests shall be specified for all new construction. This may include appropriate water or low pressure air testing. The leakage outward or inward (exfiltration or infiltration) shall not exceed 100 gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile per day (0.19 m three/cm of pipe dia./km/day) for any section of the system. An exfiltration or infiltration test shall be performed with a minimum positive head of two feet (0.61 m). The air test, if used, shall, as a minimum, conform to the test procedure described in ASTM C-828-80 entitled "Low-Pressure Air Test of Vitrified Clay Pipe Lines" or latest revision. The testing methods selected should take into consideration the range in groundwater elevations projected and the situation during the test. With pressure pipe sewers, the leakage allowance should not exceed 100 gallons per inch diameter per mile per day (0.19 m three/cm of pipe dia./km/day) under a test head appropriate to the local conditions. Certification of the test results must be submitted to the reviewing authority before approval of the installation will be given. Replacement of existing sewers may require the connection of house service lines as the sewer is installed. Under these circumstances, the engineer shall specify special construction and/or inspection techniques to ensure the exclusion of infiltration to meet the above standards. 
(5)  Deflection testing. Unless specified otherwise, the maximum allowable pipe deflection for SDR-35 PVC (reduction in vertical inside diameter) shall be five percent. Deflection tests shall be performed on all flexible pipe. The mandral will be pulled through all sewer pipes prior to acceptance. 
(Code 1977, § 13.28.180) 
  
  
  
   
Chapter 122 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance amending the zoning map or zoning atlas, or rezoning specific properties saved from repeal, § 1-15(a)(15); animal regulation conflicts with zoning regulations, § 14-2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 50; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70; natural resources, ch. 74; planning, ch. 90; signs, ch. 94; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 102; subdivisions, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Zoning generally, 11 O.S. § 43-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 122-1. - Purpose of chapter; interpretation of chapter. 
The regulations contained in this chapter are necessary to encourage the most appropriate uses of land, to maintain and stabilize the value of property, to reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the public health, to decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards, to prevent undue concentration of population, and to create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan for transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, parks, public utilities and other facilities. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(Code 1977, § 17.02.020) 
State Law reference— Zoning ordinance purpose, 11 O.S. § 43-103.  
Sec. 122-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
This chapter classifies and regulates the land, buildings and structures within the city limits set forth in this chapter. The regulations contained in this chapter are necessary to promote health, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants by dividing the city into zones and regulating therein the use of the land and the use and size of buildings as to height and number of stories, the coverage of the land by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, density of population and location of buildings. 
(Code 1977, § 17.02.030)  
Sec. 122-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The term "person" includes a corporation, a partnership and an incorporated association of persons, such as a club. The term "building" includes any part thereof. The term "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
Accessory building or structure means a building customarily incidental and appropriate and subordinate to the main building or use and located on the same lot with the main building. 
Accessory use means a use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings located upon the same premises. 
Agriculture means the use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the principal use. The operation of commercial feed pens, sales yards and auction yards for horses, cattle or hogs is deemed an industrial and not an agricultural use. 
Alley means a right-of-way or easement dedicated to public use which gives a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
Apartment. See Dwelling, multiple-family . 
Automobile means a self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people, including but not limited to the following: passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters and motorcycles. 
Automobile wash service means a structure designed primarily for washing automobiles using production line methods, with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaner, high pressure spray or other mechanical devices. A self-service system may also be available for the manual washing of vehicles. 
Automobile wrecking or salvage yard means an area outside of a building where motor vehicles are disassembled, dismantled, junked or wrecked, or where motor vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor vehicles are stored. 
Basement means a story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises. 
Billboard (including poster and panel types) means a non-accessory sign or sign structure upon which advertising may be posted, painted or affixed, and which is primarily designed for the rental or lease of the sign space for advertising not related to the use of the property upon which the sign is located. 
Block means a parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks, parks or green strips, rural land or drainage channels, boundaries of a municipality, or a combination thereof. 
Boardinghouse means a dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three or more but not exceeding 12 persons. 
Breezeway means a covered area that connects two buildings. 
Building means any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated is deemed to be a separate structure. 
Building coverage means the percentage of the lot area covered by the building. Overhanging roofs are not included in this area. 
Building height means the vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. 
Building, main means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling is deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
Building site means a single parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or structure. 
Carport means a permanent roofed structure permanently open on at least two sides, designated for or occupied by private passenger vehicles. 
Cellar means an underground structure separate from the foundation of the main building. 
Clinic, animal means a facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted animals. 
Clinic, dental or medical means a facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients including, but not limited to, dental and doctors' office; provided, however, that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions. Clinic, dental or medical, shall not include a detoxification facility as defined herein. 
Convalescent home, rest home, nursing home and extended care facility mean a health facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for compensation, but shall not include a detoxification facility as defined herein. 
Court means an open unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, and which is bordered on two or more sides by such building or buildings. 
Court, inner means a court other than an outer court. The length of an inner court is the minimum horizontal dimension measured parallel to its longest side. The width of an inner court is the minimum horizontal dimension measured at right angles to its length. 
Court, outer means a court the full width of which opens onto a required yard or street or alley. The width of an outer court is the minimum horizontal dimension measured in the same general direction as the yard, street or alley upon which the court opens. The depth of an outer court is the minimum horizontal dimension measured at right angles to its width. 
Day care center means a facility which provides care for 13 or more children for more than 15 hours a week and which is subject to the provisions of the Oklahoma Child Care Facilities Licensing Act (10 O.S. § 401 et seq.) 
Detoxification facility means any treatment facility, multiple-family facility, transitional living facility, halfway home and any housing or facility that is used for medical or nonmedical detoxification. 
Drinking establishment means establishments or places of business where customers are seated and served and which are primarily engaged in the sale, mixing or dispensing of beverages containing more than 0.5 percent alcohol by volume for consumption on the premises. Little or no food items are served. 
Drive-in restaurant means any establishment where food, frozen desserts and/or beverages are sold to the consumer and where motor vehicle parking space is provided and where such food, frozen desserts and/or beverages are intended to be consumed in the motor vehicle parked upon the premises or anywhere on the premises outside of the building. 
Drive-through means a facility where purchases may be made from a motor vehicle but are not intended to be consumed on the premises. 
Dry cleaning or laundry, self-service means any attended or unattended place, building or portion thereof available to the general public for the purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from or dry cleaning wearing apparel, cloth, fabrics and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical appliance which is operated primarily by the customer. 
Duplex means a structure with two dwelling units located on one lot. 
Dwelling means any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one or more families, but not including travel trailers. 
Dwelling, attached means a dwelling having any portion of each of two walls in common with adjoining dwellings. 
Dwelling, condominium means individual ownership of a unit in a multiple-unit structure but not of the lot in which the unit is located. 
Dwelling, detached means a dwelling having open space on all sides. 
Dwelling, multiple-family means a dwelling designed for occupancy by ten or more families living independently of each other, exclusive of auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels or resort type hotels. 
Dwelling, townhouse or row house means three or more dwelling units attached at the side or sides, each unit of which has a separate outdoor entrance, is located on a separate lot, and is designed to be occupied and may be owned by one family. 
Dwelling, single-family means a detached dwelling designed to be occupied by one family. 
Dwelling, two-family means a dwelling designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for a family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Eating establishment, sit-down, alcohol not permitted means establishments or places of business where customers are seated and served and that are primarily engaged in the sale of prepared foods and beverages for on-premises consumption. There is no sale, mixing or dispensing of beverages containing more than 0.5 percent alcohol by volume. 
Eating establishment, sit-down, alcohol permitted means establishments or places of business where customers are seated and served and that are engaged in the sale, mixing or dispensing of beverages containing more than 0.5 percent alcohol by volume for on-premises consumption as accessory to a restaurant operation. 
Electric regulating station means a subsidiary station in which electric current is transformed. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood or marriage, including adopted children, or a group of not to exceed five persons (excluding servants) not all related by blood or marriage, occupying premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse or lodginghouse, hotel, club or similar dwelling for group use. A family is deemed to include domestic servants employed by the family. 
Family child care home means a residential family home which provides care and protection for seven or fewer children for part of the 24-hour day and which is subject to the provisions of the Oklahoma Child Care Facilities Licensing Act (10 O.S. § 401 et seq.) 
Fence, sight-proof means an opaque screen of earth, fencing or vegetation which conceals a required part of a parcel from view of an adjoining parcel or public way. 
Garage apartment means a dwelling unit for one family erected above a private garage. 
Garage, private means an accessory building or a part of a main building used for storage purposes only for automobiles used solely by the occupants and their guests of the building to which it is accessory. 
Garage, public means any garage, other than a private or repair garage, which is used for the parking or storing of vehicles. 
Garage, repair means a building in which are provided facilities for the care, servicing, repair or equipping of automobiles. 
Gasoline service station means any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or oil fuels, but not butane or propane fuels, or other automobile accessories, and which may or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning or otherwise servicing automobiles, but not including the painting thereof. 
Height means the distance from the foundation to the highest point of the building or structure. 
Hobby dog breeding means an incidental accessory use that is not a kennel, where dogs are bred for sale. 
Home occupation means any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings, provided that no trading in merchandise is carried on, and in connection with which there is no display of merchandise or sign other than one nonilluminated nameplate not more than two square feet in area attached to the main or accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used or activity is conducted which creates any noise, dust, odor or electrical disturbance beyond the confines of the lot on which the occupation is conducted. The conducting of a beauty shop or barbershop, tearoom or restaurant, rest home, clinic, doctor's or dentist's office, day care center, real estate office, or cabinet, metal or auto repair shop shall not be deemed a home occupation. 
Homeowners' association means an incorporated nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which each lot and/or homeowner in a planned unit or other described land area is automatically a member and each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining a common property, and the charge if unpaid becomes a lien against the property. 
Hospital means an institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured, including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. 
Hotel means a building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six or more sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed to be occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation, but not including a sanatorium, detoxification facility, hospital, asylum, orphanage or building where persons are housed under restraint. 
Impoundment yard means a facility established and used for the temporary storage of disabled or impounded motor vehicles and shall not mean a facility established and used for the purpose of dismantling, salvaging or otherwise altering a motor vehicle. Requirements are as follows: 
(1)  All operators of an impoundment yard must have a state wrecker license and a city wrecker license if so established by the city. 
(2)  Areas where motor vehicles are stored must be screened from view of adjacent properties by a six-foot sight-proof fence. 
(3)  The area used for the storage of motor vehicles shall at a minimum be surfaced in accordance with the parking lot construction standards in section 122-928. 
(4)  The impoundment yard must have a minimum setback of 75 feet on section line roads and major streets. If the impoundment yard is located on a minor street, it must be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the property line. 
Incidental repair, automobile means an accessory use of repairing automobiles which is incidental to main use of the building or structure. 
Kennel means an establishment where dogs are bred, raised, boarded or trained for show or profit. 
Large family child care home means a residential family home which provides care and supervision for eight to 12 children for part of the 24-hour day and which is subject to the provisions of the Oklahoma Child Care Facilities Licensing Act (10 O.S. § 401 et seq.) 
Lodge hall means the meeting place of a branch of an organization, especially a fraternal organization. 
Long range plan and comprehensive plan mean the long range comprehensive physical development plan for the city which has been officially adopted to provide long range development policies for the area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and which includes, among other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision, circulation and community facilities. 
Lot means a subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the transfer of ownership or for development. 
Lot, corner means a lot located at the intersection of and abutting two or more streets. 
Lot depth means the average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot. 
Lot, double frontage means a lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot frontage means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot and bounded by a street on only one side. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot. 
Lot of record means a lot which is a part of an approved plat or metes and bounds subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the county registrar of deeds. 
Lot, reverse frontage means a double frontage lot which is designed to be developed with the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress and egress provided on a minor street. 
Lot width means the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at right angles to the depth, typically measured at the frontage line or front property line. 
Manufactured home and manufactured home construction mean a factory-fabricated building, transportable in two or more sections, designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site. The building is constructed with or without a permanent chassis and shall be placed on a permanent foundation. Manufactured home construction shall meet the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) specifications. The term "manufactured home" or "manufactured home construction" is intended to apply to major assemblies, and does not include prefabricated panels, trusses, plumbing trees and other prefabricated sub-elements incorporated into a site-built structure, or mobile homes transportable in one unit. 
Medical detoxification means diagnostic and treatment services performed by licensed facilities for acute alcohol intoxication, delirium tremens and physical and neurological complications resulting from acute intoxication. Medical detoxification includes the services of a physician and attendant medical personnel including nurses, interns and emergency room personnel, the administration of a medical examination and a medical history, the use of an emergency room and emergency medical equipment if warranted, a general diet of three meals each day, the administration of appropriate laboratory tests, and supervision by properly trained personnel until the person is no longer medically incapacitated by the effects of alcohol. 
Mobile home means a structure transportable in one or more sections which is eight body feet or more in width and 32 body feet or more in length, but contains no less than 320 square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a yearround residential dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. 
Mobile home, dependent means a mobile home that does not have a flush toilet and a bath or shower. For purposes of regulation under this chapter, a dependent mobile home is considered to be the same as a travel trailer, unless otherwise specified. 
Mobile home, independent means a mobile home which has a flush toilet and a bath or shower. Unless otherwise indicated in the text of this chapter, the term "mobile home" means an independent mobile home. 
Mobile home park means any plot of ground upon which one or more mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
Mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home, and not located on a mobile home sales lot. 
Mobile home subdivision means a subdivision designed and intended for residential use where residence is in mobile homes exclusively and mobile home lots are sold for occupancy. 
Motel. See Hotel . 
Nonconformance means a lawful condition of a structure or land which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. This may include but is not limited to failure to conform to use, height, area, coverage or off-street parking requirements. 
Nonmedical detoxification means detoxification services for intoxicated clients with no apparent physical or neurological symptoms requiring medical treatment as a result of their intoxication. Nonmedical detoxification includes providing a bed, oral administration of fluids, three meals a day and the taking of the client's temperature, blood pressure and pulse at least once every six hours for the duration of the client's stay in the nonmedical detoxification service. 
Nursery, plant means an area where plants (such as trees and shrubs) are grown for transplanting, for use as stock for budding and grafting, or for sale. 
Off-street parking means a type of parking wherein the maneuvering of the vehicle while parking and unparking, as well as parking itself, is done entirely off of the street right-of-way, and where access to the area is by means of driveway approach built to the standards of the city. 
Parking space means a permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile, together with a permanently surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress or egress of an automobile. 
Pet shop means a place for the selling and/or grooming of small domestic animals. 
Planned unit development means a form of development characterized by a unified site design, which may include providing common open space, density averaging and mixing of building types and land uses. 
Planning commission and commission mean the planning commission of the city as created by the city council. 
Porch, open means a covered entrance to a building that is not enclosed. 
Rest home. See Convalescent home . 
Restaurant. See Eating establishment . 
Row house. See Dwelling, townhouse or row house . 
Sadomasochistic practice means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked. 
Sanatorium means an institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical treatment or treatment and recuperation using natural therapeutic agents, but shall not include a detoxification facility as defined herein. 
Seat means a chair, stool, bench or pew intended to be sat in or on. If individual seats are not provided, such as in the use of a bench or pew, each 20 inches of bench or pew shall be considered a seat. 
Setback means the distance between the lot line and the building line. 
Sexually oriented businesses means and includes the following: 
(1)  Adult amusement or entertainment. Amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or material depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, including but not limited to topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment. 
(2)  Adult bookstore. An establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, videocassettes, compact disks, DVDs, compact disks, or other visual reproductions, which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, or instrument, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed or marketed for use in sexual conduct. 
(3)  Adult motion picture arcade. Any establishment to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled, still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Adult motion picture theater. An establishment designed to accommodate more than five persons where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, compact disks, DVDs, digital recordings or other similar photographic or visual reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
(5)  Massage parlor. Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration or fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with sexual conduct or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Model studio. Any place other than university or college art classes where, for any form of consideration or gratuity figure models who display specific anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity. 
(7)  Sexual encounter center. Any building or structure which contains, or is used for commercial entertainment where the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with or allow personal contact by employees, devices or equipment or by personnel provided by the establishment which appeals to the prurient interest of the patron, to include but not to be limited to bath houses, massage parlors, and related or similar activities. 
The definition of sexually oriented businesses is not intended to include as a permitted use, or authorize property to be used, for conduct which constitutes an offense under the laws of the City of Mustang, or applicable state or federal laws. 
Sexual conduct means and includes the following: 
(1)  The stimulation, fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, vulva, or female breasts; 
(2)  Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or anal copulation; 
(3)  Sadomasochistic practices; and 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in [subsections] (1) through (3) above. 
Sign. See Billboard . 
Site-built structure means a structure constructed at its location, which may include the assembling of prefabricated parts. 
Site plan means a plan showing the location and size of water and sewer lines and storm sewers, paving, contours at two-foot intervals, building pad elevations, spot elevations at each lot corner for all lots in the subdivision, lot and street drainage arrows, streetlight locations, water and sewer service connections, top of curb elevations, lot dimensions, fire hydrants, manhole locations, right-of-way widths and utility easements. 
Specialty fabrication shop (indoors). Property located within the industrial zoning category, and falling under the classification of specialty fabrication shop (indoors), shall be allowed to conduct the following operations as listed below, provided that no operations of any kind, such as the repair or storage of finished or unfinished products, materials, or equipment of any kind, shall be undertaken outside the walls of the facility (excluding the loading or unloading of materials, products, equipment or supplies, finished or unfinished, to be used in the fabrication process): Processing or machining of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, alloys or composites to include welding, cutting, sawing, grinding, stamping, bending and finishing materials. Painting (within an appropriate area inside) shall be permitted as long as paint, materials or odors are not released into the air outside the facility. The use of advanced coatings such as the powder coating process, involving powder that is sprayed onto a finish and baked on in a high heat oven shall be permitted. The use of chemically-based stripping processes, the anodizing, chroming or other coating of materials either finished or unfinished is prohibited unless prior approval of the city manager, the director of community development, and the fire chief is obtained. Approval shall be based on demonstrated ability to comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to such processes. All processes shall be completely contained inside the building with no public exposure. No work shall be allowed that creates loud or excessive sounds or noise that annoys others outside the facility. No noxious odors shall be released that can be detected by others at locations outside the facility grounds. No electrical interference shall be emitted that will disrupt any devices outside the facility grounds. At no time shall any toxic or otherwise damaging products be discharged into the City of Mustang sewer system. All solid, liquid or gaseous emission or discharge will comply with federal, state and local standards. In the event applicable federal, state or local laws impose more stringent requirements than imposed herein, then the more stringent requirements shall apply. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes the following: 
(1)  Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, vulva, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Story, half means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
Street means any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, intersecting means any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
Townhouse. See Dwelling, townhouse or row house . 
Trailer court. See Mobile home park . 
Trailer, hauling means a vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats. 
Trailer, travel or camping means all vehicles and portable structures built on a chassis, designed as a temporary or permanent dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use. This is meant to include tent trailers and motor-driven travel vehicles not included in the definition of independent mobile homes. For purposes of this chapter, a dependent mobile home is considered the same as a travel trailer, unless otherwise specified. 
Travel trailer park means any plot of ground upon which one or more travel trailers occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
Use means the legal enjoyment of property that consists in its employment, occupation, exercise or practice. 
Variance means a procedure by which certain requirements established in this chapter may be modified. 
Yard means an open space at grade, other than a court or plaza, between a structure and the adjacent lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward except where otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the depth of the side yard, front yard or rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and a building or structure shall be used. 
Yard, front means a yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending across a lot between the side yard lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the main building or any projection thereof, other than steps. 
Yard, rear means a yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. The rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
Yard, side means an open area which extends from the required front yard to the required rear yard and which has a minimum width measured from the side lot line as specified for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
Zoning district means any section of the city for which regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings are uniform. 
(Code 1977, §§ 17.04.010—17.04.030; Ord. No. 706, § 1, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 769, § 1, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 770, § 1, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 771, § 1, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 993, § 1, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 1037, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 122-4. - Violations; penalty. 
A violation of the regulations of this chapter is deemed a misdemeanor. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 17.50.060)  
Sec. 122-5. - Comprehensive plan adopted. 
The document entitled "Imagine Mustang Comprehensive Plan" approved in September 2017 is hereby adopted in its entirety by reference for the City of Mustang. Three copies of the plan are to remain on file in the office of the city clerk subject to public use and inspection. The "Imagine Mustang Comprehensive Plan" will govern and be used as a guide for future buildings, structures, land use and development in the city with all of the force and effect which it would have if set out in full in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.52.010; Ord. No. 890, § 1, 3-2-2004; Ord. No. 1152, § 1, 9-26-2017)  
Sec. 122-6. - Compliance with chapter. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no land shall be used and no building, structure or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt which is designed, arranged or intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the requirements established in the district in which such land, building, structure or improvement is located, and in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter relating to any or all districts. 
(Code 1977, § 17.02.040)  
Sec. 122-7. - Residential use in commercial or industrial zoned property. 
The conversion of buildings or structures from residential uses to commercial uses is prohibited within residential zoned districts. Where buildings or structures used for residential purposes are located on property that is thereafter zoned for commercial or industrial use, the residential use may continue until a commercial or industrial use is made thereon. After the commercial or residential use is made, the residential use is prohibited and shall immediately cease. For purposes of this section, a commercial or industrial use is made on the property at the earlier of such time as a building permit or business license is sought for a commercial or industrial use, or the property is used for a purpose that would not be allowed but for the commercial or industrial zoning. 
(Code 1977, § 17.06.040; Ord. No. 1186, § 1, 4-2-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1186, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 2019, changed the title of § 122-7 from conversion of residential buildings to commercial uses to residential use in commercial or industrial zoned property.  
Secs. 122-8—122-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 122-31. - Enforcement generally. 
This chapter shall be enforced by a zoning administrator appointed by the city manager. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to change or permit change in the use of land or buildings or structures or to erect, alter, move or improve any building or structure until a building permit has been obtained under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 17.50.020)  
Sec. 122-32. - Building permits. 
(a)  Whenever any structure or building is to be improved in an amount exceeding $2,500.00, or erected, moved or structurally altered, a building permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator. The administrator may require every applicant for a building permit to furnish the following information: 
(1)  A plot plan, drawn to scale, which shows the topographic characteristics of the site at a contour interval of not less than two feet and also shows the exact size, shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of all existing buildings and structures, and the exact size and location on the lot of the structure or building proposed to be repaired, altered, erected or moved, and the size, arrangement, number of parking stalls, movement of vehicles and ingress and egress drives for all off-street parking and loading facilities; 
(2)  A declaration of the existing and intended use of each existing and proposed building or structure on the lot and the number of families and housekeeping units which each existing building accommodates and which each existing and proposed building is designed to accommodate; 
(3)  Additional information relating to the proposed improvement needed to determine compliance with this chapter; and 
(4)  A survey prepared by a land surveyor or an engineer registered in the state of the boundaries of the lot on which the improvement is proposed to be located. 
(b)  The cost of a building permit shall be as set forth in section 42-18. 
(Code 1977, §§ 17.50.021, 17.50.022)  
Secs. 122-33—122-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Amendments, 11 O.S. § 43-104 et seq. 
 
Sec. 122-51. - Generally. 
The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion, on petition as set forth in section 122-52, or on recommendation of the planning commission, amend the regulations and districts herein established. No change in regulations, restrictions or district boundaries shall become effective until after a public hearing is held in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. A notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published in an official paper or paper of general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
(Code 1977, § 17.50.030)  
Sec. 122-52. - Petition for amendment. 
(a)  For each petition for amendment to this chapter or the comprehensive plan, any person shall provide in writing the following information: 
(1)  A legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location in the city. 
(2)  The present zoning classification of the property and the classification sought by the applicant. 
(3)  The zoning application for any land or premises must be signed by the owner of the property or his duly designated agent, and unless signed shall not be considered. 
No application for rezoning of any land or premises will be approved unless the owner of the property for which rezoning is being proposed agrees to dedicate a street right-of-way to the city. 
(b)  The applicant shall deposit with the city clerk the application and notice fees as set forth in section 42-122. 
(Code 1977, § 17.50.031; Ord. No. 1185, § 4, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 122-53. - Certified list of property owners required. 
A list of the property owners within 300 feet of a rezoning applicant's property shall be prepared and certified by an abstract company. For applications requesting rezoning to a C6 commercial special use district, a list of the property owners within 1,320 feet of a rezoning applicant's property shall be prepared and certified by an abstract company. This certified ownership list shall contain the legal description and the mailing address of the property owners and shall be submitted at the time of application for rezoning. The property owners affected shall be located on an accompanying map. 
(Code 1977, § 17.50.032; Ord. No. 1037, § 2, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-54. - Notice and hearing by the planning commission. 
(a)  Following receipt of a complete application for a zoning map amendment or initiation of a zoning map amendment by the planning commission or city council, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing and make a report and recommendation to the city council. The planning commission shall recommend that the proposed amendment be approved, approved with modifications, or denied. 
(b)  Notice of a public hearing before the planning commission of any petition for amendment shall be given by the secretary of the planning commission by mailing written notice at least 20 days in advance of the meeting headed "notice of redistricting" to all owners of property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the property. The notice shall contain the information required in section 122-52 and shall set forth the date, time and place of the public hearing of all interested parties before the planning commission. 
(c)  Notice of a public hearing before the planning commission of any petition for amendment for a use allowed only in a C6 commercial special use district shall be given by the secretary of the planning commission by mailing written notice at least 30 days in advance of the meeting headed "notice of redistricting" to all owners of property within a 1,320-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the property. The notice shall contain the information required in section 122-52 and shall set forth the date, time and place of the public hearing of all interested parties before the planning commission. 
(d)  In addition to the notice under subparts (b) or (c), the secretary of the planning commission shall cause such notice to be published at least 15 days prior to the time fixed for the hearing in the official paper or publication in general circulation in the city. 
(e)  A petition for amendment initiated by the city council or the planning commission shall be transmitted to the city council with the report and recommendations of the planning commission within 30 days of the date of planning commission action for hearing before and city council action thereon. 
(f)  A petition for amendment recommended by the planning commission for approval, or approval subject to modifications, shall be transmitted to the city council with the report and recommendations of the planning commission within 30 days of the planning commission action for hearing before and city council action thereon. 
(g)  A petition for amendment recommended for denial by the planning commission shall not be considered further, unless the applicant, within 15 days of the action by the planning commission, shall file with the city clerk and the recording secretary of the planning commission a written request for a public hearing before the city council. If no such request is filed, then $50.00 of the original filing fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Upon notice of a request for a public hearing before the city council, the planning commission shall transmit to the city council the application, its report and recommendations, and a copy of its minutes of the hearing. The recording secretary of the planning commission shall notify all interested parties of the time and place of the city council meeting pursuant to subparts (b), (c) and (d) herein. 
(Code 1977, § 17.50.033; Ord. No. 1037, § 3, 2-2-2010; Ord. No. 1174, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 43-106.  
Sec. 122-55. - Hearing procedure before the council. 
(a)  At the time set for hearing, the council shall proceed to conduct a hearing wherein all interested parties shall have the opportunity to be heard. Protests against proposed changes shall be filed at least three days before the date of public hearing before the city council. If protests are filed by: 
(1)  The owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots included in the proposed change, or 
(2)  The owners of 50 percent or more of the area of the lots within a 300- foot radius of the exterior boundary of the territory included in the proposed change, separated therefrom only by an alley or street, excluding property outside the city limits and public property, then the proposed change or amendment shall not become effective except by three-fifths favorable vote of all members of the municipal governing body. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city council to vote upon applications for amendments to zoning regulations within 90 days of the filing of same by applicants with the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 17.50.040(B); Ord. No. 796, § 1, 2-19-2002)  
Sec. 122-56. - Refiling of petitions. 
Petitions to amend this chapter heard and decided by the city council will not again be set down for hearing within six months of the date of the decision by the city council. Petitions may not be refiled with the planning commission within six months after the date of such decision by the city council. Petitions for zoning of the same property in a different zoning classification may, however, be refiled. 
(Code 1977, § 17.50.041)  
Sec. 122-57. - Application for conditional use permit. 
Where the letter "R" appears for certain uses in sections 122-212, 122-241, 122-472, and 122-641 of the district regulations, their use may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit. The uses designated under the various districts herein as "conditional uses" are nonconforming and temporary uses and so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses permitted in the district. Such conditional uses are subject to yearly review and renewal or termination, and are subject to termination during the year if the use is no longer compatible with the area or the applicant is violating the conditions imposed on such use. The following procedure is established to integrate properly the conditional uses with the other land uses located in the district. These conditional uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedure: 
(1)  An owner or his duly authorized agent or representative may make application for a conditional use permit by filing with the planning and zoning department a written application, in such form and content as the planning commission may establish. The application shall be accompanied by the payment of an application fee of $200.00, and a notice fee as set forth in section 42-122. Said application fee shall consist of two parts, $150.00 for the hearing before the planning commission and $50.00 for the hearing before the city council. For conditional use permits for uses in the C6 commercial special use district, the application shall be accompanied by the payment of an application fee of $500.00, and a notice fee as set forth in section 42-122. Said application fee shall consist of two parts, $450.00 for the hearing before the planning commission and $50.00 for the hearing before the city council. For conditional use permits for a sexually-oriented business, the application shall be accompanied by the payment of an application fee of $5,000.00, and a notice fee as set forth in section 42-122. Said application fee shall consist of two parts, $4,500.00 for the hearing before the planning commission and $500.00 for the hearing before the city council. 
(2)  The application shall show the location and intended use of the site, and any other material pertinent to the request which the planning commission may require. 
(3)  The planning commission shall set a date for a public hearing not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days from the date of the filing said application to consider the effect of such proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic, conditions, public utilities, other matters pertaining to the general welfare, matters identified as applicable to particular uses elsewhere in this Code, and the reports and recommendations of staff. 
(4)  The planning commission shall conduct one or more public hearings on an application for a conditional use permit. Notice of a public hearing before the planning commission shall be given by the secretary of the planning commission by mailing written notice at least 20 days in advance of the meeting to all owners of property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the property. Fifteen days' notice of the public hearing shall be given by the planning commission by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Mustang. For conditional use permits for uses in the C6 commercial special use district, notice of the public hearing before the planning commission shall be given at least 30 days in advance of the meeting to all owners of property within a 1,320-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the property. 
(5)  An application recommended by the planning commission for approval, or approval subject to modification or conditions, shall be transmitted to the city council with the report and recommendations of the planning commission within 30 days of the commission hearing for city council action therein. 
(6)  An application recommended for denial by the planning commission shall not be considered further, unless the applicant, within 15 days of the action by the planning commission, shall file with the city clerk a written request for hearing before the city council. If no such request is filed, then $50.00 of the original fee (or $500.00 for applications for a conditional use permit for a sexually oriented business) shall be refunded to the applicant. Upon filing of such request for hearing before the city council, the planning commission shall transmit to the city council its report and recommendation and a copy of its minutes on the hearing. The city clerk shall notify all interested parties of record of the time and place of the city council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1037, § 4, 2-2-2010; Ord. No. 1185, § 5, 4-2-2019)  
Secs. 122-58—122-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 13 of Ord. No. 1037, adopted Feb. 2, 2010, repealed § 122-58 which pertained to moratorium on rezoning requests for sexually oriented businesses and derived from Ord. No. 1035, § 1, adopted Jan. 19, 2010.  
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL USE PERMIT 
 
Sec. 122-71. - Purpose. 
In order to process those uses which have not been identified within this Code or any zoning district as permitted uses or uses permitted on review, such other uses shall be considered for a special use permit. Therefore, this division allows the planning commission to review and recommend to the city council, and for the city council to authorize, by a majority of five affirmative votes, such uses to locate within a designated zoning district under the controls, limitations and regulations of a special use permit. 
(Code 1977, § 17.39.010)  
Sec. 122-72. - Authority of council; basis for decisions; authority to impose additional conditions. 
The decision to approve or disapprove the special use permit shall be within the legislative power of the city council and shall be based upon consideration of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens and compatibility with the surrounding area, the size of land required, the specialized nature of the land use, and the impact on surrounding properties. It shall be the duty of the planning commission and city council under the provisions of this division to evaluate the impact of uses for which an application for a special use permit is submitted, and to stipulate any necessary conditions and restrictions, in addition to those specifically contained in this division, to ensure that the use remains compatible with the surrounding area. The city council may impose any additional terms or conditions necessary to protect the general character of the area and preserve the intent and purpose of this chapter and the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1977, § 17.39.020)  
Sec. 122-73. - Application for approval; issuance or denial. 
(a)  Application. An application for a special use permit shall be filed with the community development department. At the time of filing, the applicant shall pay the application and notice fees as provided in section 42-122 to cover the cost of public notice and investigation. The applicant shall submit a list of all record property owners and their current addresses within a 300-foot radius of the boundaries of the total site used for the special use permit described or the boundaries of the property ownership. For applications requesting a use that could include or accommodate a detoxification facility, a list of the property owners within 1,320 feet of the boundaries of the total site shall be prepared and certified by an abstract company. 
(b)  Site development plan required. A complete site development plan shall be filed with each application. 
(c)  Recommendation by planning commission; action by council. 
(1)  The planning commission shall hold one or more public hearings on the application and prepare for the city council a report as to the effect of such proposed building conditions, public utilities, and other matters pertaining to the general welfare, and the recommendations of the planning commission concerning the use thereon. 
(2)  A special use permit recommended by the planning commission for approval, or approval subject to modifications, shall be transmitted to the city council with the report and recommendations of the planning commission within 30 days of the planning commission action for hearing before and city council action thereon. Thereupon, the city council will hold one or more public hearings, at which time it may authorize or deny the issuance of a special use permit for the use of the land. 
(3)  A special use permit recommended for denial by the planning commission shall not be considered further unless the applicant, within 15 days of the action by the planning commission, shall file with the city clerk and the recording secretary of the planning commission a written request for a public hearing before the city council. If no such request is filed, then $50.00 of the original permit fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Upon notice of a request for a public hearing before the city council, the planning commission shall transmit to the city council the application, its report and recommendations, and a copy of its minutes of the hearing. The recording secretary of the planning commission shall notify all interested parties of the time and place of the city council hearing pursuant to subpart (d) herein. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. The planning commission shall set a date for a public hearing not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days from the date of the filing. Notice of such public hearing before the planning commission shall be given by the secretary of the planning commission by mailing written notice at least 20 days in advance of the meeting to all owners of property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the property. For applications requesting a use that could include or accommodate a detoxification facility, notice of the public hearing before the planning commission shall be given at least 30 days in advance of the meeting to all owners of property within 1,320 feet of the boundaries of the total site. 
(Code 1977, § 17.39.030; Ord. No. 1037, § 5, 2-2-2010; Ord. No. 1174, § 6, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 1185, § 6, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 122-74. - Conformance with site plan; expiration. 
(a)  No use approved under special use permit shall be commenced or maintained upon a lot or parcel except in accordance with the approved site plan. 
(b)  All special use permits shall expire by default: 
(1)  If the use is not established within 12 months and no extension is approved when a building permit has not been issued for construction. Within 12 months of city council approval the applicant or owner may request a hearing for an extension of the initial special use permit approval. Good cause for an extension shall mean that the owner shows evidence that he has contractors or applications for continual development within the next year following the original approval. 
(2)  If the use, once established, has been discontinued for a period of 12 months or abandoned. 
(c)  Whenever the building inspector finds that any proposed construction or occupancy will not, in his opinion, substantially comply with the special use permit, he shall refer the question to the city council for its review. 
(d)  When the holder of a special use permit determines that an extension of time or modification of the site development plan or other requirement is necessary, he may apply for amendment in the same manner as the original application, including the payment of required fees. The amendment shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. 
(Code 1977, § 17.39.040; Ord. No. 1037, § 5, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-75. - Extension or relocation of use; transfer of ownership of property; periodic review; extensions. 
Once a special use permit has been granted for a particular use at a specified location, the use shall not be enlarged, extended, increased in intensity or relocated without an application for a new special use permit. In the event of a transfer of ownership of the property which is the subject of the special use permit, such permit shall terminate and it will be necessary for the new owner to apply for a new special use permit. After a special permit has been granted by the city council, the use and special use permit shall be reviewed every two years, and may be extended for an additional two years by the city council if all conditions imposed continue to be met. If the special use permit is not granted an extension, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing, and the special use permit shall be terminated within 90 days after official notification by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.39.050)  
Secs. 122-76—122-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES OF LAND[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Nonconforming uses, 11 O.S. § 44-107.1. 
 
Sec. 122-91. - Generally. 
Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted, there are uses, structures and lots which were lawful before October 18, 1983, or before this chapter was amended, but which became prohibited under the terms of this chapter or amendments to this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.010)  
Sec. 122-92. - Nonconforming uses of land without building or structure. 
The lawful use of land existing on October 18, 1984, even though such use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, may continue subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  If the nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for a period of three months, or changed, any future use of such land, or change in use, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the district in which the land is located. 
(2)  A nonconforming use shall not be expanded or moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel on which it is located. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.020)  
Sec. 122-93. - Continuation of nonconforming use of conforming building. 
This section applies to nonconforming uses of conforming buildings. If a lawful use involving conforming individual buildings or structures, existing on October 18, 1984 or on the effective date of an amendment to this chapter, becomes nonconforming under the terms of this chapter, the use may continue, subject to the provisions of sections 122-94 through 122-98. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.030)  
Sec. 122-94. - Change of use of nonconforming building. 
The use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a use of the same or a more restricted district classification, but where the use of a nonconforming building or structure is changed to a use of a more restrictive district classification, it shall not thereafter be changed to a use of a less restricted district classification. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.031)  
Sec. 122-95. - Effect of discontinuance of nonconforming use. 
If a nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued for a period of one year, the use of the building or premises shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the district. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.032)  
Sec. 122-96. - Expansion or reconstruction of nonconforming use. 
No nonconforming use, except when required by law, shall be enlarged, extended or reconstructed, unless such change is to a use permitted in the district. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.033)  
Sec. 122-97. - Restoration of damaged nonconforming use. 
When a nonconforming use of a building is damaged by fire, explosion, natural cause or public enemy by more than 50 percent of its true value, the building shall be restored only if it conforms with the district regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.034)  
Sec. 122-98. - Remodeling of building housing nonconforming use. 
Improvements or remodeling which do not increase the size or intensity of a nonconforming use shall be permitted. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.035)  
Sec. 122-99. - Continuation of nonconforming building or structure with conforming use. 
This section applies to nonconforming buildings and structures with conforming uses. Although a structure or building does not conform to the district regulations of this chapter for minimum lot size, lot width, yard requirements, height, lot coverage, parking, other characteristics of the structure, or its location on the lot, the lawful existence of a structure or building at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may continue, subject to the provisions of sections 122-100 through 122-103. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.040)  
Sec. 122-100. - Alteration or enlargement of nonconforming building or structure. 
A nonconforming building or structure shall not be enlarged in any manner unless the building or structure, including additions and enlargements, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located; however, if a building or structure is conforming as to use, but nonconforming as to yards or height or off-street parking space, the building or structure may be enlarged or added to provided that the enlargement or addition complies with the yard or height requirements and the existing building and the addition comply with the off-street parking requirements of the district in which the building or structure is located. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.041)  
Sec. 122-101. - Restoration of damaged nonconforming building. 
When a nonconforming building is damaged by fire, explosion, natural causes or a public enemy by more than 50 percent of its true value, it shall be restored only if it is done in a manner that conforms with the district regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.042)  
Sec. 122-102. - Relocation of nonconforming building. 
No nonconforming building shall be moved for any reason for any distance whatever unless it conforms to all provisions of the zoning district in its new location. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.043)  
Sec. 122-103. - Remodeling of nonconforming building. 
Improvements or remodeling of a nonconforming building which do not increase the size or intensity of use shall be permitted. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.044)  
Sec. 122-104. - Existing violations not authorized. 
Nothing in this division shall be interpreted as authorizing approval of a building or premises in violation of zoning regulations in effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1977, § 17.46.050)  
Secs. 122-105—122-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authority, § 2-221 et seq. 
State Law reference— Board of adjustment, 11 O.S. § 44-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 122-121. - Established. 
There is created within and for the city a board of adjustment with the powers and duties as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1977, § 17.48.010) 
State Law reference— Board of adjustment required, 11 O.S. § 44-101.  
Sec. 122-122. - Membership. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five members, each to be appointed for a term of three years and removable for the good of the service by the governing body upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. Members appointed shall be citizens of the city, each appointed by the governing body. 
(b)  Only one member shall be appointed from the membership of the planning commission by the governing body. In this case expiration of membership on the planning commission shall also constitute expiration of membership on the board of adjustment. 
(Code 1977, § 17.48.020; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 8-17-2004; Ord. No. 919, § 1, 8-17-2004) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 44-101.  
Sec. 122-123. - Meetings; rules. 
The board of adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this division. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairperson, or in his absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The board of adjustment shall be subject to the open meeting laws of the state and all meetings, deliberation and voting of the board shall be open to the public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of all official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board of adjustment and shall be public record. 
(Code 1977, § 17.48.030) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 44-102.  
Sec. 122-124. - Powers generally. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall have the power to: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals if it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Hear and decide special exceptions to this chapter to allow a use, or a specifically designated element associated with a use, which is not permitted by right in a particular district because of potential adverse effect, but which, if controlled in the particular instance as to its relationship to the neighborhood and to the general welfare, may be permitted by the board of adjustment, where specifically authorized by this chapter, and in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of this chapter. 
(3)  Authorize in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done; provided, however, that the board shall have no power to authorize variances as to use except as provided by subsection (a)(4) of this section. 
(4)  Hear and decide oil and/or gas applications or appeals unless prohibited throughout the city by ordinance. The board of adjustment shall be required to make the findings prescribed by 11 O.S. § 44-107 in order to grant a variance as to use with respect to any such application or appeal. 
(b)  Exceptions and/or variances may be allowed by the board of adjustment only after notice and hearing as provided in section 122-129. The record of the meeting at which the variance or special exception was granted shall show that each element of a variance or special exception was established at the public hearing on the question; otherwise the variance or special exception shall be voidable on appeal to the district court. 
(Code 1977, § 17.48.040) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 44-104.  
Sec. 122-125. - Actions by board. 
(a)  When exercising the powers provided for in section 122-124, the board of adjustment, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination from which appealed and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made. 
(b)  The concurring vote of at least three members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination being appealed from, to decide in favor of the applicant, or to decide any matter which may properly come before it pursuant to this chapter and 11 O.S. § 44-104. 
(Code 1977, § 17.48.050) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 44-105.  
Sec. 122-126. - Authority to make special exceptions. 
The city council may authorize the board of adjustment to make special exceptions to the terms of this chapter in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with its general purpose and intent and only in accordance with general or specific provisions contained in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.48.060) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 44-106.  
Sec. 122-127. - Permitted exceptions. 
Upon appeal, the board is empowered to permit the following exceptions: 
(1)  To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record. 
(2)  To interpret the provisions of this chapter where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map fixing the several districts, which map is attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and made a part of this chapter. 
(3)  To grant exceptions to the off-street parking requirements set forth in article X of this chapter when it is determined that the size and shape of the lot to be built on is such that off-street parking provisions could not be complied with and that the proposed use will not create undue traffic congestion in the adjacent streets. 
(4)  To grant exceptions to the side yard requirements for accessory detached private automobile garages on a lot where a conforming dwelling existed on October 18, 1984; provided, however, that no detached garage shall be permitted to be closer than 60 feet to the front property line or to be located closer than ten feet to a dwelling located on an adjacent lot. 
(5)  To authorize by special permit the temporary location of one mobile home in an A-1 or R-E district for a period of time not to exceed one year under the following conditions: 
a.  The mobile home shall be connected with a suitable water supply and sewer system and shall be in conformance with the health and sanitation laws of the city, county and state. 
b.  The land on which the mobile home is located shall be owned by the occupant thereof, or the owner shall be related in the first degree to an occupant thereof. 
c.  Only one mobile home unit shall be permitted to locate on a lot. The mobile home unit shall be temporary only, for a period of time which shall not exceed one year from the date of issuance of the permit. 
d.  It is intended that a single mobile home unit be permitted to locate temporarily in an area that is relatively undeveloped. The location of mobile homes, even on a temporary basis, in established residential areas is not considered desirable. Therefore, no mobile home shall be permitted within 200 feet, including streets and alleys, of an existing dwelling. 
(Code 1977, § 17.48.061; Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-128. - Variances. 
(a)  Applications for variances shall be filed with the planning director, who shall distribute it to other appropriate city departments for review. The application shall be accompanied by the payment of the application fee and notice fee as set forth in section 42-122. 
(b)  A variance from the terms of this chapter may be granted, as provided in this division, only upon a finding by the board of adjustment that: 
(1)  The application of this chapter to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(2)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
(3)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter or the comprehensive plan; and 
(4)  The variance, if granted, would be the minimum necessary to alleviate the unnecessary hardship. 
(c)  The applicant for a variance has the burden of showing that granting of a variance will not be contrary to the public interest, that literal enforcement of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, that by granting the variance the spirit of this chapter will be observed, and that by granting the variance substantial justice will be done. 
(Code 1977, §§ 17.48.070, 17.48.071; Ord. No. 1185, § 7, 4-2-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 44-107.  
Sec. 122-129. - Notices and hearings. 
(a)  Notice of a public hearing before the board of adjustment shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by mailing written notice by the clerk of the board of adjustment to all owners of property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. A copy of the published notice may be mailed in lieu of written notice; however, the notice by publication and written notice shall be published and mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(b)  The notice, whether by publication or mail, of a public hearing before the board of adjustment shall contain: 
(1)  A legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location in the city; 
(2)  The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the appeal, variance or exception requested; and 
(3)  The date, time and place of the hearing. 
(c)  On hearings involving minor variances or exceptions, notice shall be given by the clerk of the board of adjustment by mailing written notice to all owners of property adjacent to the subject property. The notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing and shall contain the facts listed in subsection (b) of this section. The board of adjustment shall set forth in a statement of policy what constitutes minor variances or exceptions, subject to approval or amendment by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 17.48.080) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 44-108.  
Sec. 122-130. - Procedure for appeals. 
Appeals from any action or decision of an administrative officer acting pursuant to any zoning ordinance to the board of adjustment shall be made in the following manner: 
(1)  Appeals from the action of any administrative officer to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the administrative officer. 
(2)  An appeal shall be taken within 30 days from the date of the decision by filing with the city clerk and filing with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor, and by paying the filing and notice fees as set forth in section 42-122 at the office of the city clerk at the time the notice is filed. The applicant shall provide at the time of application a certified list of property owners within 300 feet of the property in question, prepared by a bonded abstract company. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment certified copies of all the papers constituting the record of the matter, together with a copy of the ruling or order from which the appeal is taken. 
(3)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken on due cause shown. 
(4)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Code 1977, § 17.48.090; Ord. No. 1185, § 8, 4-2-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 44-109.  
Sec. 122-131. - Appeals from decisions of board. 
(a)  An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the board of adjustment may be taken by any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city to the district court for the county. 
(b)  The appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk and with the clerk of the board of adjustment, within 15 days, a notice of appeal. The notice shall specify the grounds for the appeal. No bond or deposit for costs shall be required for such appeal. 
(c)  Upon filing the notice of appeal, the board of adjustment shall forthwith transmit to the court clerk the original, or certified copies, of all papers constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision or ruling of the board. 
(d)  The appeal shall be heard and tried de provo (without a jury) in the district court. All issues in any proceedings under this section shall have preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. 
(e)  An appeal to the district court from the board of adjustment stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the chairperson of the board certifies to the court clerk, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the district court upon application on notice to the administrative officer in charge of the enforcement of the terms and provisions of this chapter and upon notice to the chairperson of the board, and upon due cause being shown. 
(f)  The district court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision brought up for review. Costs shall not be allowed against the board of adjustment unless it shall appear to the district court that the board acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. An appeal shall lie from the action of the district court as in all other civil actions. 
(Code 1977, § 17.48.100) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 44-110.  
Secs. 122-132—122-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; ZONING MAP 
 
Sec. 122-161. - Districts established. 
(a)  The city is divided into zones as shown on the zoning map and filed with the city clerk. The map, as amended, and all explanatory material thereon is made a part of this chapter. 
(b)  Zoning districts shall be designated as follows: 
Agricultural: 	
	A-1 	General Agricultural and Oil and Gas District 
Residential: 	
	R-E 	Rural Estates District 
	R-1 	Single-Family District 
	R-2 	Two-Family District 
	R-3 	Low Density Multiple-Family District 
	R-4 	Multiple-Family District 
	R-MH-1 	Manufactured Housing District 
	R-MH-2 	Mobile Home Park District 
Commercial: 	
	C1 (OPB) 	Office-Professional Business District 
	C2 (CN) 	Commercial Neighborhood District 
	C3 (CG) 	Commercial General District 
	C5 (CI) 	Commercial Intensive District 
	C4 (SC) 	Planned Shopping Center District 
	C6 	Commercial Special Use District 
Industrial: 	
	I-1 	Light Industrial District 
	I-2 	Moderate Industrial District 
	I-3 	Heavy Industrial District 
 
(Code 1977, § 17.06.010; Ord. No. 1037, § 6, 2-2-2010) 
State Law reference— Districts authorized, 11 O.S. § 43-102.  
Sec. 122-162. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such scaled distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. 
(4)  Where the boundary of a district line follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located on the easement line to which it is closest, which shall completely include or exclude the railroad easement unless otherwise designated. 
(5)  As of January 1, 1986, all areas which were previously zoned C1 shall become CN; C2 zoned areas shall become OPB; C3, C4, C5 and CR zoned areas shall become CI. Any nonconformities which may result may continue to exist as per the regulations of section 122-91. 
(Code 1977, § 17.06.020)  
Sec. 122-163. - Classification of property resulting from vacation of public easement. 
Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated, the district classifications of the property to which the vacated portions of land accrue shall become the classification of the vacated land. 
(Code 1977, § 17.06.030)  
Sec. 122-164. - Classification of property annexed to city. 
All new additions and annexations of land to the city shall be in an A-1 agricultural zone, unless otherwise classified by the city council, for a period of time not to exceed one year from the effective date of the ordinance annexing the addition. Within this one-year period of time, the city council shall instruct the planning commission to study and make recommendations concerning the use of land within the annexation to promote the general welfare and in accordance with the comprehensive plan, and upon receipt of such recommendations the city council shall, after public hearings as required by law, establish the district classification of the annexation; provided, however, that this shall not be construed as preventing the city council from holding public hearings prior to annexation and establishing the district classification at the time of the annexation. 
(Code 1977, § 17.50.050)  
Secs. 122-165—122-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 122-191—122-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - A-1 GENERAL AGRICULTURAL AND OIL AND GAS DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-211. - Purpose. 
There is created an A-1 general agricultural and oil and gas district in the city, which is intended to provide an area primarily for either agricultural endeavors or the extraction of various products such as oil, minerals, rock and gravel from the earth. Drilling for and extraction of oil and natural gas is permitted under the regulations of the district provided that a permit for the drilling and operation of the oil or gas well has been first obtained as provided by the terms of chapter 74, article II. 
(Code 1977, § 17.08.010)  
Sec. 122-212. - Table of permitted uses. 
Property and buildings in an A-1 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the A-1 category listed in this section. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
Permitted Use 	Zoning 
District 
A-1 
Accessory dwelling for caretaker 	R 
Accessory identification sign 	P 
Airport or landing field 	P 
Agricultural land uses, buildings and activities 	P 
Animal hospital (with or without outside runs) 	P 
Apiary (beekeeping) 	P 
Boarding or training large animals 	P 
Cemetery 	P 
Church, synagogue or temple 	P 
Drilling, operating, equipping and maintaining of wells for oil and gas as per chapter 74, article II 	R* 
Drive-in theater 	R 
Electric regulating station 	P 
Family child care home 	P 
Fishery 	P 
Golf course 	P 
Hobby dog breeding 	P 
Kennel 	P 
Large family child care home 	R 
Library 	P 
Marijuana commercial grower 	R 
Mining, quarrying and earth extraction 	R 
Museum or art gallery 	P 
Nursery (trees and shrubs), no sales 	P 
Park or playground 	P 
Public buildings and facilities 	P 
Retail sale of farm products sold on premises 	P 
Riding arena or stable 	P 
School, elementary or secondary 	P 
Single-family detached dwelling 	P 
Skeet and/or trap shooting range 	R 
Transmitting station or tower 	R 
Veterinarian facilities 	P 
 
*Reviewed by the planning commission and city council only as per chapter 74, article II. 
(Code 1977, §§ 17.07.020, 17.08.020; Ord. No. 683, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 774, § 1, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 775, § 1, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 1023, § 4, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1173, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 122-213. - Intensity of uses. 
Intensity of uses in the A-1 agricultural and oil and gas district are those permitted uses and uses permitted on review that are in accordance with provisions contained in sections 122-126 and 122-127. 
(Code 1977, § 17.07.010)  
Sec. 122-214. - Area requirements. 
(a)  Minimum lot area. In the A-1 district, there shall be a lot area of not less than five acres for each dwelling and buildings accessory thereto, except as provided in article IX of this chapter. 
(b)  Nonconforming lots. Where a lot has less area than required in this division and all the boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on October 18, 1984, that lot may be used for any of the uses permitted by this division. 
(c)  Raising of animals and poultry. The raising of animals or poultry shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the city and in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  There shall be provided a fenced area of not less than 20,000 square feet, exclusive of the area covered by main buildings and required front and side yards, for each large animal, including horses, cattle and sheep, and all structures and buildings for the care and protection of animals shall be located not closer than 20 feet to a side or rear lot line. 
(2)  Animals and poultry may not be kept on any lot of less than two acres which does not contain an occupied dwelling. 
(3)  The raising of hogs shall be prohibited on all tracts of less than 40 acres. The number of hogs over two months of age shall not exceed 20 grain-fed or five garbage-fed hogs. Hogs shall not be located closer than 100 feet to the property line of the tract in which they are located. 
(Code 1977, § 17.08.030)  
Sec. 122-215. - Lot width. 
There shall be minimum lot width of 100 feet in the A-1 district. 
(Code 1977, § 17.08.040)  
Sec. 122-216. - Yards. 
All buildings in the A-1 district shall be set back from street right-of-way lines to comply with the following yard requirements, except as provided in article IX of this chapter: 
(1)  Front yard. 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 50 feet. 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 30 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than 65 feet. 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets. 
(2)  Side and rear yards. There shall be a side yard setback of 25 feet and a rear yard setback of 50 feet required for either main or accessory buildings. 
(Code 1977, § 17.08.050)  
Sec. 122-217. - Building coverage. 
Main and accessory buildings in the A-1 district shall not cover more than 25 percent of the lot area on interior lots and 30 percent of the lot area on corner lots. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 20 percent of the rear yard. 
(Code 1977, § 17.08.060)  
Sec. 122-218. - Building height. 
No building in the A-1 district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.08.070)  
Sec. 122-219. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the A-1 district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.08.080)  
Secs. 122-220—122-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 122-241. - Table of permitted uses. 
Property and buildings in the defined residential districts shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the zoning districts listed in the following table. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
	Zoning District 
Permitted Use 	R-E 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-MH-1 	R-MH-2 
Agricultural land uses, buildings and activities 	P 						
Apiary (beekeeping) 	P 						
Boardinghouse or roominghouse 					P 		
Cemetery 	P 						
Church, synagogue or temple 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
College or university 		R 	R 	P 	P 		
Convalescent, rest or nursing home 				R 	P 		
Day care center 				R 	R 	R 	R 
Electric regulating station 	P 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Family child care home 	P 	P 	P 				
Golf course 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Group homes. See section 122-852. 	R 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Hobby dog breeding 	P 						
Home beauty shop (one operator) 	R 	R 					
Housing for the aged or children 				R 	P 		
Large family child care home 	P 	P 	P 				
Library 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Manufactured housing 						P 	P 
Mobile home 							P 
Multiple-family dwelling 				P 	P 		P 
Museum 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Park or playground 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public buildings and facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
School, elementary and secondary 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Single-family detached dwelling 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Townhouse 				P 	P 		
Travel trailer 							P 
Two-family dwelling 			P 	P 	P 		
 
(Code 1977, § 17.09.020; Ord. No. 683, § 1, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 776, § 1, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 777, § 1, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 1023, § 5, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-242. - Use of travel trailers as temporary housing following a disaster. 
(a)  The owner of a residence may obtain a permit to occupy a travel trailer for a temporary period when an unforeseen hazard involving a vehicular accident, fire, or natural disaster has made a single-family residence unsafe for occupancy. 
(b)  An application for a permit for temporary occupancy shall be made by the owner within six months from the date of the unforeseen hazard on a form approved by the city manager, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the affected property, the street address of the affected property, the number of acres included in the affected property, and the current zoning of the affected property. 
(2)  Three copies of a complete site plan illustrating the proposed location of the travel trailer, and showing the location thereof in relation to property boundaries and applicable set back lines. 
(3)  Photographs of the travel trailer. 
(4)  A statement affirming the owner's intention to rebuild the permanent residence on the affected property. 
(5)  Such other information as deemed necessary or appropriate by the city manager. 
(c)  Conditions. 
(1)  The travel trailer must be placed on the property where construction is planned, and no portion therefore may be placed within ten feet of a property boundary, beyond an applicable set back line, over a utility easement, or in the sight triangle of an intersection. 
(2)  Permits for temporary occupancy may be issued only to the owner of the affected residence at the time of the unforeseen hazard. Only the owner of the affected residence and the owner's family may occupy a travel trailer or recreational vehicle under a permit for temporary occupancy issued pursuant to this section. 
(3)  Permits for temporary occupancy are valid for up to 12 months from the date of issuance. For good cause shown, the city inspector may extend a permit for temporary occupancy for a period not to exceed six months. An extension for more than six months may be granted only upon approval of the city council. 
(4)  Only one permit for temporary occupancy is allowed for a property lying in a single-family zoning district, or on any tract of five acres or less. 
(5)  The travel trailer must be skirted where appropriate, and be in compliance with manufacturer safety requirements. 
(6)  The travel trailer shall contain a kitchen area and restroom facility. 
(7)  Where available, municipal refuse, electric, water and sewer service shall be provided and connected to the travel trailer, as appropriate, during the period of temporary occupancy. Where the property is serviced by a septic or other private refuse system, the travel trailer shall be connected to such private sewer system during the period of temporary occupancy. 
(8)  Permits for temporary occupancy shall terminate upon the occurrence of any of the following: 
a.  Three months having passed since the date of issuance and no building permit being issued to rebuild or restore the primary residence on the property; provided, for good cause shown the city inspector may extend this period for an additional three months. 
b.  The primary residence having been restored or rebuilt to a point where it can be occupied. 
c.  Two years having passed from the date of issuance of the temporary permit. 
(d)  The fee for a temporary permit under this section shall be the amount set forth in subsection 42-122(e) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Secs. 122-243—122-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - R-E RURAL ESTATES DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-261. - Purpose. 
The R-E district provides single-family residential housing with rural amenities. Special attention should be given to overall design and location of lots within this district to ensure adequate light, air and open space are provided and to protect the area from being subject to intensified zoning once the district has been established and developed. 
(Code 1977, § 17.10.010)  
Sec. 122-262. - Permitted uses. 
See section 122-241. Property and buildings in an R-E district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the R-E category listed in section 122-241. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Code 1977, § 17.10.020; Ord. No. 1023, § 6, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-263. - Area requirements. 
(a)  Minimum lot area. For a single-family dwelling in the R-E district, there shall be a lot area of not less than three-quarters acre for each dwelling and buildings accessory thereto, except as provided in article IX of this chapter. 
(b)  Nonconforming lots. Where a lot has less area than required in this division and all the boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on October 18, 1984, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches, permitted by this division. 
(c)  Raising of animals and poultry. The raising of animals or poultry shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the city and in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  There shall be provided a fenced area of not less than 20,000 square feet, exclusive of the area covered by the main buildings and required front and side yards, for each large animal, including horses, cattle and sheep, and all structures and buildings for the care and protection of animals shall be located not closer than 20 feet to a side or rear lot line. 
(2)  Animals and poultry may not be kept on any lot of less than two acres which does not contain an occupied dwelling. 
(3)  The raising of hogs shall be prohibited on all tracts of less than 40 acres. The number of hogs over two months of age shall not exceed 20 grain-fed or five garbage-fed hogs. Hogs shall not be located closer than 100 feet to the property line of the tract in which they are located. 
(Code 1977, § 17.10.030)  
Sec. 122-264. - Lot width. 
For dwellings in the R-E district, there shall be a minimum lot width of 55 feet at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than 40 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.12.040)  
Sec. 122-265. - Yards. 
All buildings in the R-E district shall be set back from street right-of-way lines to comply with the following yard requirements, except as provided in article IX of this chapter: 
(1)  Front yard. 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 30 feet. 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 30 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than 40 feet. 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets. 
(2)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building, but shall not encroach on any easements. No private improvement shall be situated on or across an easement in the rear yard unless a revocable permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(3)  Side yard. 
a.  For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than ten feet for dwellings of one story, and of not less than 15 feet for dwellings of more than one story, except as provided in article IX of this chapter. 
b.  For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to be set back more than three feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located more than 90 feet behind the front lot line. 
c.  For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot, and 25 feet in every other case; provided, however, that the side yard setback adjacent to a federal, state or county highway and section line road shall be the same as the front yard setback required on these facilities. The interior side yard on a corner lot shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot. 
d.  Churches and main accessory buildings other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings shall be set back from all interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 35 feet. The side yard setback from the intersecting street on the corner lot shall be the same as required in subsection (3)c of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 17.10.050; Ord. No. 1138, § 2, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 122-266. - Building coverage. 
Main and accessory buildings in the R-E district shall not cover more than 25 percent of the lot area on interior lots, and 30 percent of the lot area on corner lots. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 20 percent of the rear yard. 
(Code 1977, § 17.10.060)  
Sec. 122-267. - Building height. 
No building in the R-E district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.10.070)  
Sec. 122-268. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the R-E district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.10.080)  
Secs. 122-269—122-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-291. - Purpose. 
The principal use of land in the R-1 district is for single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function appropriate to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities, and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element. 
(Code 1977, § 17.12.010)  
Sec. 122-292. - Permitted uses. 
See section 122-241. Property and buildings in an R-1 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the R-1 category listed. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Code 1977, § 17.12.020; Ord. No. 1023, § 7, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-293. - Area requirements. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. For a single-family dwelling in the R-1 district, there shall be a lot area of not less than 7,200 square feet for each dwelling and building accessory thereto, except as provided in section 122-841. 
(b)  Nonconforming lots. Where a lot has less area than required in this division and all the boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on October 18, 1984, that lot may be used for any of the uses permitted by this division. 
(c)  Other uses. For main and accessory buildings other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this division and the off-street parking areas required in article X of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.12.030; Ord. No. 916, § 1, 8-3-2004)  
Sec. 122-294. - Lot width. 
For dwellings in the R-1 district, there shall be a minimum lot width of 60 feet at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than 45 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.12.040; Ord. No. 917, § 1, 8-3-2004)  
Sec. 122-295. - Yards. 
All buildings in the R-1 district shall be set back from street right-of-way lines to comply with the following yard requirements, except as provided in article IX of this chapter: 
(1)  Front yard. 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 30 feet; provided, if 50 percent or more of the front lot is situated on a cul-de-sac or eyebrow curve, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet. For purposes of this subsection, an "eyebrow curve" shall mean a partial bulb located adjacent to the serving road that provides access to lots and can serve as a vehicle turnaround, which bulb has a minimum 50-foot radius to property line or 40-foot radius to the curve. 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 30 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings, but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than 40 feet. 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets. 
(2)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building, and shall not encroach on any easements. No private improvement shall be situated on or across an easement in the rear yard unless a revocable permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(3)  Side yard. 
a.  For dwellings of one story located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than five feet for one-story main buildings and not less than eight feet for main buildings of more than one story. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to be set back more than three feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located not less than 90 feet back of the front property line. 
b.  For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot, and 25 feet in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot. 
c.  Main and accessory buildings other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings shall be set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 35 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.12.050; Ord. No. 950, § 1, 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 1138, § 3, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 122-296. - Building coverage. 
Main buildings in the R-1 district shall not cover more than 35 percent of the lot area on interior lots and 40 percent of the lot area on corner lots. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 15 percent of the rear yard. 
This regulation shall apply only to plats applied for after the effective date of this section. Any dwellings built prior to the effectiveness of this section may be rebuilt at up to its previous lot area coverage. 
(Code 1977, § 17.12.060; Ord. No. 924, § 1, 11-2-2004)  
Sec. 122-297. - Building height. 
No building in the R-1 district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.12.070)  
Sec. 122-298. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the R-1 district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.12.080)  
Secs. 122-299—122-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - R-2 TWO-FAMILY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-321. - Purpose. 
The R-2 district is a residential district intended to provide for a slightly higher population density but with basic restrictions similar to the R-1 district. The principal use of land is for single-family and two-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function appropriate to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities, and through the consideration of the proper functional relationship and arrangement of each element. 
(Code 1977, § 17.14.010)  
Sec. 122-322. - Permitted uses. 
See section 122-241. Property and buildings in an R-2 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the R-2 category listed in section 122-241. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Code 1977, § 17.14.020; Ord. No. 1023, § 8, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-323. - Area requirements. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. For each single-family dwelling and accessory building in the R-2 district, there shall be a lot area of not less than 6,600 square feet, except as provided in section 122-841. 
(b)  Single-family dwellings with garage apartment. Where a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less than 8,400 square feet. 
(c)  Two-family dwellings. For each two-family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less than 4,200 square feet per unit. 
(d)  Nonconforming lots. Where a lot has less area than required in this division and all boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on October 18, 1984, that lot may be used for any use permitted in the R-2 district. 
(Code 1977, § 17.14.030)  
Sec. 122-324. - Lot width. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. For single-family dwellings in the R-2 district, or single-family dwellings and garage apartments, there shall be a minimum lot width of 55 feet at the front building line, and the lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than 40 feet. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings. For two-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of 30 feet for each dwelling unit, and the lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than 20 feet for each dwelling unit. 
(Code 1977, § 17.14.040)  
Sec. 122-325. - Yards. 
All buildings in the R-2 district shall be set back from the street right-of-way to comply with the following yard requirements, except as set forth in article IX of this chapter: 
(1)  Front yard. 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 30 feet. 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 30 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings, but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than 40 feet. 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets. 
(2)  Rear yard. For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Garage apartments may be located in the rear yard of a single-family dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of the main building and shall not encroach on any easement. No private improvement shall be situated on or across an easement in the rear yard unless a revocable permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(3)  Side yard. 
a.  For detached dwellings and for unattached sides of dwellings located on an interior lot, a side yard of not less than five feet shall be provided on the unattached sides of the main dwelling for the first story and an additional three feet of side yard shall be provided for each additional story or part thereof. For detached buildings of accessory use there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that detached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to be set back more than three feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located not less than 90 feet from the front property line. 
b.  For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot and 25 feet in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot. 
c.  Main and accessory buildings other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings shall be set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 35 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.14.050; Ord. No. 1138, § 4, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 122-326. - Building coverage. 
Main and accessory buildings in the R-2 district shall not cover more than 30 percent of the lot area on interior and corner lots. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 20 percent of the rear yard. 
(Code 1977, § 17.14.060)  
Sec. 122-327. - Building height. 
No building in the R-2 district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.14.070)  
Sec. 122-328. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the R-2 district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.14.080)  
Secs. 122-329—122-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - R-3 LOW DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-351. - Purpose. 
The R-3 district is intended to provide for multiple-family development which has a concentration of dwelling units served by open spaces, including common areas and facilities. The principal use of land is for townhouses and multiple-family dwellings and recreational, religious and educational uses normally located to service the basic elements of convenient, balanced and attractive living areas. 
(Code 1977, § 17.16.010)  
Sec. 122-352. - Permitted uses. 
See section 122-241. Property and buildings in an R-3 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the R-3 category listed in section 122-241. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Code 1977, § 17.16.020; Ord. No. 1023, § 9, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-353. - Area requirements. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. For a single-family dwelling in the R-3 district there shall be a lot area of not less than 6,600 square feet. 
(b)  Single-family dwellings with garage apartment. Where a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less than 8,400 square feet. 
(c)  Two-family dwellings. For a two-family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less than 4,200 square feet per unit. 
(d)  Townhouses and multiple-family units. For townhouses and multiple-family units, there shall be a lot area of not less than 5,445 square feet per unit. 
(e)  Other uses. For main and accessory buildings other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall not be less than that required in an R-3 district, and shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this division and the off-street parking areas required in article X of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.16.030; Ord. No. 845, § 1, 7-15-2003)  
Sec. 122-354. - Lot width. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. For single-family dwellings in the R-3 district, and for single-family dwellings and garage apartments located on the same lot, there shall be a minimum lot width of 55 feet at the front building line, and the lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than 40 feet. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings. For two-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of 30 feet for each dwelling unit, and the lot shall abut a street for a distance of not less than 20 feet for each dwelling unit. 
(c)  Townhouses. For townhouse dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of 22 feet at the front building line, and the front lot line shall abut a street for a distance of not less than 22 feet. 
(d)  Multiple-family dwellings. For multiple-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of 60 feet at the front building line, and the width shall be increased by ten feet for each additional dwelling unit exceeding three which is located in the structure; however, the lot width at the front building line shall not be required to exceed 150 feet. The front lot line shall abut a street for a distance of not less than 55 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.16.040)  
Sec. 122-355. - Yards. 
All buildings in the R-3 district shall be set back from street right-of-way or property lines to comply with the following yard requirements, except as set forth in article IX of this chapter: 
(1)  Front yard. 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 30 feet. 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 30 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings, but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than 40 feet. 
(2)  Rear yard. For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Garage apartments may be located in the rear yard of a single-family dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of the main building, and shall not encroach on any easement. No private improvement shall be situated on or across an easement in the rear yard unless a revocable permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(3)  Side yard. 
a.  For detached dwellings and for unattached sides of attached dwellings located on an interior lot, a side yard of not less than five feet shall be provided on the unattached sides of the main dwelling for the first story, and an additional three feet of side yard shall be provided for each additional story or part thereof. For detached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that detached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to be set back more than three feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located not less than 90 feet from the front property line. 
b.  For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot, and 25 feet in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot. 
c.  Main and accessory buildings other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings shall be set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 35 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.16.050; Ord. No. 1138, § 5, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 122-356. - Building coverage. 
Main and accessory buildings in the R-3 district shall not cover more than 30 percent of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
(Code 1977, § 17.16.060)  
Sec. 122-357. - Building height. 
No building in the R-3 district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.16.070)  
Sec. 122-358. - Fencing and lighting. 
(a)  Requirements. Whenever any new R-3 low-density multi-family residential land use is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot or tract in any existing residential district or any subcategory thereof, including a residential planned unit development (PUD), such residential use including, but not limited to, a parking lot or parking area, a fence or wall that is sight-proof from single-story residential areas or streets, not less than six feet nor more than ten feet high, as measured from the finished grade shall be constructed between the R-3 low-density multi-family residential land use and residential lots. Such fence shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition, as determined by the community development director. This fence shall be placed along and within three feet of the rear lot lines and along and within three feet of the side lot line to the point of the front yard setback of the residential tract or lot, except where the front yard of the R-3 lot is used for off-street parking, then the provisions of article X of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking lots shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. Such sight-proof screening shall consist of a sturdy opaque fence or, if appropriate, decorative planting, which complies with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, and adequate so that the R-3 low-density multi-family residential use is not visible from any residential street or pedestrian way, except as to those portions of the operation of use which exceed the height limitations of the fencing or screening. This provision shall supersede all other fencing and lighting requirements for R-3 low-density multi-family residential districts which may be contrary to this provision. 
(b)  Fencing plan to be part of preliminary and final plats. 
(1)  At the time of submission of an application for building permit for any R-3 low-density multi-family residential district adjoining the side or rear line of a residential district, a fencing plan shall be submitted which shows all screening, fencing, or, where appropriate, decorative planting, and the materials and type of screening and fencing. This fencing plan will be considered a supplemental part of the building permit application and no building permit will be issued without an approved fencing plan. 
(2)  At the time of consideration of the building permit application, the community development department will review the fencing plan to determine the adequacy of the proposed screening, fencing, and/or planting to meet the purposes set forth herein. The director of community development shall submit a recommendation which shall include any information provided by the city engineer regarding the application. If the community development department determines that the proposed plan for screening, fencing, and/or planting is not adequate to obstruct visibility or is inharmonious with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, or is not of sufficient materials, construction, or strength to reasonably withstand factors of nature and weather, then the community development department may make such requirements as are necessary and reasonable to meet the criteria set forth herein. 
(c)  Fencing plan in R-3 low-density multi-family residential districts. In those R-3 low-density multi-family residential districts which adjoin the side or rear lot line of residential districts, a fencing plan shall be submitted and approval must be granted prior to the issuance of any building permit, or, if no building permit is required, prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit within the R-3 low-density multi-family residential district. 
(d)  Fencing approval required for occupancy. An occupancy permit will not be issued until the fencing, screening, and planting, as required, is complete in accordance with the approved fencing plan. 
(e)  Fencing/screening definitions. As used in this section, fencing or screening shall mean a structure of wood, stone, ornamental iron, or metal, brick, tile, or concrete, and vinyl, landscaping or other opaque construction materials, connected together and designed for use in a fixed position, erected upon the ground for aesthetic and functional purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 17.16.080; Ord. No. 817, § 1, 10-1-2002)  
Sec. 122-359. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the R-3 district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.16.090)  
Sec. 122-360. - Brick or masonry facade. 
All two-family dwellings, townhouses and multiple-family units in the R-3 district shall have a brick or masonry facade covering 100 percent of all sides of the building, excluding gabled ends. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 7-15-2003)  
Secs. 122-361—122-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-381. - Purpose. 
The R-4 district is a higher density residential district which encourages multiple-family residential developments representing a broad variety of housing types and densities. The principal use of land can range from single-family to multiple-family uses. Certain uses which are functionally more compatible with intensive residential uses rather than with commercial uses are permitted, as are recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities, and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element. 
(Code 1977, § 17.18.010)  
Sec. 122-382. - Permitted uses. 
See section 122-241. Property and buildings in an R-4 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the R-4 category listed in section 122-241. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Code 1977, § 17.18.020; Ord. No. 1023, § 10, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-383. - Area requirements. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. For a single-family dwelling and accessory buildings in the R-4 district, there shall be a lot area of not less than 6,600 square feet. 
(b)  Single-family dwellings with garage apartment. Where a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less than 8,400 square feet. When a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a two-family or multiple-family dwelling, the lot area shall provide not less than 1,700 square feet more than is required for the two-family or multiple-family dwelling. 
(c)  Two-family dwellings. For a two-family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less than 4,200 square feet per unit. 
(d)  Townhouses. For each townhouse dwelling unit, including an accessory building, there shall be a lot area of not less than 4,356 square feet. 
(e)  Multiple-family units. For multiple-family dwellings there shall be provided a lot area of not less than 43,560 square feet for up to ten units. An additional 4,356 square feet shall be added to the minimum lot area requirement for each multiple-family housing unit more than ten which is located on a lot. 
(f)  Other uses. For main and accessory buildings other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot areas shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this division and the off-street parking areas required in article X of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.18.030; Ord. No. 847, § 1, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 848, § 1, 7-15-2003)  
Sec. 122-384. - Lot width. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. For single-family dwellings in the R-4 district, and for a single-family dwelling and garage apartment located on the same lot, there shall be a minimum lot width of 55 feet at the front building line, and the lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than 40 feet. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings. For two-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of 30 feet for each dwelling unit, and the lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than 20 feet for each dwelling unit. 
(c)  Townhouses. For townhouse dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of 22 feet at the front building line, and the front lot line shall abut a street for a distance of not less than 22 feet. 
(d)  Multiple-family dwellings. For multiple-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of 100 feet at the front building line, and the width shall be increased by ten feet for each additional dwelling unit exceeding ten which is located on a lot; however, the lot width at the front building line shall not be required to exceed 150 feet. The front lot line shall abut a street for a distance of not less than 50 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.18.040)  
Sec. 122-385. - Yards. 
All buildings in the R-4 district shall be set back from street right-of-way or property lines to comply with the following yard requirements, except as set forth in article IX of this chapter: 
(1)  Front yard. 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 30 feet. 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 30 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than 40 feet. 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets. 
(2)  Rear yard. For main buildings other than garage apartments, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Garage apartments may be located in the rear yard of another dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building, and shall not encroach on any easements. No private improvement shall be situated on or across an easement in the rear yard unless a revocable permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(3)  Side yard. 
a.  For detached dwellings and for unattached sides of dwellings located on an interior lot, a side yard of not less than five feet shall be provided on the unattached sides of the main dwelling for the first story, and an additional three feet of side yard shall be provided for each additional story or part thereof. For detached buildings of accessory use there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that detached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to be set back more than three feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located not less than 90 feet from the front property line. 
b.  For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot, and 25 feet in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot. 
c.  Main and accessory buildings other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings shall be set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 35 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.18.050; Ord. No. 1138, § 6, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 122-386. - Building coverage. 
Main and accessory buildings in the R-4 district shall not cover more than 35 percent of the lot area; provided, however, that a townhouse located on a lot with a rear yard abutting a common open space as authorized in section 122-383(d) may cover not more than 40 percent of the lot area exclusive of the common area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
(Code 1977, § 17.18.060)  
Sec. 122-387. - Building height. 
No building in the R-4 district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.18.070)  
Sec. 122-388. - Fencing and lighting. 
(a)  Requirements. Whenever any new R-4 multi-family residential land use is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot or tract in any existing residential district or any sub-category thereof, including a residential planned unit development (PUD), such residential use including, but not limited to, a parking lot or parking area, a fence or wall that is sight-proof from single-story residential areas or streets, not less than six feet nor more than ten feet high, as measured from the finished grade, shall be constructed between the R-4 multi-family residential land use and the adjacent residential tract or lot. Such fence shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition, as determined by the community development director. This fence shall be placed along and within three feet of the rear lot line and along and within three feet of the side lot line to the point of the front yard setback of the residential tract or lot, except where the front yard of the R-4 lot is used for off-street parking, then the provisions of article X of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking lots shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. Such sight-proof screening shall consist of a sturdy opaque fence or, if appropriate, decorative planting, which complies with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, and adequate so that the R-4 multi-family residential use is not visible from any residential street or pedestrian way, except as to those portions of the operation of use which exceed the height limitations of the fencing or screening. This provision shall supersede all other fencing and lighting requirements for R-4 multi-family residential districts which may be contrary to this provision. 
(b)  Fencing plan to be part of preliminary and final plats. 
(1)  At the time of submission of an application for building permit for any R-4 multi-family residential district adjoining the side or rear line of a residential district, a fencing plan shall be submitted which shows all screening, fencing, or, where appropriate, decorative planting, and the materials and type of screening and fencing. This fencing plan will be considered a supplemental part of the building permit application and no building permit will be issued without an approved fencing plan. 
(2)  At the time of consideration of the building permit application, the community development department will review the fencing plan to determine the adequacy of the proposed screening, fencing, and/or planting to meet the purposes set forth herein. The director of community development shall submit a recommendation which shall include any information provided by the city engineer regarding the application. If the community development department determines that the proposed plan for screening, fencing, and/or planting is not adequate to obstruct visibility or is inharmonious with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, or is not of sufficient materials, construction, or strength to reasonably withstand factors of nature and weather, then the community development department may make such requirements as are necessary and reasonable to meet the criteria set forth herein. 
(c)  Fencing plan in R-4 multi-family residential districts. In those R-4 multi-family residential districts which adjoin the side or rear lot line of residential districts, a fencing plan shall be submitted and approval must be granted prior to the issuance of any building permit, or, if no building permit is required, prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit within the R-4 multi-family residential district. 
(d)  Fencing approval required for occupancy. An occupancy permit will not be issued until the fencing, screening, and planting, as required, is complete in accordance with the approved fencing plan. 
(e)  Fencing/screening definitions. As used in this section, fencing or screening shall mean a structure of wood, stone, ornamental iron, or metal, brick, tile, or concrete, and vinyl, landscaping or other opaque construction materials, connected together and designed for use in a fixed position, erected upon the ground for aesthetic and functional purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 17.18.080; Ord. No. 818, § 1, 10-1-2002)  
Sec. 122-389. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the R-4 district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.18.090)  
Sec. 122-390. - Brick or masonry facade. 
All two-family dwellings, townhouses and multiple-family units in the R-4 district shall have a brick or masonry facade covering 100 percent of all sides of the building, excluding gabled ends. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1, 7-15-2003)  
Secs. 122-391—122-410. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - R-MH-1 MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70. 
 
Sec. 122-411. - Purpose. 
The R-MH-1 district is a restrictive residential district. The principal use of land is a freestanding manufactured home used as a single residence. The purpose of this district is to provide a grouping of home sites within the setting of a residential subdivision for manufactured homes. This district provides for individual lots which allow the manufactured home owner to own the property on which his home is situated. Provision is made for related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for manufactured homes and related facilities, and through the consideration of proper functional relationship and arrangement of each element. A minimum subdivision size is established to ensure that a sufficiency of compatible housing types can be established to create a desirable environment. 
(Code 1977, § 17.20.010; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-19-1999)  
Sec. 122-412. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  See section 122-241. Property and buildings in an R-MH-1 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the R-MH-1 category listed in section 122-241. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. Property and buildings in an R-MH-1 district shall be used as follows: 
(1)  Permitted uses include manufactured homes, churches, synagogues, temples, golf courses, libraries, parks, playgrounds, public buildings and schools. 
(2)  Uses permitted on review include day care centers, electric regulating stations and museums. 
(b)  A mobile home is not allowed in the R-MH-1 district. (See section 122-1 for the definition of mobile home.) 
(Code 1977, § 17.20.020; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 1023, § 11, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-413. - Area requirements. 
(a)  Minimum subdivision size. A minimum subdivision size of 15 acres is established for the R-MH-1 district, which shall be platted in accordance with the subdivision regulations. 
(b)  Lot area for dwellings. For each dwelling and accessory buildings thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than 6,600 square feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.20.030; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-19-1999)  
Sec. 122-414. - Lot width. 
For dwellings in the R-MH-1 district, there shall be a minimum lot width of 55 feet at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than 40 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.20.040; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-19-1999)  
Sec. 122-415. - Yards. 
All buildings in the R-MH-1 district shall be set back from the street right-of-way to comply with the following yard requirements: 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard shall have a minimum depth of 30 feet. 
(2)  Double frontage lots. When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building, but shall not encroach on any easements. No private improvement shall be situated on or across an easement in the rear yard unless a revocable permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(4)  Side yard for interior lots. Side yards for dwellings located on interior lots shall be not less than five feet on each side. Unattached buildings or accessory use buildings shall have side yards of not less than five feet. 
(5)  Side yard for corner lots. For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.20.050; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 1138, § 7, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 122-416. - Building coverage. 
Main and accessory buildings in the R-MH-1 district shall not cover more than 25 percent of the lot area on interior lots, and 30 percent of the lot area on corner lots. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 20 percent of the rear yard. 
(Code 1977, § 17.20.060; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-19-1999)  
Sec. 122-417. - Building height. 
No building in the R-MH-1 district shall be more than 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.20.070; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-19-1999)  
Sec. 122-418. - Garages. 
All home structures in the R-MH-1 district shall have an attached or detached garage consistent with the material and appearance of the dwelling. 
(Code 1977, § 17.20.080; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-19-1999)  
Sec. 122-419. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the R-MH-1 district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.20.090; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-19-1999)  
Sec. 122-420. - Manufactured home standards. 
Manufactured homes in an R-MH-1 district shall conform with the following: 
(1)  The minimum width shall be 26 feet. 
(2)  Exterior veneer material must be consistent with the other homes in the R-MH-1 zoning district 
(3)  The roof of each home must be a gable or hip type of construction with a minimum pitch of 5:12. 
(4)  Each home must be attached to a foundation compatible with the current adopted code for a single-family dwelling as adopted in section 18-31. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1(17.20.100), 1-19-1999)  
Secs. 122-421—122-440. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - R-MH-2 MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 70. 
 
Sec. 122-441. - Purpose. 
The R-MH-2 district permits locations for mobile home parks, which, while a residential environment, are not generally compatible with normal residential developments. These parks are under a single ownership and provide leased or rented mobile home spaces. This district should provide for an orderly arrangement of homesites in mobile home parks that have been located and designed in a manner that will promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents. 
(Code 1977, § 17.22.010)  
Sec. 122-442. - Permitted uses. 
See section 122-241. Property and buildings in an R-MH-2 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the R-MH-2 category listed in section 122-241. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Code 1977, § 17.22.020; Ord. No. 1023, § 12, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-443. - Area requirements. 
(a)  Minimum park area; intensity of use. The minimum area of any park in the R-MH-2 district shall be 15 acres. Intensity of development shall be limited to no more than eight mobile homes per gross acre for a mobile home park and no more than 12 travel trailers per gross acre for a travel trailer park. 
(b)  Mobile home and trailer spaces. Each mobile home and travel trailer space shall have a minimum of not less than 4,000 net square feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.22.030)  
Sec. 122-444. - Space width. 
In the R-MH-2 district, there shall be a minimum space width of 40 feet at the front building line, and such space shall abut on a drive or street for a distance of not less than 30 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.22.040)  
Sec. 122-445. - Yards. 
All buildings in the R-MH-2 district shall be set back from street right-of-way lines to comply with the following yard requirements, except as set forth in article IX of this chapter: 
(1)  Front yard. Mobile homes and all other structures shall be located no less than 25 feet from access drives or from the street right-of-way. 
(2)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the space, whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building. No private improvement shall be situated on or across an easement in the rear yard unless a revocable permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(3)  Side yard. 
a.  For dwellings of one story located on interior spaces, there shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than five feet for one-story main buildings, and not less than eight feet for main buildings of more than one story. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to be set back more than three feet from an interior side space line when all parts of the accessory building are located not less than 90 feet back of the access drive or street. 
b.  For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner spaces, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting drive or street of not less than 15 feet in case such space is back-to-back with another corner space, and 25 feet in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior space. 
c.  Main and accessory buildings other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings shall be set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 35 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.22.050; Ord. No. 1138, § 8, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 122-446. - Building coverage. 
Main and accessory buildings in the R-MH-2 district shall not cover more than 35 percent of a mobile home space. 
(Code 1977, § 17.22.060)  
Sec. 122-447. - Building height. 
No building in the R-MH-2 district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.22.070)  
Sec. 122-448. - Fencing and lighting. 
(a)  Requirements. Whenever any new R-MH-2 mobile home park land use is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot or tract in any existing residential district or any subcategory thereof, including a residential planned unit development (PUD), such residential use including, but not limited to, a parking lot or parking area, a fence or wall that is sight-proof from single-story residential areas or streets, not less than six feet nor more than ten feet high, as measured from the finished grade, shall be constructed between the R-MH-2 mobile home park land use and the adjacent residential tracts or lots. Such fence shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition, as determined by the community development director. This fence shall be placed along and within three feet of the rear lot line and along and within three feet of the side lot line to the point of the front yard setback of the residential tract or lot, except where the front yard of the R-MH-2 lot is used for off-street parking, then the provisions of article X of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking lots shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. Such sight-proof screening shall consist of a sturdy opaque fence or, if appropriate, decorative planting, which complies with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, and adequate so that the R-MH-2 mobile home park use is not visible from any residential street or pedestrian way, except as to those portions of the operation of use which exceed the height limitations of the fencing or screening. This provision shall supersede all other fencing and lighting requirements for R-MH-2 mobile home park districts which may be contrary to this provision. 
(b)  Fencing plan to be part of preliminary and final plats. 
(1)  At the time of submission of an application for building permit for any R-MH-2 mobile home park district adjoining the side or rear line of a residential district, a fencing plan shall be submitted which shows all screening, fencing, or, where appropriate, decorative planting, and the materials and type of screening and fencing. This fencing plan will be considered a supplemental part of the building permit application and no building permit will be issued without an approved fencing plan. 
(2)  At the time of consideration of the building permit application, the community development department will review the fencing plan to determine the adequacy of the proposed screening, fencing, and/or planting to meet the purposes set forth herein. The director of community development shall submit a recommendation which shall include any information provided by the city engineer regarding the application. If the community development department determines that the proposed plan for screening, fencing, and/or planting is not adequate to obstruct visibility or is inharmonious with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, or is not of sufficient materials, construction, or strength to reasonably withstand factors of nature and weather, then the community development department may make such requirements as are necessary and reasonable to meet the criteria set forth herein. 
(c)  Fencing plan in R-MH-2 mobile home park districts. In those R-MH-2 mobile home park districts which adjoin the side or rear lot line of residential districts, a fencing plan shall be submitted and approval must be granted prior to the issuance of any building permit, or, if no building permit is required, prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit within the R-MH-2 mobile home park district. 
(d)  Fencing approval required for occupancy. An occupancy permit will not be issued until the fencing, screening, and planting, as required, is complete in accordance with the approved fencing plan. 
(e)  Fencing/screening definitions. As used in this section, fencing or screening shall mean a structure of wood, stone, ornamental iron, or metal, brick, tile, or concrete, and vinyl, landscaping or other opaque construction materials, connected together and designed for use in a fixed position, erected upon the ground for aesthetic and functional purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 17.22.080; Ord. No. 819, § 1, 10-1-2002)  
Sec. 122-449. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the R-MH-2 district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.22.090)  
Secs. 122-450—122-470. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 122-471. - Purpose. 
The following is a list of commercial zoning districts available in the city. Intensity of usage increases from C1 to C6. Uses permitted in C1 are also permitted in C2 through C6. Permitted uses in C2 are also permitted in C3 through C6. Permitted uses in C3 are also permitted in C4 through C6. Permitted uses in C4 are also permitted uses in C5 through C6. Permitted uses in C5 are also permitted uses in C6. Permitted uses in C6 include all commercial districts. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.23.10), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1037, § 7, 2-2-2010) 
_____ 
Sec. 122-472. - Table of permitted uses. 
Property and buildings in the defined commercial districts shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or "R" in the zoning districts listed below. The letter P indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter R signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
Permitted Uses By Right or Upon Review 	Zoning Districts 
Previous Zoning Designations 
	C1 
OPB 	C2 
CN 	C3 
CG 	C4 
SC 	C5 
CI 	C6 
Abstract company 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Accountants 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Advertising 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Advertising officers 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Alarm system company 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Ambulance service, office or garage 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Amusement, outdoor 					P 	P 
Amusement place, indoor 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Antique shop 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Appliance store 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Archery shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Architect office 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Armored car service 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Artist materials, supply studio 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Art school, gallery or museum 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Attorney 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Auction house 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Auto and truck rental 					P 	P 
Auto body repair shop 					P 	P 
Auto car wash 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Auto painting and body work 					P 	P 
Auto parts and supply 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Auto repair 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Auto sales (new and used) 					P 	P 
Auto service 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Baby, children's clothing 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Bait shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Bakery 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Banks 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Barber or beauty shop 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Battery service 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Beauty supply sales 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Bed and bath store 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Bicycle shop 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Billiards or pool hall 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Boat repair, service, rental or sales 					P 	P 
Book binders 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Book or stationery store 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Book store 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Bowling alley 				P 	P 	P 
Broadcasting or recording studio 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Broker (stocks and bonds) 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Building supplies, sales 				R 	P 	P 
Bus terminal 					P 	P 
Business or management consultant 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Cafe 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Cafeterias 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Camera shop 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Candy store 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Car rental 					P 	P 
Card shop 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Carpenter and cabinet shop 					P 	P 
Carpeting sales and service 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Catering establishment 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Cellular equipment sales and service 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Ceramic shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Church, synagogue, temple 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Clothing or apparel store 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Coffee shop 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Collection agency 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
College or university 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Computer sales and service 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Contractor's office 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Contractor's plant or storage yard 					P 	P 
Convenience store 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Credit unions 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dairy products or ice cream store 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Data processing 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Dating service 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Day care center 	R 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Delicatessen 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Delivery service 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Dentist or dental surgeon 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Department store 				P 	P 	P 
Designer's office 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Detective or protective service 	R 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Detoxification facility 						R 
Doctor's and physician's office 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Drafting service 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dress shop 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Drinking establishment, alcoholic 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Drive-in restaurant 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Drive-in theater 					P 	P 
Drug store 	R 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dry cleaning (no cleaning or pressing on premises) 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dry cleaning, laundry, plant 					P 	P 
Eating establishment with alcohol 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Eating establishment without alcohol 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Electric regulating substation 			R 	R 	P 	P 
Electrical repair shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Electrical supplies 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Employment agencies 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Engineer's office 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Equipment sales, service, rental, repair 					P 	P 
Exterminator service 					P 	P 
Fabric store 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Farm store 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Feed and fertilizer sales 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Fencing company 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Finance company 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Fine arts studio 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Fire extinguisher service 					P 	P 
Firewood sales 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Florist shop 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Fraternal organizations 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Frozen food locker 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Fruit or vegetable shop 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Fuel service 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Funeral home, mortuary 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Fur repair and storage 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Furniture repair and upholstery 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Furniture store 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Garden supply store 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Glass shop 			R 	R 	P 	P 
Geologist or geophysicists 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Gift and novelty shop 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Golf course 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Golf, miniature or driving 			R 	R 	P 	P 
Grocery or supermarket 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Gun shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Gunsmith 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Hardware store 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Health club or spa 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Hearing aid shop 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Heating, air conditioning or plumbing shop and supplies 					P 	P 
Home decor shop 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Hospital 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Hotel and motel 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Ice plant 					P 	P 
Import/export office 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Impoundment yard 					P 	P 
Indian goods store 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Insurance sales office 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Jewelry store 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Key shop 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Labor union hall 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Laboratory, testing and experimental 					P 	P 
Landscape and nursery, retail 					P 	P 
Laundry, self-service 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Leather goods shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Library 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Liquor store 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Lumber or building material 					P 	P 
Lumber or building material(retail) 				P 	P 	P 
Machinery sales and service 					P 	P 
Mail order house 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Marijuana commercial grower 					P 	P 
Meat market 		R 	R 	R 	P 	P 
Meat market(non-wholesale) 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Medical facility 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Medical marijuana retailer 	R 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Mini-storage 			R 	R 	P 	P 
Mobile, manufactured homes, trailer sales and service 					P 	P 
Monument sales 					P 	P 
Motorcycle sales and repair 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Movie sales 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Muffler shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Museums 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Music store 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Newspaper office 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Newsstand sales 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Office supply 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Optometrist or optician 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Oriental goods store 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Orthopedic supply 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Paint and decorating shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Pawn shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Pet shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Pharmacy 	R 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Photocopying, blueprinting 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Photo-finishing service 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Photography studio 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Planning consultant 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Plant nursery 					P 	P 
Pottery shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Printing shop 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Psychologist 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public building and facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Radio and television, electronic sales and service 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Real estate office 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Rental center 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Saddlery or tack shop 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Safe and vault sales 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Savings or loan office 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
School 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Senior citizens center 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Sewing machine sales and service 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Sexually oriented business 						R 
Shoe sales and repair 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Small engine sales 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Souvenir sales 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Sporting goods store 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Stationery store 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Storage building or company 					P 	P 
Studio (photo, music, artist) 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Super center 				P 	P 	P 
Sweeper sales 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Swimming pool supply and sales 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Tailoring and alterations 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Tax consultants 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Tax office 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Telephone company 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Telephone sales and service 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Telephone shop 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Theater 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Tobacco store 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Tool sales 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Toy shop 			P 	P 	P 	P 
Travel agency 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Truck sales and service 					P 	P 
Trust company 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Upholstery sales and service 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Used goods, retail 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Utility company 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Variety store 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Vending, sales and service 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Veterans hall 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Veterinarian hospital or office 			R 	P 	P 	P 
Vitamin shop 		R 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Warehouse, inside storage 					P 	P 
Wedding chapel 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Wholesale establishment 			R 	P 	P 	P 
 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.23.20), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 806, § 1, 4-16-2002; Ord. No. 850, § 1, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 979, § 1, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 990, § 1, 3-6-2007; Ord. No. 1023, § 13, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1037, § 8, 2-2-2010; Ord. No. 1173, § 3, 9-4-2018) 
_____ 
Sec. 122-473. - General requirements; all commercial districts. 
Unless specifically stated otherwise, the following requirements shall apply to all commercial districts. 
(1)  Lot width. For buildings, there shall be a minimum lot width of 100 feet at the front building line and such lot shall abut a street for a distance of not less than 100 feet. 
a.  Where a tract abuts a section line road or a state highway a distance of not less than 100 feet, and is commercially developed and platted as a unified tract, the requirement that a portion of each lot abuts a street may be met by showing that the lot abuts a common access driveway for the required distance. 
b.  Common access driveway means one or more shared private driveways intended to provide access for vehicles from the roadway of an approved public street to private property. 
c.  Common access driveways must be identified as such on the preliminary and final plat, must be restricted to use for ingress and egress only, and must meet all requirements for fire, emergency and other required access. Common access driveways must be constructed to the standards for streets to be dedicated to the public. 
d.  Where lot access is provided through a common access driveway, the face of the preliminary and final plat shall include statements that access to lots within the platted area is limited to the common access driveway (except as otherwise shown on the plat), that the common access driveway is not a public street, and that maintenance of the common access driveway shall be the responsibility of owners of lots within the platted area. The city may require covenants to be submitted to reasonably ensure continued maintenance of the common access driveway, which covenants shall provide that the city may enforce compliance therewith. 
(2)  Yard requirements. The following requirements shall apply to commercial districts: 
a.  Front yard. All buildings shall setback from the street right-of-way line to provide a front yard at least 30 feet in depth. Where commercially zoned property frontage is along a designated state highway there shall be a 50-foot setback for all buildings from the right-of-way and/or property line. 
b.  Rear yard. When any commercial building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard or combination thereof, of not less than 30 feet. In all other cases if delivery service and firefighting capabilities can be maintained there shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than 25 feet. Unattached or accessory buildings may not be located in the rear yard of a main building other than those designated for trash or recycling activities, and shall not encroach on any easement or be constructed closer than ten feet of the property line when abutting residential and/or agricultural zoned districts. Areas designated for trash and/or recycling activities, when adjacent to residential or agriculturally zoned property, shall not exceed six feet in height nor be located in required landscaping areas. 
Any commercial activity which involves or requires outside communication devices for the public and/or delivery or service activities shall not locate said device(s) closer than 35 feet to the rear property line. Such devices shall be set to accommodate the minimum necessary volume for the activity being conducted. 
The rear yard setback shall also be modified when a proposed building exceeds a total of 20 feet in height when any portion of the rear yard abuts a residential and/or agricultural zoned district. The building height shall include all facades and/or decorative features. In cases where the building height is greater than 20 feet from the finished grade, the rear yard setback shall be increased by two feet for every one foot of height increase above 20 feet. This provision shall not be construed as allowing a maximum total building height exceeding the limit set forth in subparagraph (3), below. 
c.  Side yard. For attached buildings, there shall be no side yard requirements, except as required by the fire code. For unattached buildings, there shall be a side yard setback of not less than five feet where abutting commercially zoned properties. For buildings and accessory buildings located on corner lots not designated as section line roads and/or state highways, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting streetof no less than 25 feet. On corner lots abutting section line roads and/or state highways, the side yard setback shall be 35 feet in all cases. The interior side yard on a corner lot shall be the same as for buildings and accessory buildings on an interior lot where abutting commercially zone properties; and when adjoining a residential district, a side yard of not less than 15 feet shall be provided. 
(3)  Height requirements. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(4)  Fencing, lighting and noise. 
a.  Requirements. 
1.  Whenever any new commercial land use is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot or tract in any existing residential district or any subcategory thereof, including a residential planned unit development (PUD), such residential use including, but not limited to, a parking lot or parking area, a fence or wall that is sight-proof from single-story residential areas or streets, not less than six feet nor more than ten feet high, as measured from the finished grade, shall be constructed between the commercial and residential lots. Such fence shall be maintained by the commercial property owner in good condition, as determined by the community development director. This fence shall be placed along the rear lot line and along the side lot line to the point of the front yard setback of the residential tract or lot, except where the front yard of the commercial lot is used for off-street parking, then the provisions of article X of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking lots shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. This provision shall supersede all other fencing and lighting requirements for commercial districts which may be contrary to this provision. 
2.  Whenever any land zoned for C-3, C-4 or C-5 commercial use is established so that the rear line abuts a lot of tract in any existing rural estates, single-family, two-family, low density multiple-family residential district, including a residential planned unit development (PUD), then the fence required under subsection (4)(a)1. shall be a masonry fence meeting the requirements of subparagraph (iv), below. 
3.  Whenever any new commercial land use is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot or tract in any existing rural estates, single-family, two-family, low density multiple-family residential district, including a residential planned unit development (PUD), and the commercial land use is such that high volumes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic may be generated or encouraged, including but not limited to retail convenience stores, retail intensive shopping centers, restaurants with exterior seating areas, and automobile car washes, then the fence required under subsection (4)(a)1. shall be a masonry fence not less than six feet nor more than eight feet high, as measured from the finished grade, constructed between the commercial and residential lots along the entire length of the adjoining property line. The masonry fence shall be of opaque material consisting of stone, brick, masonry block or split-faced masonry block. Wood, plastic, metal, imitation stone or concrete, or other material not made of stone, brick or masonry are not approved materials for construction of the separating fence between commercial and residential uses. Construction of the masonry fencing shall have an approved footing and construction plans as approved by the community development department; be required to have all necessary inspections as determined by the chief inspector; and be reinforced to the extent as to not be susceptible to collapse under adverse weather conditions. This may include, but not be limited to, steel reinforcement, concrete reinforcement or other measures to ensure stable conditions and longevity of the fence. 
4.  For purposes of this subdivision, a residential use shall be considered an existing use if both a preliminary plat and a final plat have been filed and approved by the city. 
b.  Fencing plan to be part of preliminary and final plats. 
1.  At the time of submission of an application for building permit for any commercial district adjoining the side or rear line of a residential district, a fencing plan shall be submitted which shows all screening, fencing, or, where appropriate, decorative planting, and the materials and type of screening and fencing. This fencing plan will be considered a supplemental part of the building permit application and no building permit will be issued without an approved fencing plan. 
2.  At the time of consideration of the building permit application, the community development department will review the fencing plan to determine the adequacy of the proposed screening, fencing, and/or planting to meet the purposes set forth herein. The director of community development shall submit a recommendation which shall include any information provided by the city engineer regarding the application. If the community development department determines that the proposed plan for screening, fencing, and/or planting is not adequate to obstruct visibility or is inharmonious with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, or is not of sufficient materials, construction, or strength to reasonably withstand factors of nature and weather, then the community development department may make such requirements as are necessary and reasonable to meet the criteria set forth herein. 
c.  Fencing plan in commercial districts. In those commercial districts which adjoin the side or rear lot line of residential districts, a fencing plan shall be submitted and approval must be granted prior to the issuance of any building permit, or, if no building permit is required, prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit within the commercial district. 
d.  Fencing approval required for occupancy. An occupancy permit will not be issued until the fencing, screening, and planting, as required, is complete in accordance with the approved fencing plan. 
e.  Fencing/screening definitions. As used in this section, fencing or screening shall mean a structure of wood, stone, ornamental iron, or metal, brick, tile, or concrete, and vinyl, landscaping or other opaque construction materials, connected together and designed for use in a fixed position, erected upon the ground for aesthetic and functional purposes. 
(5)  Landscaping. All lots shall be landscaped and maintained per sections 122-871, 122-877 and other applicable codes of the city. 
(6)  Requirements. The requirements for the district zoned shall be applicable, regardless of whether the use is also permitted in other zoning districts. 
(7)  Building materials. Within 300 feet of any section line road, unpainted concrete block, plain concrete, corrugated metal, sheet metal, plywood or sheet press board may not be used as exterior finish materials, excluding architectural grade metal roofs, overhangs or decorative metal trim approved by the director of community development during plan review. Foundation material may be plain concrete or plain concrete block where the foundation material does not extend more than two feet above ground level. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.23.30), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 813, § 1, 10-1-2002; Ord. No. 855, § 1, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 1001, § 6, 2-19-2008; Ord. No., 1004, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 122-474. - Amendments of zoning applications. 
As an application for zoning is processed and considered with public hearings by the planning commission and city council, the planning commission or city council may, on the approval of the applicant, lower the commercial zoning to a lower, less intensity, zoning classification without a new application being filed for consideration, for example, a C5 application could be amended to a C3 application; however, a C3 application could not be amended to a C5 application. It is specifically provided that any such amendments shall not waive the requirements regarding the necessity for certain uses being permitted upon review. 
(Ord. No. 713, § I(17.23.40), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-475. - Mixed uses. 
A building with mixed uses shall comply with the greater zoning use restrictions, as denoted by the higher number; for example, C5 is a greater use restriction than C4. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.23.50), 9-7-1999)  
Secs. 122-476—122-490. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - C1 OFFICE-PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (Formerly OPB) 
 
Sec. 122-491. - Purpose. 
The C1 district is intended primarily for business and professional offices that are compatible with residential uses. The district is suitable for business, consulting, executive or administrative offices. It is designed to serve as a transition zone between commercial and residential districts, and to provide a district for office space without the more intensive retail uses of the commercial zone district. 
(Code 1977, § 17.24.010; Ord. No. 717, § I(17.24.010), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-492. - Permitted uses. 
Property and buildings in a C1 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the C1 category listed in section 122-472. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Code 1977, § 17.24.020; Ord. No. 717, § I(17.24.020), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1023, § 14, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-493. - Area requirements. 
For main and accessory buildings there shall be no minimum lot area requirements except as provided in article IX of this chapter; provided, maximum building coverage (including main and accessory buildings) in C-1 zoned districts shall not exceed 40 percent of the total lot area. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.24.30), 9-7-1999; Ord No. 1001, § 1, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-494. - General requirements. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 apply to this district, but shall not exceed one story in height. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.24.40), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1005, § 2, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 122-495. - Building coverage. 
Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 40 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.24.50), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1001, § 7, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-496. - Building height. 
No building or structure in the OPB district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.24.070)  
Sec. 122-497. - Fencing or other screening; lighting. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 apply to this district. In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. 
(Code 1977, § 17.24.080; Ord. No. 1005, § 3, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 122-498. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the OPB district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.24.090)  
Secs. 122-499—122-520. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - C2 COMMERCIAL NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT (Formerly CN) 
 
Sec. 122-521. - Purpose. 
This commercial district is intended for the conduct of retail trade and to provide personal services to meet the regular needs and for the convenience of the people of adjacent residential areas. Because these shops and stores may be closely associated with residential, religious, recreational and educational elements, more restrictive requirements for light, air, open space and off-street parking are made than are provided in other commercial districts. 
(Code 1977, § 17.26.010; Ord. No. 717, § I(17.25.10), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-522. - Permitted uses. 
Property and buildings in a C2 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or "R" in the C2 category listed in section 122-472. Note, that items in a C1 district are also permitted in a C2 district. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.25.20), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1023, § 15, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-523. - Area requirements. 
For main and accessory buildings there shall be no minimum lot area requirements except as provided in article IX of this chapter; provided, maximum building coverage (including main and accessory buildings) in C-2 zoning districts shall not exceed 45 percent of the total lot area. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.25.30), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-524. - Building coverage. 
Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 45 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.25.40), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1001, § 8, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-525. - General requirements. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 apply to this district, but shall not exceed one story in height. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.25.50), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-526. - Additional requirements. 
The requirements for the district zoned shall be applicable, regardless of whether the use is also permitted in other zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.25.60), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-527. - Building height. 
No building in the CN district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.26.070)  
Sec. 122-528. - Fencing or other screening; lighting. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 apply to this district. In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. 
(Code 1977, § 17.26.080; Ord. No. 1005, § 4, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 122-529. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the CN district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.26.090)  
Secs. 122-530—122-550. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - C3 COMMERCIAL GENERAL DISTRICT (Formerly CG) 
 
Sec. 122-551. - Purpose. 
This commercial district is intended to provide a place for those types of commercial activities that require separate buildings and building groups surrounded by landscaped yards and open area. Generally, the uses associated with this district require a larger tract of land than those associated with less intense districts. 
(Code 1977, § 17.28.010; Ord. No. 717, § I(17.28.010), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-552. - Permitted uses. 
Property and buildings in a C3 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or "R" in the C3 category listed in section 122-472. Note, that items in a C1 and C2 district are also permitted in a C3 district. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.26.20), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1023, § 16, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-553. - Area requirements. 
For main and accessory buildings there shall be no minimum lot area requirements except as provided in article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.26.30), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1001, § 3, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-554. - Building coverage. 
There shall be no maximum building coverage for C-3 districts, except to the extent necessitated by the requirements of article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.26.40), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1001, § 9, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-555. - General requirements. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 apply to this district. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.26.50), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-556. - Additional requirements. 
The requirements for the district zoned shall be applicable, regardless of whether the use is also permitted in other zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.26.60), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-557. - Building height. 
No building or structure in the CG district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.28.070)  
Sec. 122-558. - Fencing or other screening; lighting. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 apply to this district. In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. 
(Code 1977, § 17.28.080; Ord. No. 1005, § 5, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 122-559. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the CG district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.28.090)  
Secs. 122-560—122-580. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - C5 COMMERCIAL INTENSIVE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-581. - Purpose. 
This commercial district is intended to provide a place for intensive commercial uses. Outside display and storage of completely assembled merchandise is permitted as per this division. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.28.10), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-582. - Permitted uses. 
Property and buildings in a C5 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or "R" in the C5 category listed in section 122-472. Note that items in C1, C2, C3 and C4 districts are also permitted in a C5 district. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.28.20), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1023, § 17, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-583. - Area requirements. 
For main and accessory buildings there shall be no minimum lot area requirements except as provided in article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.28.30), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 857, § 1, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 1001, § 4, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-584. - Building coverage. 
There shall be no maximum building coverage for C-5 districts, except to the extent necessitated by the requirements of article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.28.40), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1001, § 10, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-585. - General requirements. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 shall apply to this district, except in a C5 district the lot width shall be a minimum width of 100 feet at the building line. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.28.50), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 858, § 1, 8-19-2003)  
Sec. 122-586. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  Common off-street parking is required in a C4 district in accordance with article X of this chapter. 
(b)  The requirements for the district zoned shall be applicable, regardless of whether the use is also permitted in other zoning districts. 
(c)  Ornamental fences or evergreen plantings shall screen materials which are not completely assembled or which are not immediately and actively being offered for sale, or items shall be enclosed in permanent buildings, so it cannot be seen from a public street. 
(d)  All servicing of vehicles and assembly of equipment carried on as an incidental part of the sales operations shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.28.60), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-587. - Building height. 
No building in the CI district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.30.070)  
Sec. 122-588. - Fencing or other screening; lighting. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 apply to this district. 
(Code 1977, § 17.30.080; Ord. No. 1005, § 6, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 122-589. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the CI district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.30.090)  
Sec. 122-590. - Outdoor storage and activities. 
(a)  In the CI district, merchandise and materials which are not completely assembled or which are not immediately and actively being offered for sale shall, in addition to complying with the other screening requirements of this division, be so screened by ornamental fences or evergreen planting or by permanent buildings that they cannot be seen from a public street. 
(b)  All servicing of vehicles and assembly of equipment carried on as an incidental part of the sales operations shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(Code 1977, § 17.30.100)  
Secs. 122-591—122-610. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - C4 SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-611. - Purpose. 
This commercial district is intended for a unified grouping, in one or more buildings, of retail shops and stores that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of people residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods. It is intended that the neighborhood shopping center be developed as a unit, with adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees, and with appropriate landscaping and screening materials. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.27.10), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-612. - Permitted uses. 
Property and buildings in a C4 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or "R" in the C4 category listed in section 122-472. Note, that items in a C1, C2 and C3 district are also permitted in a C4 district. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.27.20), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1023, § 18, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-613. - Area requirements. 
The parcel of land zoned as a C4 district shall not be less than 12,000 square feet in area. Platting for this C4 district shall allow more than one shop or store in a C4 district. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.27.30), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 854, § 1, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 1001, § 5, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-614. - Building coverage. 
There shall be no maximum building coverage for C-4 districts, except to the extent necessitated by the requirements of article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.27.40), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 1001, § 11, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-615. - General requirements. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 shall apply to this district, except in a C4 district the lot width shall be a minimum width of 150 feet at the building line. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.27.50), 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 856, § 1, 8-19-2003)  
Sec. 122-616. - Additional requirements. 
Parking requirements for a C4 district shall be in accordance with article X of this chapter. The requirements for the district zoned shall be applicable, regardless of whether the use is also permitted in other zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 717, § I(17.27.60), 9-7-1999)  
Sec. 122-617. - Building height. 
No building or structure in the SC district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.32.070)  
Sec. 122-618. - Fencing or other screening; lighting. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 apply to this district. In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. 
(Code 1977, § 17.32.080; Ord. No. 1005, § 7, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 122-619. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the SC district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.32.090)  
Sec. 122-620. - Common parking facilities. 
In the SC district, off-street parking requirements set forth in article X of this chapter may be complied with by providing a permanent common off-street parking facility for all of the uses within the shopping center, provided that the lot contains the requisite number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements; provided, however, that in no case shall the amount of off-street parking area, including driveways required for ingress and egress and circulation, be less than 2½ times the gross floor area of the shopping center. 
(Code 1977, § 17.32.100)  
Sec. 122-621. - Rezoning procedures. 
An application for rezoning for a shopping center shall include the following, in addition to the administrative requirements set forth in article II of this chapter: 
(1)  Site development plan required. The developer shall submit site development plans of the proposed development which shall be in adequate detail to determine compliance with the provisions of this division, and which shall show the arrangement of the buildings, design and circulation pattern of the off-street parking area, landscaped yards, ornamental screening, service courts, and utility and drainage easements and facilities, and the relationship of the shopping center development to adjacent areas which it may affect. 
(2)  Evidence of intent. Evidence that indicates to the satisfaction of the planning commission the ability and intent of the developer to carry out the development of the shopping center in accordance with the plans submitted in accordance with subsection (1) of this section shall be submitted. 
(3)  Conformance with approved plans. Any substantial deviation from the plat or building plans submitted at the time of rezoning shall constitute a violation of the building permit authorizing construction of the shopping center. Substantial changes in plans shall be resubmitted to the planning commission to ensure compliance with the requirements and purpose and intent of this division, and no building permit shall be issued for any construction which is not in substantial conformity with the approved plan. 
(Code 1977, § 17.32.110)  
Secs. 122-622—122-629. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - C6 SPECIAL USE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-630. - Purpose. 
This commercial district is established for those uses which, because of special concerns related to the activity, and because of special notice requirements imposed by Oklahoma law, may require more detailed analysis and review, and implementation of special notice and use requirements protecting the interests of those in surrounding districts. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 9, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-631. - Permitted uses. 
Property and buildings in a C6 commercial special use district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or "R" in the C6 category listed in section 122-472. Note that items in C1, C2, C3, C4 and C5 districts are also permitted in a C6 district. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 9, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-632. - Area requirements. 
For main and accessory buildings there shall be no minimum lot area requirements except as provided in article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 9, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-633. - Building coverage. 
There shall be no maximum building coverage for C6 commercial special use district, except to the extent necessitated by the requirements of article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 9, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-634. - General requirements. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 shall apply to this district, except in a C6 commercial special use district the lot width shall be a minimum width of 100 feet at the building line. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 9, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-635. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  Common off-street parking is required in a C6 commercial special use district in accordance with article X of this chapter. 
(b)  The requirements for the district zoned shall be applicable, regardless of whether the use is also permitted in other zoning districts. 
(c)  Ornamental fences or evergreen plantings shall screen materials which are not completely assembled or which are not immediately and actively being offered for sale, or items shall be enclosed in permanent buildings, so it cannot be seen from a public street. 
(d)  All servicing of vehicles and assembly of equipment carried on as an incidental part of the sales operations shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 9, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-636. - Building height. 
No building in the C6 commercial special use district shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 9, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-637. - Fencing or other screening; lighting. 
The general requirements for all commercial districts contained in section 122-473 apply to this district. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 9, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-638. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the C6 commercial special use district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 9, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-639. - Outdoor storage and activities. 
(a)  In the C6 commercial special use district, merchandise and materials which are not completely assembled or which are not immediately and actively being offered for sale shall, in addition to complying with the other screening requirements of this division, be so screened by ornamental fences or evergreen planting or by permanent buildings that they cannot be seen from a public street. 
(b)  All servicing of vehicles and assembly of equipment carried on as an incidental part of the sales operations shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 9, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-640. - Findings and restrictions applicable to sexually oriented business. 
(a)  The city council has found that sexually oriented businesses require special supervision from the public safety agencies and community development agencies of the city in order to protect and preserve the health, safety, morals and welfare of the patrons of such businesses as well as the citizens of the city. Sexually oriented businesses are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities, including prostitution and sexual liaisons of a casual nature. There is convincing documented evidence that sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values. It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses, due to their nature, have serious and objectionable operational characteristics that contribute to urban blight and downgrade the quality of life in the adjacent area. The city council desires to minimize and control these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry. This is done to protect the citizens from increased crime, preserve the quality of life, preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods, and deter the spread of urban blight. The city council does not condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. The council recognizes that state and federal law prohibits the distribution of obscene materials, and therefore expects and encourages all law enforcement officials to enforce state obscenity statutes against any such illegal activities within the city. Based on these findings, it is the intent of the city council to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. 
(b)  The location of sexually oriented businesses shall be in compliance with applicable commercial zoning regulations of the city and may not be located within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  Any building primarily and regularly used for worship services or religious activities; 
(2)  Any public or private educational facility, including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; a school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose such as offices and vehicle maintenance facilities and only incidentally used by students; 
(3)  Any public or private fraternal organization; 
(4)  Any public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, golf course, basketball or tennis courts, wilderness area, or other similar land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the parks department or any public trusts, provided that a recreation area as used in this article shall not be interpreted as including turnpikes and highways that also contain jogging or bicycle paths; 
(5)  Any public library; 
(6)  A premises licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the state where any beverage containing alcohol is sold, distributed or served; 
(7)  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; 
(8)  Any other sexually oriented business; or 
(9)  Any land zoned or used for residential purposes. 
The distance between a sexually oriented business and any use named above shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures, objects or political boundaries, from the nearest exterior boundary of the parcel or the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property boundary of the premises of a listed use. For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated on the opposite side of the street shall be considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The following conditions shall be imposed on any conditional use permit granted for a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  The business may not operate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following day, and may not operate on Sunday; 
(2)  No one under the age of 21 years may be allowed to enter or be upon, or be employed by, such business; 
(3)  No low-point beer, beer, wine, alcoholic beverage, mixed drinks, or any other similar substance which is regulated by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Law Enforcement Commission or which requires a license from local government as a condition to selling may be served or sold within or upon the premises; 
(4)  Any other conditions determined to be appropriate by city staff, the planning commission or the city council. 
(d)  Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be punished, subject to the provisions of section 1-7. For purposes of this provision, each day that the violation occurs shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 9, 2-2-2010)  
ARTICLE VII. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 122-641. - Table of permitted uses. 
Property and buildings in the defined industrial districts shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the zoning districts listed in the following table. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
	Zoning District 
Permitted Uses 	I-1 	I-2 	I-3 
Acid manufacture 			R 
Advertising signs/billboards 	P 	P 	P 
Aircraft parts: sales, service, rental or repair, including airframes and engines 			P 
Airway beacon or marker 	P 	P 	P 
Ambulance service office or garage 	P 	P 	P 
Animal and marine fats and oils, manufacturing or processing 			R 
Animal and poultry slaughter and processing 			R 
Animal hospital, including large animals 		P 	P 
Apparel and other textile products 	P 	P 	P 
Auction barn, excluding sale or trade of livestock 		P 	P 
Automobile painting, body work 	R 	P 	P 
Automobile, bus, truck dismantling, salvaging or wrecking 			R 
Automobile assembly 			P 
Automobile wash service, including self-service 	P 	P 	P 
Baked goods, candy, bread, dairy and ice cream manufacturing 	P 	P 	P 
Batching and mixing plant, asphaltic or Portland cement, concrete, mortar or plastic 			R 
Battery manufacturing 			P 
Beverages, alcoholic, manufacturing 		R 	R 
Beverages, nonalcoholic, manufacturing 		P 	P 
Blacksmith, tinsmith or sheetmetal shop 		P 	P 
Blueprinting, photocopying and similar reproducing services 	P 	P 	P 
Boat rental or storage 		P 	P 
Book bindery 	P 	P 	P 
Bottling plant 		P 	P 
Brick, tile or clay manufacturing 			P 
Broadcasting or recording studio 	P 	P 	P 
Building materials sales maintained wholly inside buildings 	P 	P 	P 
Building materials or lumber, outside building 		P 	P 
Building services, including janitorial service, floor waxing and office cleaning 	P 	P 	P 
Cabinetmaker 	P 	P 	P 
Carpentry, woodworking or furniture working 	P 	P 	P 
Cesspool cleaning establishment 			P 
Chemicals, compounding or packaging, but not materials which decompose by detonation 	R 	R 	P 
Church, synagogue or temple 	P 	P 	P 
Cold storage plant 		P 	P 
Commercial feed pen 			R 
Computing, data processing or similar service 	P 	P 	P 
Construction equipment repair, sales or storage 		P 	P 
Contractor (general or heavy construction) facilities other than office 		P 	P 
Cosmetics manufacturing 	P 	P 	P 
Cotton ginning and compressing 		P 	P 
Custom manufacturing 	P 	P 	P 
Dairy products production and distribution 		P 	P 
Delivery service 	P 	P 	P 
Disinfecting, deodorizing or exterminator service 	P 	P 	P 
Drafting service 	P 	P 	P 
Drugs and pharmaceutical products manufacturing 		P 	P 
Dry cleaning, laundry and dyeing plant 		P 	P 
Electric generating plant 		P 	P 
Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture 	P 	P 	P 
Exploration for minerals other than oil and gas 			R 
Explosives: manufacture, storage, warehousing or wholesaling 			R 
Extraction of sand, gravel, clay; quarrying of rock 			R 
Farm equipment sales and service 	R 	P 	P 
Feed and fertilizer sales 	P 	P 	P 
Fence and fencing equipment manufacturing and sales 	R 	P 	P 
Fertilizer mixing 			R 
Fire extinguisher service 	P 	P 	P 
Fireworks: manufacture, storage, warehousing or wholesaling 			R 
Food locker plant 	P 	P 	P 
Food products, including bakery products, fruit and vegetable processing and canning, packing and processing of meats and poultry, but not including slaughtering of animals or poultry 		P 	P 
Foundries, lightweight nonferrous metal 			P 
Freight depot, railroad or truck 		R 	P 
Furniture cleaning 	P 	P 	P 
Furniture manufacturing 		P 	P 
Furniture upholstering 	P 	P 	P 
Garbage or trash: assembly, incineration or processing 			R 
Gases or liquids, flammable, storage 			R 
Glass manufacturing or processing 		P 	P 
Grain milling or processing 		P 	P 
Hair, felt, feather or leather production 		P 	P 
Heating, air conditioning or plumbing sales or service 	P 	P 	P 
Ice cream production and distribution 		P 	P 
Ice plant, dry or natural 	P 	P 	P 
Impoundment yard 	P 	P 	P 
Instrument or meter manufacturing 	P 	P 	P 
Jewelry manufacturing 	P 	P 	P 
Laboratory: research, development or testing 	P 	P 	P 
Leather goods fabrication 	P 	P 	P 
Linen supply or industrial laundry 	P 	P 	P 
Livestock auction sales barn and pens 		P 	P 
Livestock breeding and slaughtering 			P 
Lumberyard 	P 	P 	P 
Machine shop 		P 	P 
Mail order house 	P 	P 	P 
Marijuana commercial grower 	P 	P 	P 
Marijuana processor facility 	P 	P 	P 
Mattresses, rebuilding or renovating 	P 	P 	P 
Ministorage warehouse 	P 	P 	P 
Monument works 		P 	P 
Motion picture distribution and services 	P 	P 	P 
Musical instrument production and distribution 		P 	P 
Office: professional/business 	P 	P 	P 
Oilfield equipment and supplies: sales, service, rental or repair 			P 
Optical goods manufacturing 	P 	P 	P 
Packing and crating service 		P 	P 
Paint, enamel, lacquer, turpentine, varnish manufacturing 			R 
Paper manufacturing or processing 			P 
Paper products, including envelopes, stationary, wallpaper manufacturing, boxes and containers 		P 	P 
Pottery shop 		P 	P 
Petroleum or its products, refining of 			R 
Petroleum products, storage 			R 
Photofinishing service 	P 	P 	P 
Printing and publishing, including engraving or photoengraving 	P 	P 	P 
Propane gas, sales and storage 	R 	R 	R 
Public buildings and facilities 	P 	P 	P 
Radio transmitting station or tower 	P 	P 	P 
Railroad equipment storage or maintenance 		R 	P 
Railroad freight terminal 		R 	P 
Railroad yard 		R 	P 
Rubber products, natural or synthetic, manufacturing 			P 
Rug cleaning or repairing 	P 	P 	P 
School, commercial or trade 	P 	P 	P 
Scrap and waste materials handling, including building and vehicle wrecking establishments and junkyards 			R 
Sign painting and manufacturing 		P 	P 
Specialty fabrication shop (indoors) 	P 	P 	P 
Sports or athletic equipment manufacturing 		P 	P 
Steel products, fabrication and assembly 			P 
Tar and tar products 			R 
Telegraph transmitting or receiving station 	P 	P 	P 
Telephone exchange station, relay tower 	P 	P 	P 
Television transmitting tower or receiving station 	P 	P 	P 
Textile production and distribution 		P 	P 
Tire recapping 			P 
Toy manufacturing 		P 	P 
Trailer manufacturing (indoors) 	P 	P 	P 
Warehousing 	P 	P 	P 
Welding shop 		P 	P 
Wholesaling 	P 	P 	P 
Wood distillation 		P 	P 
Wood products, including wooden boxes and containers 		P 	P 
 
(Code 1977, § 17.33.020; Ord. No. 989, § 1, 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 993, § 1, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 1023, § 19, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1173, § 4, 9-4-2018) 
_____ 
Secs. 122-642—122-660. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-661. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the I-1 light industrial district is to provide a location for low-impact industrial developments which do not by their nature create nuisances. The intent is to preserve this land for industry in a location beneficial to industries and to prohibit non-industrial uses. 
(Code 1977, § 17.34.010)  
Sec. 122-662. - Use standards. 
Any use constructed, established, altered or enlarged in the I-1 industrial district after October 18, 1984, should be operated so as to comply with the following standards. No use already established on October 18, 1984, should be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the applicable standards established hereinafter for the I-1 light industrial district. 
(1)  No building should be used for residential purposes, except that a watchman may reside on the premises. 
(2)  No retail sales or service should be permitted except those listed in section 122-641 for the I-1 district. 
(3)  All operations, activities and storage (but not to include off-street parking and loading of motor vehicles in operating condition) should be conducted and maintained wholly inside buildings, except that storage may be maintained outside a building if no part is less than 15 feet from any lot line of the tract on which the use is located, and provided any such storage area is screened from other property with a decorative sight-proof fence or planting. 
(4)  No noise from any operation conducted on the premises, other than that emanating from vehicular traffic, either continuous or intermittent, should be detectable at any boundary line of the I-1 district. 
(5)  All manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing and testing of goods, wares and merchandise should be carried on in such a manner so as not to be injurious or offensive by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, glare or heat, fire or explosive hazards. 
(6)  No fuel or energy except electricity, natural and/or liquefied petroleum, and solar energy should be used. 
(7)  No raw materials should be processed into any of the following basic products: metals of any kind, glass, plastic, textiles, leather or paper. 
(8)  All premises should be furnished with all-weather hard-surfaced walks. Except for parking areas, the grounds shall be planted and landscaped. 
(9)  The manufacture or the use of any materials which produce explosive vapors or gases is prohibited. 
(10)  Any operation that produces intense glare or heat should be performed within a completely enclosed building, and exposed sources of light should be screened so as not to be detectable at the lot lines of the zoned parcel. 
(Code 1977, § 17.34.020)  
Sec. 122-663. - Permitted uses. 
See section 122-641. Property and buildings in an I-1 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the I-1 category listed in section 122-641. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Code 1977, § 17.34.030; Ord. No. 1023, § 20, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-664. - Area requirements. 
For main and accessory buildings in the I-1 district, there shall be a lot area of not less than 14,000 square feet, except as provided in article IX of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.34.040)  
Sec. 122-665. - Lot width. 
All lots in the I-1 district shall be at least 100 feet in width and abut on a street for a distance of not less than 60 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.34.050)  
Sec. 122-666. - Yards. 
The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in the I-1 district: 
(1)  Front yard. All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way line to provide a front yard not less than 30 feet in depth. 
(2)  Rear yard. In all cases, there shall be a rear yard not less than 30 feet in depth, except when abutting a residential district the distance from the property line to any building shall be 50 feet. Detached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of the main building, and shall not encroach on any easement. 
(3)  Side yard. 
a.  There shall be a minimum side yard setback of 15 feet on either side of the property line. 
b.  There shall be a minimum side yard setback of 25 feet on the street side of any lot which abuts a street. 
(Code 1977, § 17.34.060)  
Sec. 122-667. - Building coverage; maximum floor area. 
Main and accessory buildings and loading facilities in the I-1 district shall not cover more than 40 percent of the lot area, and in no case shall the gross floor area of the main building exceed the area of the lot. 
(Code 1977, § 17.34.070)  
Sec. 122-668. - Building height. 
No building or portion thereof in the I-1 district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.34.080)  
Sec. 122-669. - Fencing and lighting. 
(a)  Requirements. Whenever any new Industrial-1 land use is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot or tract in any existing residential district or any subcategory thereof, including a residential planned unit development (PUD), such residential use including, but not limited to, a parking lot or parking area, a fence or wall that is sight-proof from single-story residential areas or streets, not less than six feet nor more than ten feet high, as measured from the finished grade, shall be constructed between the industrial and residential lots. Such fence shall be maintained by the industrial property owner in good condition, as determined by the community development director. This fence shall be placed along and within three feet of the rear lot line and along and within three feet of the side lot line to the point of the front yard setback of the residential tract or lot, except where the front yard of the industrial lot is used for off-street parking, then the provisions of article X of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking lots shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. Such sight-proof screening shall consist of a sturdy opaque fence and, if appropriate, decorative planting, which complies with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, and adequate so that the Industrial-1 use is not visible from any residential street or pedestrian way, except as to those portions of the operation of use which exceed the height limitations of the fencing or screening. This provision shall supersede all other fencing and lighting requirements for Industrial-1 districts which may be contrary to this provision. 
(b)  Fencing plan to be part of preliminary and final plats. 
(1)  At the time of submission of an application for building permit for any Industrial-1 district adjoining the side or rear line of a residential district, a fencing plan shall be submitted which shows all screening, fencing, and, where appropriate, decorative planting, and the materials and type of screening and fencing. This fencing plan will be considered a supplemental part of the building permit application and no building permit will be issued without an approved fencing plan. 
(2)  At the time of consideration of the building permit application, the community development department will review the fencing plan to determine the adequacy of the proposed fencing to meet the purposes set forth herein. The director of community development shall submit a recommendation which shall include any information provided by the city engineer regarding the application. If the community development department determines that the proposed plan for fencing is not adequate to obstruct visibility or is inharmonious with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, or is not of sufficient materials, construction, or strength to reasonably withstand factors of nature and weather, then the community development department may make such requirements as are necessary and reasonable to meet the criteria set forth herein. 
(c)  Fencing plan in Industrial-1 districts. In those Industrial-1 districts which adjoin the side or rear lot line of residential districts, a fencing plan shall be submitted and approval must be granted prior to the issuance of any building permit, or, if no building permit is required, prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit within the Industrial-1 district. 
(d)  Fencing approval required for occupancy. An occupancy permit will not be issued until the fencing, as required, is complete in accordance with the approved fencing plan. 
(e)  Fencing/screening definitions. As used in this section, fencing or screening shall mean a structure of wood, stone, ornamental iron, or metal, brick, tile, or concrete, and vinyl, or other opaque construction materials, connected together and designed for use in a fixed position, erected upon the ground for aesthetic and functional purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 17.34.090; Ord. No. 814, § 1, 10-1-2002)  
Sec. 122-670. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the I-1 district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.34.100)  
Sec. 122-671. - Sewer service. 
No structure or use in the I-1 district shall be erected, commenced or allowed to continue which does not have a connection to a public or private sewer system or wastewater treatment facility considered adequate and effective by the city engineer or city inspector and the state department of health. 
(Code 1977, § 17.34.110)  
Secs. 122-672—122-690. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - I-2 MODERATE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-691. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the I-2 moderate industrial district is to provide locations for industry which may generate low levels of noise, odor, smoke, dust or glare which shall be contained within an enclosed building and are not a hazard to the surrounding areas. The intent is to preserve this land for industry in a location beneficial to industries and to prohibit non-industrial use. 
(Code 1977, § 17.36.010)  
Sec. 122-692. - Use standards. 
Any use constructed, established, altered or enlarged in the I-2 moderate industrial district after October 18, 1984, shall be operated as to comply with the following standards. No use already established on October 18, 1984, shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the applicable standards established hereinafter for the I-2 moderate industrial district. 
(1)  No building shall be used for residential purposes, except that a watchman may reside on the premises. 
(2)  No retail sales or services shall be permitted except those listed in section 122-641 for the I-2 district. 
(3)  No storage, manufacture or assembly of goods shall be conducted out of a building unless properly screened pursuant to section 122-699. 
(4)  Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid direct light upon property located in any residential districts. 
(5)  All manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing and testing of goods, wares and merchandise shall be carried on in such a manner so as not to be injurious or offensive by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, glare or heat, fire or explosive hazards. 
(6)  No activities involving storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted. 
(Code 1977, § 17.36.020)  
Sec. 122-693. - Permitted uses. 
See section 122-641. Property and buildings in an I-2 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the I-2 category listed in section 122-641. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Code 1977, § 17.36.030; Ord. No. 1023, § 21, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-694. - Area requirements. 
For main and accessory buildings in the I-2 district, there shall be a lot area of not less than 20,000 square feet, except as provided in article IX of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.36.040)  
Sec. 122-695. - Lot width. 
All lots in the I-2 district shall be at least 200 feet in width and abut on a street for a distance of not less than 60 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.36.050)  
Sec. 122-696. - Yards. 
The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in the I-2 district: 
(1)  Front yard. All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way line to provide a front yard not less than 30 feet in depth. 
(2)  Rear yard. In all cases, there shall be a rear yard not less than 30 feet in depth, except when abutting a residential district the distance from the property line to any building shall be 50 feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of the main building, and shall not encroach on any easements. 
(3)  Side yard. 
a.  There shall be a minimum side yard setback of 15 feet on either side of the property line. 
b.  There shall be a minimum side yard setback of 25 feet on the street side of any lot which abuts a street. 
(Code 1977, § 17.36.066)  
Sec. 122-697. - Building coverage. 
Main and accessory buildings and loading facilities in the I-2 district shall not cover more than 50 percent of the lot area, and in no case shall the gross floor area of the main building exceed the area of the lot. 
(Code 1977, § 17.36.070)  
Sec. 122-698. - Building height. 
No building or portion thereof in the I-2 district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.36.080)  
Sec. 122-699. - Fencing and lighting. 
(a)  Requirements. Whenever any new Industrial-2 land use is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot or tract in any existing Residential District or any subcategory thereof, including a residential planned unit development (PUD), such residential use including, but not limited to, a parking lot or parking area, a fence or wall that is sight-proof from single-story residential areas or streets, not less than eight feet nor more than ten feet high, as measured from the finished grade, shall be constructed between the industrial and residential lots. Such fence shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition, as determined by the community development director. This fence shall be placed along and within three feet of the rear lot line and along and within three feet of the side lot line to the point of the front yard setback of the residential tract or lot, except where the front yard of the industrial lot is used for off-street parking, then the provisions of article X of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking lots shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. Such sight-proof screening shall consist of a sturdy opaque fence and, if appropriate, decorative planting, which complies with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, and adequate so that the Industrial-2 use is not visible from any residential street or pedestrian way, except as to those portions of the operation of use which exceed the height limitations of the fencing or screening. This provision shall supersede all other fencing and lighting requirements for Industrial-2 districts which may be contrary to this provision. 
(b)  Fencing plan to be part of preliminary and final plats. 
(1)  At the time of submission of an application for building permit for any Industrial-2 district adjoining the side or rear line of a residential district, a fencing plan shall be submitted which shows all screening, fencing, and, where appropriate, decorative planting, and the materials and type of screening and fencing. This fencing plan will be considered a supplemental part of the building permit application and no building permit will be issued without an approved fencing plan. 
(2)  At the time of consideration of the building permit application, the community development department will review the fencing plan to determine the adequacy of the proposed fencing to meet the purposes set forth herein. The director of community development shall submit a recommendation which shall include any information provided by the city engineer regarding the application. If the community development department determines that the proposed plan for fencing is not adequate to obstruct visibility or is inharmonious with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, or is not of sufficient materials, construction, or strength to reasonably withstand factors of nature and weather, then the community development department may make such requirements as are necessary and reasonable to meet the criteria set forth herein. 
(c)  Fencing plan in Industrial-2 districts. In those Industrial-2 districts which adjoin the side or rear lot line of residential districts, a fencing plan shall be submitted and approval must be granted prior to the issuance of any building permit, or, if no building permit is required, prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit within the Industrial-2 district. 
(d)  Fencing approval required for occupancy. An occupancy permit will not be issued until the fencing, as required, is complete in accordance with the approved fencing plan. 
(e)  Fencing/screening definitions. As used in this section, fencing or screening shall mean a structure of wood, stone, ornamental iron, or metal, brick, tile, or concrete, and vinyl, or other opaque construction materials, connected together and designed for use in a fixed position, erected upon the ground for aesthetic and functional purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 17.36.090; Ord. No. 815, § 1, 10-1-2002)  
Sec. 122-700. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the I-2 district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.36.100)  
Sec. 122-701. - Sewer service. 
No structure or use in the I-2 district shall be erected, commenced or allowed to continue which does not have a connection to a public or private sewer system or wastewater treatment facility considered adequate and effective by the city engineer or city inspector and the state department of health. 
(Code 1977, § 17.36.110)  
Secs. 122-702—122-720. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - I-3 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 122-721. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the I-3 heavy industrial district is to provide a location for industries which may by their very nature create nuisances, but which do not create noxious nuisances or a hazard to surrounding areas. The intent is to preserve this land especially for industry in locations with access to primary major arterials and rail service. Even though this district caters to industries which may create a substantial nuisance, it does not permit industries which by the nature of their operation emit odors, gases, dust, noise, smoke, heat, glare or vibration in sufficient quantities so as to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 1977, § 17.38.010)  
Sec. 122-722. - Use standards. 
Any use constructed, established, altered or enlarged in the I-3 heavy industrial district after October 18, 1984, shall be operated as to comply with the following standards. No use already established on October 18, 1984, shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the applicable standards established hereinafter for the I-3 heavy industrial district. 
(1)  No building shall be used for residential purposes, except that a watchman may reside on the premises. 
(2)  No retail sales or services shall be permitted except those listed in section 122-641 for the I-3 district. 
(3)  No storage, manufacture or assembly of goods shall be conducted out of a building unless properly screened pursuant to section 122-729. 
(4)  Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid direct light upon property located in any residential district. 
(5)  All manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing and testing of goods, wares and merchandise shall be carried on in such a manner as not to be injurious or offensive by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, glare or heat, fire or explosive hazards. 
(6)  No activities involving storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted. 
(Code 1977, § 17.38.020)  
Sec. 122-723. - Permitted uses. 
See section 122-641. Property and buildings in an I-3 district shall be used only for those uses which have a "P" or an "R" in the I-3 category listed in section 122-641. The letter "P" indicates a use that is permitted by right. The letter "R" signifies a conditional use that may be permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit in accordance with section 122-57. 
(Code 1977, § 17.38.030; Ord. No. 1023, § 22, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 122-724. - Area requirements. 
For main and accessory buildings in the I-3 district, there shall be a lot area of not less than 25,000 square feet, except as provided in article IX of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.38.040)  
Sec. 122-725. - Lot width. 
All lots in the I-3 district shall be at least 250 feet in width and abut on a street for a distance of not less than 60 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.38.050)  
Sec. 122-726. - Yards. 
The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in the I-3 district: 
(1)  Front yard. All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way line to provide a front yard not less than 30 feet in depth. 
(2)  Rear yard. In all cases, there shall be a rear yard not less than 30 feet in depth, except when abutting a residential district the distance from the property line to any building shall be 50 feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of the main building, and shall not encroach on any easements. 
(3)  Side yard. 
a.  There shall be a minimum side yard setback of 15 feet on either side of the property line. 
b.  There shall be a minimum side yard setback of 25 feet on the street side of any lot which abuts a street. 
(Code 1977, § 17.38.060)  
Sec. 122-727. - Building coverage; maximum floor area. 
Main and accessory buildings and loading facilities in the I-3 district shall not cover more than 50 percent of the lot area, and in no case shall the gross floor area of the main building exceed the area of the lot. 
(Code 1977, § 17.38.070)  
Sec. 122-728. - Building height. 
No building or portion thereof in the I-3 district shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(Code 1977, § 17.38.080)  
Sec. 122-729. - Fencing and lighting. 
(a)  Requirements. Whenever any new Industrial-3 land use is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot or tract in any existing residential district or any subcategory thereof, including a residential planned unit development (PUD), such residential use including, but not limited to, a parking lot or parking area, a fence or wall that is sight-proof from single-story residential areas or streets, ten feet high, as measured from the finished grade, shall be constructed between the industrial and residential lots. Such fence shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition, as determined by the community development director. This fence shall be placed along and within three feet of the rear lot lines and along and within three feet of the side lot line to the point of the front yard setback of the residential tract or lot, except where the front yard of the industrial lot is used for off-street parking, then the provisions of article X of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking lots shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. Such sight-proof screening shall consist of a sturdy opaque fence and, if appropriate, decorative planting, which complies with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, and adequate so that the Industrial-3 use is not visible from any residential street or pedestrian way, except as to those portions of the operation of use which exceed the height limitations of the fencing or screening. This provision shall supersede all other fencing and lighting requirements for Industrial-3 districts which may be contrary to this provision. 
(b)  Fencing plan to be part of preliminary and final plats. 
(1)  At the time of submission of an application for building permit for any Industrial-3 district adjoining the side or rear line of a residential district, a fencing plan shall be submitted which shows all screening, fencing, and, where appropriate, decorative planting, and the materials and type of screening and fencing. This fencing plan will be considered a supplemental part of the building permit application and no building permit will be issued without an approved fencing plan. 
(2)  At the time of consideration of the building permit application, the community development department will review the fencing plan to determine the adequacy of the proposed fencing to meet the purposes set forth herein. The director of community development shall submit a recommendation which shall include any information provided by the city engineer regarding the application. If the community development department determines that the proposed plan for fencing is not adequate to obstruct visibility or is inharmonious with the aesthetic standards of the adjoining residential district, or is not of sufficient materials, construction, or strength to reasonably withstand factors of nature and weather, then the community development department may make such requirements as are necessary and reasonable to meet the criteria set forth herein. 
(c)  Fencing plan in Industrial-3 districts. In those Industrial-3 districts which adjoin the side or rear lot line of residential districts, a fencing plan shall be submitted and approval must be granted prior to the issuance of any building permit, or, if no building permit is required, prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit within the Industrial-3 district. 
(d)  Fencing approval required for occupancy. An occupancy permit will not be issued until the fencing, as required, is complete in accordance with the approved fencing plan. 
(e)  Fencing/screening definitions. As used in this section, fencing or screening shall mean a structure of wood, stone, ornamental iron, or metal, brick, tile, or concrete, and vinyl, or other opaque construction materials, connected together and designed for use in a fixed position, erected upon the ground for aesthetic and functional purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 17.38.090; Ord. No. 816, § 1, 10-1-2002)  
Sec. 122-730. - Landscaping. 
All lots in the I-3 district shall be landscaped and maintained per article IX, division 2 of this chapter and other applicable codes of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.38.100)  
Sec. 122-731. - Sewer service. 
No structure or use in the I-3 district shall be erected, commenced or allowed to continue which does not have a connection to a public or private sewer system or wastewater treatment facility considered adequate and effective by the city engineer or city inspector and the state department of health. 
(Code 1977, § 17.38.110)  
Secs. 122-732—122-790. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Planned unit developments, 11 O.S. § 43-110 et seq. 
 
Sec. 122-791. - Generally. 
A planned unit development is a special zoning district category that provides an alternate approach to conventional land use controls. The planned unit development may be used for particular tracts or parcels of land that are under common ownership and are to be developed as one unit according to a master development plan. The planned unit development is subject to special review procedures. Once approved by the city council, it becomes a special zoning classification for the property it represents. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.010)  
Sec. 122-792. - Purpose and intent of article. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to encourage unified design of residential, commercial, industrial or institutional areas and facilities, or combinations thereof, and to provide for integrated development having harmony of design and variety of function. It is also the intent of this article to encourage the development of planned commercial and industrial sites to eliminate the adverse impacts of traditional strip zoning. 
(b)  The purpose of the planned unit development provisions is to: 
(1)  Encourage innovative land development while maintaining appropriate limitations on the character and intensity of use, ensuring compatibility with adjoining and proximate properties, and following the guidelines of the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Permit flexibility within the development to maximize the unique physical features of the particular site; 
(3)  Encourage efficient use of land, facilitate economic arrangement of buildings and circulation systems, and encourage diversified living environments and land uses; 
(4)  Achieve a continuity of function and design within the development; 
(5)  Encourage innovative development of smaller parcels of land that have been passed over; and 
(6)  Provide a vehicle for negotiating modifications in standard development requirements in order to both encourage innovative development and protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.020)  
Sec. 122-793. - Establishment of district; minimum area; master plan. 
A planned unit development may be authorized by an amendment to the official zoning district map after public hearings by the planning commission and city council. A planned unit development shall be considered a special zoning district, and it may be authorized for any use or combination of uses permitted in this chapter. A planned unit development must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum district area. A planned unit development zoning district shall have a minimum area of not less than one acre or the minimum area requirement of the zoning district which the planned unit development is based upon, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Master plan. A planned unit development master plan is required as the basis for review and approval of a planned unit development application. The planned unit development master plan shall be adopted as a part of the ordinance of rezoning and shall be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and the following: 
a.  The planned unit development master plan shall consist of two elements, the design statement and the master development plan map; 
b.  The planned unit development master plan shall establish residential densities, as well as amount, type and general location of all land uses; and 
c.  The planned unit development master plan shall serve as the basis for review and approval of all subdivision plats and building permits within the planned unit development. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.030)  
Sec. 122-794. - Effect of approval. 
(a)  Approval of a zoning change to planned unit development adopts the master plan prepared by the applicant and reviewed as a part of the application. The master plan establishes new and specific requirements for amount and type of land use, residential densities, development regulations, and location of specific elements of the development such as open space, landscaping and screening. 
(b)  The planned unit development classification replaces any previous zoning district classification on a parcel. 
(c)  Where there is no provision in the planned unit development master plan for special development regulations, the requirements of the most restrictive conventional zoning district in which a proposed use or a structure is permitted shall be applied to the development. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.040)  
Sec. 122-795. - Criteria for review and approval. 
(a)  Because the planned unit development provides the opportunity for higher densities, greater design flexibility, mixed land uses, and improved marketability, the applicant should be prepared to provide amenities and services that might not be required or possible in a conventional development. Review and approval of a planned unit development is, therefore, a process of negotiation between the city government and the applicant to achieve the intents and purposes of this chapter and the comprehensive plan. The following factors should be specifically included as review criteria for the evaluation of a planned unit development application. Other factors not listed in this section may also be considered in the review process in order to respond to specific design and land use proposals. 
(b)  The following design standards should be specifically included as review criteria for the evaluation of a planned unit development application: 
(1)  General development standards. The proposed planned unit development should be designed to provide for the unified development of the area in accordance with the spirit and purpose of the comprehensive plan and the land uses and zoning districts adjacent to it. 
(2)  Modification of zoning requirements. Design of the planned unit development may provide for modification of conventional zoning ordinance requirements for such elements as yard areas, densities, setback and height on individual lots in accordance with the planned unit development master plan. 
(3)  Conformance with master plan and comprehensive plan. Density, land use and intensity of use requirements should be based on the planned unit development master plan and should be reviewed carefully for conformance to the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Conformance with building code. Building code requirements should not be reduced or modified in the design of a planned unit development. 
(5)  Gross density. The maximum number of dwelling units within a planned unit development should be based on calculation of gross density. Gross density should be established in the planned unit development master plan and should be calculated by dividing the total land area to be developed for residential uses (exclusive of arterial streets) by the number of dwelling units. 
(6)  Housing type and location. Location and type of housing should be established in a general pattern and shown on the master development plan map. 
(7)  Park dedication, parking facilities and landscaping. Park dedication requirements (chapter 106, article VI), parking requirements (article X of this chapter) and landscaping requirements (article IX, division 2 of this chapter) should not be reduced in the design of a planned unit development. 
(8)  Intensity. Proposed development should conform to the level of intensity guidelines in the comprehensive plan and should be developed in a manner and at a scale that will be compatible with adjacent developed neighborhoods. 
(9)  Amenities. Amenities should be considered as an important justification for development and city approval of a planned unit development. Where gross or net densities are to be increased to promote economy of development, or where other methods of land use intensification are proposed, usable open space should be furnished along with provisions for its permanent retention and continued maintenance. Sidewalks and pedestrian ways shall be planned where it is necessary to provide for amenity and public safety. 
(10)  Minimum land area and frontage. The minimum area and frontage for a planned unit development request involving office, commercial or industrial land uses should generally be at least the minimum required by the conventional zoning associated with the proposal. 
(11)  Streets. The following are general design standards for streets: 
a.  Street design should be innovative and should restrict through traffic from residential areas as much as possible. 
b.  Encouragement should be given to design of short local streets serving limited areas, such as the residential cul-de-sac. 
c.  Development of a private street system should be considered appropriate under certain conditions where there is no through traffic. However a private street system should not serve as a reason for reduction of minimum design and paving standards in urban areas. 
d.  On-street parking bays or other similar areas should not be approved. 
(12)  Adjacent land uses. The following general guidelines should be used to establish the relationship of the planned unit development to abutting land uses: 
a.  The master development plan map shall show graphically the treatments that will be employed to separate the planned unit development from abutting properties, including commitments to landscaping, screening, earth berms or similar techniques. 
b.  It is appropriate to specifically establish areas with height limitations where a transition to more intense uses is proposed or where a higher intensity development is proposed to abut a lower intensity area. 
(13)  Mixed land use developments. Where a planned unit development proposes a mix of uses which would generally be incompatible with a conventional development, the planned unit development master plan should specifically establish appropriate guidelines to ensure a harmonious development. 
(14)  Common access. In commercial or industrial developments, the planned unit development master plan should establish specific standards and locations for common access driveways both within the development and abutting arterial streets. 
(c)  Streets and alleys for planned unit developments should be designed and constructed in accordance with city standards and specifications for right-of-way width and paving cross sections. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.050)  
Sec. 122-796. - Application procedure generally. 
(a)  The developer and/or builder of a planned unit development shall follow a five-step application and review procedure: 
(1)  Pre-application review; 
(2)  Application for rezoning, and submission of the planned unit development master plan, including the design statement and master development plan; 
(3)  Preliminary plat, where required by the subdivision regulations (chapter 106); 
(4)  Final plat, where required by the subdivision regulations (chapter 106); and 
(5)  Application for building permits and site plan review. 
(b)  Each required step shall be completed and approved before the following step is reviewed. Where appropriate, other methods authorized in the subdivision regulations may be substituted for the steps described in subsections (a)(3) and (4) of this section. The planning commission and city council may, however, review more than one step at the same public hearing. 
(c)  Public hearings shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Public hearings shall be held on the application for rezoning and the planned unit development master plan in accordance with regular procedures for zoning applications; provided, if the proposed rezoning includes a use that is allowed only in the C6 commercial special use district, then the notice required shall be in accordance with that required for C6 zoning amendments; and 
(2)  Public hearings on required plats shall be held in accordance with regular procedures established in the subdivision regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.060; Ord. No. 1037, § 10, 2-2-2010)  
Sec. 122-797. - Pre-application review. 
Prior to submission of an application for rezoning to a planned unit development, the applicant shall submit to the director a freehand pencil sketch plan drawn to approximate scale showing streets, lots, public areas and other significant features. The applicant should discuss with the director the procedure for adopting a planned unit development and the requirements for the general layout of streets and utilities, access to arterials, or general design and narrative, the availability of existing services, and similar matters. The intent of the pre-application review is to ascertain whether the development is feasible as proposed and to expedite and facilitate the approval of a planned unit development master plan. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.061)  
Sec. 122-798. - Application for rezoning and submission of master plan. 
(a)  Filing. The planned unit development application for rezoning shall be filed in accordance with regular procedures and on application forms of the city. Twelve copies of the planned unit development master plan shall be submitted with the application for rezoning and shall consist of a design statement and a master development plan map. The applicant shall also provide other supporting maps as necessary to meet the submission requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Master development plan map. The master development plan map shall be a graphic representation of the development plan for the area, prepared at a scale appropriate for the size of the project, but no less than the minimum required for preliminary plats in the subdivision regulations (chapter 106). It shall show the following: 
(1)  Location of proposed land uses, residential densities and structures; 
(2)  Location of collector streets within the planned unit development and adjacent arterial streets; 
(3)  Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the planned unit development to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed; 
(4)  Location and approximate size of proposed open space and recreation areas and landscaping; 
(5)  Areas where access to streets will be limited, and location of driveways where appropriate; 
(6)  Design of all off-street parking facilities, with design of ingress and egress; and 
(7)  Any other pertinent information necessary for review, approval and administration of the planned unit development as determined by the director of community development. This could include but is not limited to showing the location of oil wells, towers or electrical lines. 
(c)  Development design statement. The planned unit development design statement shall be a written report submitted as a part of the planned unit development master plan, containing a minimum of the following elements: 
(1)  Title of the planned unit development; 
(2)  List of the owners and developers; 
(3)  Statement of the general location and relationship to adjoining land uses, both existing and proposed; 
(4)  Description of the planned unit development concept, including an acreage or square foot breakdown of land use areas and densities proposed, a general description of proposed building use types, proposed restrictions, and typical site layouts; 
(5)  The existing planned unit development zoning districts in the development area and surrounding it; 
(6)  A list of all special development regulations or the conventional zoning district regulations which will be applicable; 
(7)  A statement on the existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way standards and street design concepts; 
(8)  The following physical characteristics: elevation, slope analysis, soil characteristics, tree cover and drainage information; 
(9)  A topographic map with minimum two-foot contour intervals; 
(10)  Drainage information, including number of acres in the drainage area and delineation of applicable flood levels; 
(11)  A statement of utility lines and services to be installed, including which lines will be dedicated to the city and which will remain private; 
(12)  The proposed densities, and the use types and sizes of structures; 
(13)  A description of the proposed sequence of development; and 
(14)  If there is no plat required or if other methods authorized in the subdivision regulations are appropriate, then the items required by subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section shall be submitted and approved as a part of the planned unit development master plan at the time of rezoning. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.062)  
Sec. 122-799. - Preliminary plat. 
Upon approval of the planned unit development master plan and the ordinance of rezoning, the developer shall prepare a preliminary plat for the entire development area. Where a recorded plat exists and where there will be no extensive easements, no property owners' associations, no plat restrictions, and no sale of lots which do not conform to the platted lot lines, the planning commission may waive the platting requirement. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.063)  
Sec. 122-800. - Final plat. 
Where a subdivision plat has been required for a planned unit development, the developer shall prepare a final plat for review, approval and filing of record according to procedures established by the subdivision regulations (chapter 106). In addition to these procedures, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The final plat shall include provisions for the ownership and maintenance of common open space. The open space may be dedicated to a private association or to the public, provided that a dedication to the public shall not be accepted without the approval of the city council. 
(2)  A homeowners' or property owners' association shall be created if other satisfactory arrangements have not been made for improving, operating and maintaining common facilities, including private streets and drives, service and parking areas, and recreation areas. 
(3)  Covenants shall be submitted to reasonably ensure continued compliance with the approved planned unit development master plan. In order that the public interest may be protected, the city shall be made a beneficiary of the covenants pertaining to such matters as location of uses, height of structures, setbacks, screening, maintenance of common facilities, and access. Such covenants shall provide that the city may enforce compliance therewith. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.064)  
Sec. 122-801. - Plot plan. 
A plot plan shall be submitted for planned unit developments upon the application for a building permit and reviewed in accordance with the procedures outlined in article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.065)  
Sec. 122-802. - Review and approval. 
(a)  Design review. 
(1)  All planned unit development applications shall be reviewed through the design review process. Upon receipt of a completed application and application fee for planned unit development master plan review, the director shall transmit the application and all supporting material to the various city departments involved with the design review process and to appropriate officials or agencies of the city, the county, adjoining counties or municipalities, school and special districts, and other official bodies as deemed necessary or as mandated by law, including any review required by regional or state bodies under applicable state or federal law. Each participant shall consider all pertinent information, and shall provide the director with a report of its findings, comments and recommendations. 
(2)  After receiving all comments, the director shall advise the applicant whether or not significant changes or modifications should be made to the planned unit development master plan application prior to the proposal's consideration by the planning commission. The applicant may elect to present the application to the planning commission without modification. 
(3)  This process shall conform to the design review process in the subdivision regulations (chapter 106). Where a preliminary plat and a planned unit development master plan are submitted together, they may be reviewed concurrently. 
(b)  Approval. 
(1)  Upon final approval by the city council of the planned unit development master plan and the appropriate ordinance of rezoning, these elements shall become a part of the official zoning district map. The ordinance of rezoning shall adopt the planned unit development master plan by reference, and it shall be attached to the ordinance and become a part of the official records of the city. 
(2)  The planned unit development master plan shall control the use and development of the property, and all building permits and development requests shall be in accord with the plan until it is otherwise amended by the city council. The developer shall furnish a reproducible copy of the approved master development plan map for signature by the chairperson of the planning commission and the mayor, and acknowledgement by the city clerk. The planned unit development master plan, including the signed map and all supporting data, shall be made a part of the permanent file and maintained by the city clerk. 
(c)  Public hearings. Public hearings shall be required prior to approval of the planned unit development master plan. Notice shall be provided in accordance with regular procedures established by this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.070)  
Sec. 122-803. - Minor amendments and adjustments to master plan. 
(a)  The director shall be permitted to approve minor amendments and adjustments to the planned unit development master plan provided the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The project boundaries are not altered. 
(2)  Uses other than those specifically approved in the planned unit development master plan are not added. Uses may be deleted, but not to the extent that the character of the project is substantially altered. 
(3)  The allocation of land to particular uses or the relationship of uses within the project is not altered by more than 15 percent. 
(4)  The density of housing is not increased by more than ten percent or decreased by more than 30 percent. 
(5)  The land area allocated to nonresidential uses is not increased or decreased by more than ten percent. 
(6)  Floor area, if prescribed, is not increased or decreased by more than ten percent. 
(7)  Floor area ratios, if prescribed, are not increased. 
(8)  Open space ratios, if prescribed, are not decreased. 
(9)  Height restrictions, yard requirements, lot coverage restrictions and other area, height and bulk requirements prescribed in the planned unit development master plan are not substantially altered. 
(10)  The circulation system is not substantially altered in design, configuration or location. 
(11)  The design and location of access points to the project are not altered either in design or capacity. 
(b)  The director shall determine if proposed amendments to an approved master development plan satisfy the criteria in this section. If the director finds that these criteria are not satisfied, an amended planned unit development master plan shall be submitted for full review and approval according to the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.080)  
Sec. 122-804. - Reversion. 
(a)  Reversion at property owner's request. If the property owner decides to revert the planned unit development concept and nullify the planned unit development master plan, he shall make application for rezoning either to the original status or to a new classification. The zoning application shall be heard according to regular procedures by the planning commission and city council. 
(b)  Continuing review of project status. Development of at least one tract within a Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall begin within three years from approval date of the PUD master plan. If development has not begun, the city council, after hearing the planning commission's recommendation, may cause the reversion of the PUD to its former zoning classification(s). Development must also take place on at least one additional tract every three years after the initial three-year deadline, or the city council, after hearing the planning commission's recommendation, may cause the reversion of all remaining undeveloped tracts within the PUD to their former zoning classifications. This ordinance shall apply to all PUD rezoning applications approved after the effective date of this section. 
To prevent the tracts in the PUD from reverting back to their former zoning classifications, one of the following must occur: 
(1)  Development. In order for development to be considered to have begun, an application shall be made for a plat or building permit. Said permit or application fees shall be paid prior to the end of the three-year period. When construction of permanent improvements or structures is the method of development they must begin within six months of the purchase of said permit. When platting is the method of development there shall be at least a preliminary plat approved by council within one year of application. A final plat shall be approved within one year from date of approval of the preliminary plat, or neither will be considered to have begun and the city council, after hearing the planning commission's recommendation, may cause the reversion of all remaining undeveloped tracts within the PUD to their former zoning classifications. 
(2)  Development time line. 
a.  Application for permanent improvements or structures must be made within three years of effective date of the PUD. Actual construction must begin within six months of application; or 
b.  Application for preliminary plat must be made within three years of the effective date of the PUD. Preliminary plat must be approved by council one year from date of application. Council must approve final plat within one year after the preliminary plat has been approved. 
(3)  Extension. To request an extension, the owner may submit in writing to the city council not less than 60 days before the expiration, reason or reasons for not starting development within the PUD and request the actual extension of time required to begin development. The planning commission shall review all such requests and make a recommendation to the city council. The city council shall then review such requests and determine if the extension of time is warranted. At that time, the city council shall either grant or deny the extension or modify the time requested. Only one extension will be permitted, and if no development has taken place before the expiration of the extension, the city council, after hearing the planning commission's recommendation, may cause the reversion of all remaining undeveloped tracts within the PUD to their former zoning classifications. 
(Code 1977, § 17.44.090; Ord. No. 877, § 1, 12-16-2003)  
Secs. 122-805—122-830. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 122-831. - Applicability of article. 
The requirements of this article are intended to provide exceptions to or qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set forth in articles IV through VII of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.010)  
Sec. 122-832. - Lot area and open space to serve designated building only. 
No open space or lot area for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied by, or counted as open space for, any other building or structure. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.020)  
Sec. 122-833. - Projections into yards. 
Open eaves, cornices, windowsills and belt courses may project into any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet. Open porches may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to exceed five feet. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.030)  
Sec. 122-834. - Fences, walls and hedges in residential districts. 
Fences, walls and hedges in residential districts may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard; provided that no fence, wall or hedge located in front of the front building line shall exceed three feet in height, and no other wall or fence shall exceed six feet in height. On corner lots, fencing on side yards that adjoin a street shall not extend in front of the front building line. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.040; Ord. No. 1176, § 1, 10-2-2018)  
Sec. 122-835. - Measurement of front yard when dedicated right-of-way is less than 50 feet. 
Where the dedicated right-of-way is less than 50 feet, the depth of the front yard shall be measured at a starting point 25 feet from the centerline of the street easement. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.050)  
Sec. 122-836. - Street access for dwellings. 
No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least one street for the minimum width allowed in the zoning district where it is located. A street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means of ingress and egress. Provided this chapter is complied with, a garage apartment may be built to the rear of a main dwelling. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.060)  
Sec. 122-837. - Sight lines at intersections. 
The sight triangle at intersections is defined as a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of 25 feet along the front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a sight triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection. On all corner lots no wall, fence, sign, structure, or any plant growth which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two feet and six feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be placed or maintained in this area. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.070)  
Sec. 122-838. - Setback for private garages. 
An attached or detached private garage which faces on a street shall not be located closer than 30 feet to the street right-of-way line. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.080)  
Sec. 122-839. - Accessory buildings not to be constructed or used before main building. 
Except in the A-1 district, no accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also being used. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.090)  
Sec. 122-840. - Design requirements for buildings with unusual orientation or arrangement. 
Whenever one or more residential, institutional, commercial or industrial buildings are proposed to be located in a cluster or grouping which has a different arrangement or orientation or an innovative site planning variation from that of other buildings, structures or uses in the area or on adjacent properties, the architectural design, location, orientation, service and parking areas of such buildings shall be planned so as not to adversely affect the use of adjacent or other properties in the area, as determined by the planning commission. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.100)  
Sec. 122-841. - Site area for dwellings not served by sanitary sewer system. 
The 2002 edition of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality, Title 252, Oklahoma Administrative Code, Chapter 641, "Individual and Small Public On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems" guidelines and all subsequent amendments or revisions are adopted by reference. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.110; Ord. No. 828, § 1, 11-19-2002)  
Sec. 122-842. - Building height. 
The following regulations qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations appearing in articles IV through VII of this chapter: 
(1)  In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted as a story; provided that a story in a sloping roof, the area of which story at a height of four feet above the floor does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area of the story immediately below it and which does not contain an independent apartment, shall be counted as a half story. 
(2)  Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers and other projections not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.120)  
Sec. 122-843. - Court requirements for multiple-family dwellings. 
Whenever a multiple-family dwelling or group of multiple-family dwellings is designed with an inner or outer court, the following requirements shall be met: 
(1)  The width of an outer court upon which windows open shall be not less than ten feet, or equal to the height of the opposingwall, whichever is greater; and in no case shall an outer court be less than five feet in width or equal to 70 percent of the height of the opposing wall, whichever is greater. 
(2)  The width of an inner court of a multiple-family dwelling shall be not less than two times the height of the lowest wall forming the court, but in no case shall it be less than 20 feet. 
(3)  An open unobstructed passageway shall be provided at the grade of each inner court. Such passageway shall be not less than 12 feet in width, shall have a clearance of not less than 12 feet in height, and shall provide a straight and continuous passage from the inner court to a yard or open space having a direct connection with a street. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.130)  
Sec. 122-844. - Storage and parking of automobiles, trailers and commercial vehicles in residential areas. 
Automobiles, commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including utility, hauling, travel, camping and boat trailers and camper shell, shall not be parked or stored within any residential area except in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Semi-tractors. 
a.  Upon issuance of a permit as provided under this section, a semi-tractor may lawfully be parked in a residential driveway, provided: 
1.  Permits shall only be issued to persons legitimately owning or renting the real property. 
2.  Permits shall only be issued to owner/operators of persons legitimately leasing, lease-purchasing, or owning a semi-tractor. 
b.  Notwithstanding the above, the right to park, is subject to the following conditions: 
1.  A semi-tractor may not be parked in a street or upon the street right-of-way. 
2.  A semi-tractor may not block a city sidewalk or city right-of-way. 
3.  No repair work or maintenance relating to the semi-tractor shall be conducted. 
4.  No person shall sleep in a semi-tractor. 
5.  No semi-tractor engine may be left running at any time when it is parked. 
6.  No semi-tractor's radio, or other noise generating component shall be generated or set to operate at any time. 
7.  Only one semi-tractor may be permitted per home. 
8.  Semi-tractors shall be parked with the front of the vehicle towards the building line or structure to maximize the visibility of others. 
9.  In no instance shall a trailer be attached to the semi-tractor under this section. 
10.  No semi-tractor shall be parked or stored on the street, street right-of-way, or yard in a residential area. 
11.  No semi-tractor shall be parked more than 15 days, or portions thereof, in any calendar month. 
c.  Permits. 
1.  The community development department shall issue permits and permit stickers after reasonable determination that the applicant does and can comply with all provisions of this section, including sufficient driveway length and proprietary status of the semi-tractor. 
2.  The permit shall specify the address or location where such parking will be permitted. 
3.  Permits are not transferable. 
4.  Permit stickers shall be affixed as directed so as to be visible from the street. 
5.  There shall be a $25.00 annual fee, renewable on or before July 1. Fees shall not be prorated. 
6.  Not more than one commercial vehicle which exceeds 1½ tons rated capacity, per family living on the premises, shall be permitted and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted. 
d.  Revocation of permit. In addition to the penalties set forth herein or any other remedies which may be available to the city, violation of this section or any provision thereof will subject the owner or possessor of the semi-tractor and/or the owner or occupant of the real property upon which the semi-tractor is parked to revocation of the permit by the community development director upon ten days written notice to the owner or lessor of the semi-tractor. The revocation of the permit by the community development director may be appealed in writing to the city manager within ten days of the revocation whose decision shall be final. In cases where the permit has been revoked for violation of any portion of this section, a new permit shall not be issued before the next annual renewal date of July 1. 
e.  Effect of other Code Provisions. The granting of a permit under this section shall supersede those provisions elsewhere in this Code prohibiting the parking of such semi-tractors under and to the extent of the terms and conditions as stated in this section. It is specifically provided that only the terms and conditions specifically stated in this section supersede other provisions pertaining to semi-tractors. 
(2)  Semi-tractors, RV's, boats, campers, and travel trailers. 
a.  Semi-tractor, boat, RV, camper shell, camping or travel trailer, or utility, hauling or boat trailer shall be permitted, and must comply with the following provisions: 
(i)  No part shall extend over, on or across a city sidewalk or city street or street right-of-way. 
(ii)  No required sight triangle shall be violated. 
(iii)  Inside parking of items within a fully enclosed main or accessory building is permitted. 
(iv)  Outside parking in the side and rear yard is permitted. 
(v)  Only one of the items is permitted to be parked in the front yard, provided that within the RE, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts, front yard parking must be on a permitted driveway. 
(vi)  Only one semi-tractor shall be permitted, provided the requirements of subsection (1), above, are met. 
(vii)  Lots that are smaller than two acres may contain any combination of items not to exceed two in outside storage. 
(viii)  Lots that are two acres and larger may contain any combination of items not to exceed three in outside storage. 
b.  A camping or travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area with the incorporated limits, except in a mobile home park authorized under the ordinances of the city. A mobile home shall be parked or stored only in a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision which is in conformity with the ordinances of the city. 
c.  RV's, camper shells, camping or travel trailers, utility, hauling or boat trailers shall not require permits as required for semi-tractors. 
(3)  Automobiles. Automobiles parked in the front yard in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts must be on a permitted driveway. This provision shall not be construed as allowing the storage of derelict or junked vehicles otherwise than as provided in chapter 114, section 114-554. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, a "hard surface" shall mean concrete, asphalt or similar product. Brick type pavers or natural stone must be approved by the director. 
(5)  Penalties. In addition to any other penalties or remedies which may be available to the city, violation of this section or any provision thereof will subject the owner or lessor of the automobile, semi-tractor, camper shell or camping or travel trailer, or utility, hauling or boat or boat trailer and/or the owner or occupant of the real property to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.140; Ord. No. 779, § 1, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 1015, § 2, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 1020, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
Sec. 122-845. - Day care centers. 
Day care homes and centers shall conform to the regulations contained in the Oklahoma Child Care Facilities Licensing Act (10 O.S. § 401 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.150)  
Sec. 122-846. - Swimming pools. 
Private swimming pools may be constructed as an accessory use, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All swimming pools having a water depth of two feet or greater (above ground and below ground) are required to have a construction permit. 
(2)  All aboveground pools setting at least three feet above ground level shall be enclosed by a four-foot-high wood fence, chainlink fence, wrought iron or ornamental steel fence with slats no more than four inches apart, or similar fencing as approved by the community development director or his designee. This fencing shall be erected in addition to any existing railing around the pool. It is recommended that the fencing completely enclose the rear yard area, however, it shall be required to completely enclose the pool area. 
(3)  All aboveground pools with more than three feet of water and in-ground pools with a water depth of at least two feet into the ground shall be enclosed by a six-foot-high wood fence, chainlink fence, wrought iron or ornamental steel fence with slats no more than four inches apart, or similar fencing as approved by the community development director or his designee. This fencing shall be erected in addition to any existing railing around the pool. It is recommended that the fencing completely enclose the rear yard area, however, it shall be required to completely enclose the pool area. 
(4)  All gates to the fenced enclosed area around the pool shall be self-closing with a spring hinge or closing device to allow the gates to close automatically. 
(5)  All swimming pools utilizing any electrical facilities shall obtain an electrical permit, and all electrical work shall be done by a licensed electrician. 
(6)  All swimming pools shall be wired according to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city in chapter 18, article III. 
(7)  Low voltage lighting located within six feet of the water's edge shall be on a 24-volt or less system, protected by a GFCI. Any lighting in pool construction shall be 15 volts maximum. 
(8)  No swimming pool shall be constructed in front of the front building line and no portion of the pool shall be constructed closer than ten feet to the side and rear lot lines or across any easement. All pool equipment, sidewalks and decks shall not be located within five feet of any side or rear lot lines or across any easement. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.160; Ord. No. 981, § 1, 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 1194, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 122-847. - Animals. 
Animals in any district shall be kept only in accordance with city ordinances. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.170) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14.  
Sec. 122-848. - Storage of liquefied petroleum gas. 
The use of land or buildings for the commercial wholesale or retail storage of liquefied petroleum gases shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the city and the regulations of the liquefied petroleum gas administration of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.180)  
Sec. 122-849. - Architectural design of accessory buildings and fences. 
The architectural design and materials used for the construction of accessory buildings and fences shall harmonize with the main building to which the building or fence is accessory. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.190)  
Sec. 122-850. - Churches. 
(a)  Churches are permitted uses in the zoning districts regulated by articles IV, V, VI and VII of this chapter. 
(b)  For churches and main accessory buildings other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by the zoning district regulations for the district in which the church is located and the off-street parking areas required in article X of this chapter; provided, however, that the lot area for a church shall not be less than 21,000 square feet, and for each increment in seating capacity of 20 persons which exceeds a seating capacity of 100 persons in the main auditorium an additional 3,000 square feet of lot area shall be provided. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.200)  
Sec. 122-851. - Carports. 
(a)  Definition; standards and restrictions. For purposes of this section, carports are defined as all structures, whether attached to an existing structure or freestanding, which are constructed for the purpose of providing a roof-type cover only for protection from the sun, rain, snow, sleet or hail. Carports are permitted to be added to residential structures and are subject to the following conditions and regulations: 
(1)  Any person erecting or constructing a carport, in whole or in part, shall obtain a building permit from the city. 
(2)  No portion of a carport shall violate a required side yard setback as prescribed in this chapter, with the exception that open eaves may extend two feet into the side yard. All width measurements shall be from eave line to eave line. 
(3)  All carports shall be located only over a paved hard-surfaced drive; provided, however, that a gravel driveway may be used to satisfy the requirement if the property owner can demonstrate, through dated photographs or dated negatives, that the gravel driveway existed prior to January 1, 1985, or provide other such proof deemed acceptable by the city. Dated photographs or negatives must be dated on the front or back through a development process. Handwritten, typed or other means of dating photographs or negatives other than those dated through the development process shall not be accepted as proof. Those properties currently approved with a residential building permit, whether for a new home, addition, remodel or house move-in, that have been required to install a paved driveway as part of their permit approval or any other regulations pertinent to the approved building permit shall not be exempt from the requirement to install paved driveways. 
(4)  All carports shall be kept in an attractive state, in good repair, and in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(5)  Metal carports shall be constructed of 26-gauge steel or 0.025 aluminum decking with a baked-on enamel finish, to be compatible with the exterior finish of the structure. Poles supporting the carport shall be wrought iron or of a metal material compatible with the exterior finish of the structure. Exposed eaves shall have rain guttering directing water flow to the street and away from adjacent properties. Wooden construction of carports shall be permitted with the following provisions: 
a.  Roof slopes shall exceed a pitch of two inches in 12 inches. 
b.  All eaves shall be enclosed and have rain guttering installed to divert water to the street and/or away from adjacent properties unless the pitch of the roof diverts the flow of rainwater to the street. 
c.  Finishes shall be compatible with the exterior of the primary structure. 
d.  The underside of the carport shall be enclosed with an approved material. 
(6)  No more than one carport shall be permitted for each dwelling unit, and no carport shall exceed 24 feet in width. 
(7)  All carports shall be permanently open on two sides from the grade surface to the eave line. All carports which extend into the required front yard setback shall be permanently open on three sides from the grade surface to the eave line. 
(8)  All carports shall comply with the front yard setback requirements of this chapter, provided that carports used in conjunction with single-family dwellings or two-family dwellings shall be permitted to extend into the required front yard setback areas; however, no portion of a carport shall be permitted closer than five feet to the right-of-way line of a public street except as provided in subsection (a)(9) of this section. 
(9)  For corner lots only, a carport may extend into the right-of-way of only a local street if the garage is so situated because of the building setback line that a carport cannot be constructed without extending into the right-of-way. In this situation a carport may extend into the right-of-way; however, no carport shall be permitted closer than six feet to the curbline and no carport shall be more than 20 feet in length measured from the structure to which it is attached. The carport must be constructed in such a manner as not to obstruct sight distance at the intersection. Damage to any public utility associated with the carport shall be the responsibility of the property owner. If the city shall determine that street widening is necessary or the installation, repair or replacement or maintenance of existing or future public utilities is necessary, the city or any public utility shall have the right to remove the carport. The cost of removal and reinstallation, if allowed, shall be at the owner's expense. If the owner refuses to remove the carport, the city or public utility may have the carport removed, such cost being included on the ad valorem tax rolls of the property as a debt if not paid. Other provisions of this Code which would prohibit structures within the right-of-way shall not apply to this exception. 
(10)  All carports must be designed to support a load of 20 pounds per square foot in addition to the weight of the structure. 
(11)  Freestanding carports shall be supported by 2½-inch diameter by 14-gauge steel columns, or columns of equivalent strength, set in concrete footings not less than 24 inches deep and not less than 12 inches in diameter. 
(b)  Permit. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or install any carport within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city clerk. 
(2)  An application for a permit under this section shall be in writing, on forms provided for that purpose. Such application shall contain the address of the applicant, along with a detailed drawing showing the desired specifications for the proposed carport and showing on such drawing compliance with this section and other applicable ordinances in all particulars. The application shall contain such other information as is deemed necessary by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 1, 2-4-1997)  
Sec. 122-852. - Group homes. 
(a)  Definition. In this section, the term "group home for persons with developmental or physical disabilities" means any establishment or institution, other than a hotel, motel, fraternity or sorority house, college or university dormitory, or detoxification facility, for not more than 12 residents who are 18 years of age or older and who have developmental or physical disabilities, which offers or provides supervision, residential accommodations, food service, and training and skill development opportunities designed to lead to increased independence of the residents and which offers or provides supportive assistance to any of its residents requiring supportive assistance. Such residents shall not require intermediate care facility services. 
(b)  Approval procedure. Procedures and requirements for group homes are as follows: 
(1)  An application shall be submitted by the property owner or his representative. The application shall consist of the following: 
a.  The application shall be submitted to the department of community development with the signature of the property owner. A copy of the applicant's deed shall be submitted. 
b.  A copy of the contract with the department of human services must be submitted within 30 days of execution. 
c.  A certified ownership list prepared by a bonded abstractor, attorney or land surveyor shall be submitted. The ownership list shall reflect all owners of record of property within a 300-foot radius from the exterior boundary of the group home site. The ownership list shall contain the names, mailing addresses, zip codes and legal descriptions of the owners of record. 
d.  A filing fee as set forth in section 42-122 shall be charged for the application. If the application requires a public hearing, an additional fee as set forth in section 42-122 shall be required. 
(2)  The community development department shall mail by certified mail a notice to all property owners within 300 feet that appear on the furnished list of property owners advising that the application will be approved (if all city codes are met) unless 50 percent of the affected property owners protest the application within 15 days of the mailing of the notice and request that a public hearing be scheduled before the planning commission and city council for the purpose of approving or denying the application. 
(c)  Public hearing. If 50 percent of the affected property owners within the 300-foot radius request a hearing, the applicant has 30 days to submit the public hearing filing fee to initiate a public hearing on the application before the planning commission. Should the applicant fail to submit the public hearing filing fee within the required 30 days, the application is void and any future group home request at the proposed site must reapply at the original level with the necessary fee required. At the public hearing, the planning commission and city council shall hear testimony and accept evidence pertaining only to the physical suitability of the group home or incompatibility of the group home with the restrictive covenants and zoning regulations of the residential area or the residents of the group home. 
(d)  Criteria for approval. After the public hearing, the city council shall authorize the establishment of such group home if the following are met: 
(1)  The group home is physically suitable for the residential area; 
(2)  The group home will meet the restrictive covenants and zoning regulations of the area; and 
(3)  The public health and safety of the affected property owners and the residents of the group homes will be protected. 
(e)  Reapplication. Any property on which an application is either denied or voided shall not be considered again as a group home for at least six months from the date of denial or from the date the application is voided. 
(f)  Additional regulations. All group home applicants must comply with the regulations of the department of human services and the state health department, as well as all other state laws which might be applicable. 
(Code 1977, § 17.50.023; Ord. No. 1037, § 11, 2-2-2010)  
Secs. 122-853—122-870. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LANDSCAPING 
 
Sec. 122-871. - Generally. 
All new development and redevelopment areas, except agricultural, shall be landscaped to provide visual buffering, enhance the beautification of the city, safeguard and enhance property values, protect public and private investment, and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.210)  
Sec. 122-872. - Landscaped area. 
Landscaped area shall mean the area within the boundaries of a given lot which is devoted to and consists of plant material, including but not limited to grass, trees, shrubs, flowers, vines and other ground covers, planters, brick, stone, natural forms, water forms, or aggregate or other inorganic features, but not including the use of smooth concrete or asphalt; provided, however, that the use of brick, stone, aggregate or other inorganic materials shall not predominate over the use of organic plant material. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.211)  
Sec. 122-873. - Required landscaping. 
(a)  The property owner in all zoning districts shall be responsible for landscaping the area within the street right-of-way line and the curb line. This area shall not be hard surfaced, other than a permitted driveway or sidewalk. No tree may be planted more than 100 feet from a water source. 
(b)  The property owner has the responsibility of maintaining all landscaping according to the following standards: 
(1)  Listed below are the required sizes for landscaping at time of installation: 
Deciduous trees shall be two inches caliper at time of planting, and shall be of a species having an average minimum mature crown spread of greater than nine feet. 
Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of four feet at time of planting with a minimum two-inch caliper. 
Medium shrubs shall have a minimum height of one and one-half feet at time of planting. 
Low shrubs shall be at least one gallon bucket-sized. 
Groundcover shall consist of natural plant materials. Suggested ground covers include, but are not limited to: 
Euonymous coloradis. 
Perennial verbena. 
Low-spreading junipers. 
Monkey grass. 
Mondo grass. 
Boston ivy. 
Dragon's blood sedum. 
Cypress mulch. 
Grass. 
(2)  Green space shall be defined as the landscaped strip along property frontage, side and rear yard landscape buffers. 
(3)  See section 122-874 for a list of suggested street trees. Trees shall not be placed in the sight triangle (as defined in section 94-3). 
(c)  In all single-family residential and two-family residential districts, all yards shall be landscaped. The landscaping of these yards shall, at a minimum, consist of a combination of living vegetation, such as trees, shrubs, grasses or ground cover materials, planted or transplanted and maintained, or preserved as existing natural vegetation areas (e.g. woods or thickets). 
In all single-family residential and two-family residential districts, within the front yard of a lot of a newly constructed residential structure, there shall be at least one medium tree (two-inch caliper or greater) planted and/or existing and maintained for every 75 feet, or fraction thereof, of frontage with a minimum of one tree per lot. An occupancy permit shall not be issued for the residential structure until the tree(s) required hereunder have been planted and/or are existing and maintained. 
(d)  For multi-family, commercial and industrial development, landscaping is required along and within the front property line along section-line road frontage. Planting shall be adjacent to, but not in the public right-of-way. Generally, planting required in this section should be in an irregular line and spaced at random. Clustering of plants and tree species is recommended to produce a professionally acceptable composition and mix of vegetation. 
(e)  Landscaping in commercial districts shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Rear yard landscaping. There shall be a ten-foot rear yard landscaping buffer for all commercial lost that abut a residential or agricultural zoned district. This buffer must contain one evergreen tree of two-inch caliper per ten lineal feet; or one deciduous tree of two-inch caliper per 15 lineal feet. Other requirements as outlined in subsection 122-873(c)(1) are also applicable. This required landscape buffer shall run the length of the commercial property (exclusive of permitted driveways of sidewalks). No parking, hard surface treatment or other commercial activities shall be placed within this required landscape buffer, other than permitted driveways or sidewalks. 
(2)  Side yard landscaping. All commercially zoned property shall provide for a landscaped side yard area where the property abuts a street, public property or right-of-way, or a non-commercially zoned district. On a side yard that abuts a local street, collector street, public property and/or right-of-way (other than a section line road or a state highway) or a non-commercially zoned property, there shall be a 7.5-foot greenbelt landscape buffer outside the right-of-way. This area shall contain a tree planting of one tree per 35 lineal feet of street frontage or property line, whichever is applicable. 
On a side yard that abuts a section line road or state highway, there shall be a ten-foot greenbelt landscape buffer outside the right-of-way. This greenbelt shall include one tree per 50 lineal feet of road frontage. 
Landscape buffers shall run the length of the property line (exclusive of permitted driveways or sidewalks) and be shown in detail on the landscape plan. No parking lot or hard surface treatment shall encroach on the required buffer, other than permitted driveways of sidewalks. Nor shall trash receptacles or recycling activities be located in the required buffers. 
(3)  Front yard landscaping. There shall be a ten-foot landscaping buffer outside the right-of-way along all front yards in commercial zoned districts. If the front yard abuts a local street, collector street, public property and/or right-of-way (other than a section line road or a state highway), one tree per every thousand square feet of building area will be required. In addition, one tree per every 50 lineal feet of street frontage will be required. 
If the front yard abuts a section line road or state highway, one tree per every thousand square feet of building area will be required. In addition, one tree per every 35 lineal feet of street frontage will be required. 
Fifty percent of the required trees in the front yard landscape buffer may be used in parking lot islands. Clustering of the required trees in a manner so as to not inhibit tree growth or compromise the integrity of paved surfaces, buildings, screening walls and sidewalks is acceptable. Trees located in parking lot islands must have adequate island size to accommodate proper tree growth, moisture requirements and longevity. 
These requirements must be shown on the required landscaped plan and be approved by the community development director. Creative design is encouraged as long as it is in keeping with the intent and purpose of the landscaping requirements to provide environmental enhancements, beautification, heat mitigation and community enhancement of com metrical properties. Designs that relegate tree planting to secondary status, side or hidden areas are not deemed acceptable design practices. 
(f)  Landscaping in industrial districts shall meet the same standards applicable to commercial district when adjoining residential and/or agriculturally zoned districts. 
(g)  Multi-family. 
(1)  The tree requirements for a duplex shall be one tree per unit located within the front yard outside of the right-of-way. Additionally, one tree shall be planted in the back yard within 15 feet of the rear property line. The required trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper. 
(2)  Multi-family units greater than a duplex shall be required to plant a minimum of one tree per unit up to two bedrooms and two trees per unit for three bedrooms and greater. Trees shall be located within 25 feet of the main structure(s). Up to 50 percent of the required trees may be located in common areas and along perimeter landscaped areas. Trees shall be a minimum two-inch caliper and be located within 100 feet of a water source. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.212; Ord. No. 860, § 1, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 976, § 1, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 1001, § 12, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-874. - Suggested street trees. 
The following is a suggested list of suitable trees for planting within the city rights-of-way. Those tree types listed were selected due to their ability to respond to the environmental conditions within the city. Those factors considered in tree selection were soil conditions in relation to growth, the tree's ability to cope with the climate, and its survival rate as an urban tree. Low maintenance, a moderate growth rate and aesthetic quality were also considered. 
SUGGESTED STREET TREES 
Goldenrain Tree 
Hackberry 
Sycamore 
London Planetree 
Red Oak 
Shumard Oak 
Water Oak 
Honey Locust (thornless and seedless) 
Caddo Maple 
Sweet Gum 
Chinese Pistache 
Lacebark Elm 
Japanese Zelkova 
Austrian Pine 
Japanese Black Pine 
Slash Pine 
Loblolly Pine 
Carvert Juniper 
Eastern Red Cedar 
This table is not an all-inclusive list of street trees that may be planted; however, other selections must be approved by the director prior to planting. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.213; Ord. No. 1001, § 13, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-875. - Landscaping plan. 
A landscaping plan shall be required as part of the site plan submitted for all building permits, except agricultural, rural estates, single-family and two-family districts. This plan shall show detailed landscape treatment of the area. This landscaping plan must include building footprint, parking, easements, types of plants, size, location of plants and details of irrigation system, water lines and other utilities, driveways, easements or utilities, irrigation systems or other items as required by the community development director or building inspector. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.214; Ord. No. 1001, § 14, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-876. - Completion of installation. 
A certificate of occupancy for any use shall not be issued until the landscaping has been installed in accordance with the plan, and it shall be illegal for any person to occupy or operate a business in any new structure for which landscaping, as shown by the plans, is not provided; except that, if a structure and all site improvements are complete except for these landscaping requirements and the season of the year will not permit the planting and growing of plants, temporary occupancy may be permitted by the director until a date certain in the growing season. If the landscaping has not been completed by the date, the property owner shall be in violation of this division. A temporary extension may be approved by the director for a period not to exceed one 30-day period. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.215)  
Sec. 122-877. - Responsibility for maintenance. 
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain in good condition all of the improvements required by this division. Any required fence or screening which is damaged shall be repaired, and any vegetation which dies shall be replaced no later than the following planting season (spring or fall). 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.220)  
Sec. 122-878. - Enforcement of maintenance requirements. 
When it is determined by the director, or person officially designated, that improvements required by this division are not being maintained, it shall be his duty to give notice in writing to the property owner. Such notice shall specify in what manner the improvements are in need of maintenance and a date for compliance. The property owner shall have not less than 30 days to comply with the notice; provided, however, that any person aggrieved by any such order or disagreeing with any of the requirements of the notice may file an appeal within the 30-day period to the board of adjustment. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.221; Ord. No. 1001, § 15, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 122-879. - Failure to provide or maintain landscaping. 
Failure to provide the improvements required by this division or failure to maintain required improvements in the manner prescribed by this division shall constitute an offense and violation of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 17.40.222)  
Secs. 122-880—122-885. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 
 
Sec. 122-886. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations for telecommunications facilities are: 
(1)  To facilitate the provision of telecommunications services throughout the city; 
(2)  To enhance the ability to provide telecommunications services the community quickly, effectively and efficiently; 
(3)  To encourage the location of towers in nonresidential zone districts; 
(4)  To minimize the total number of towers in the community; 
(5)  To encourage the joint use of new and existing tower locations; 
(6)  To ensure that towers are located in areas that minimize adverse impacts; 
(7)  To ensure towers and antennas are configured in a way that minimizes adverse visual impacts by careful design, appropriate siting and landscape screening; 
(8)  To encourage the attachment of antennas on existing structures; 
(9)  To consider public health and safety of telecommunications facilities; 
(10)  To avoid damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through careful engineering and locating of tower structures; and 
(11)  To protect residential areas and lands by minimizing adverse impacts of towers. 
(Ord. No. 761, § 1, 12-5-00)  
Sec. 122-887. - Definitions. 
Accessory support facilities shall mean support buildings, structures and equipment cabinets for telecommunications facilities containing electrical and mechanical equipment and devices used for the reception of or transmission of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. 
Alternative tower structure shall mean clock towers, bell steeples, building structures or building equipment normally maintained above the roof line of a structure, light poles and similar alterative design mounting structures. An alternative tower structure must be compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures and must camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas and/or towers. This term also includes any antenna or antenna array attached to the alternative tower structure. 
Antenna shall mean any exterior transmitting or receiving devices mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
Backhaul network shall mean the lines that connect a provider's tower/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network. 
FAA means Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means Federal Communications Commission. 
Telecommunications facilities shall mean the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, towers, alternative tower structures, electronics and other appurtenances used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services. 
Telecommunications service shall mean the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit or any closed transmission medium. 
Tower shall mean any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carriers towers, cellular telephone towers, and other similar structures This term also includes any antenna or antenna array attached to the tower structure. 
Tower height shall mean, when referring to a tower or other alternative tower structure, the distance measured from the lowest point within ten feet of the structure to the highest point on the tower or other alternative tower structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
(Ord. No. 761, § 2, 12-5-00)  
Sec. 122-888. - Permit required. 
Telecommunications facilities shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this division and the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(1)  A telecommunications facility shall obtain a permit as a condition for the siting, construction or operation of the telecommunications facility. 
(2)  These regulations shall apply to all towers and antennas as defined, except: 
a.  Any tower, or antenna, not more than 70 feet in height, owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator if it is used exclusively as a received only facility. 
b.  Any antenna colocated on an existing telecommunications facility, except as expressly provided in this division. 
c.  A telecommunications facility located or colocated on property, which is owned by the city and designated by the city as a site suitable for location of a telecommunications facility. 
(3)  Any violation of this division is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief or penalty provided by law, the city may apply to district court for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 761, § 3, 12-5-00)  
Sec. 122-889. - Co-location requirements. 
(a)  All applicants for a telecommunications facility permit shall co-locate on an existing facility if it is feasible to do so. An existing facility shall be deemed to be available to the applicant for co-location if the facility is within the search ring of the applicant or within a reasonable distance so as to fit into the applicant's design, space is available on the facility, and the facility owner will lease space to applicant at a reasonable market rate. 
(1)  If the applicant finds co-location is not feasible, it shall submit to the city a written statement of the reasons for the infeasability. The city may retain a technical expert in the field of radio frequency (RF) engineering to determine whether co-location at the site is feasible. The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant. 
(2)  Should co-location not be feasible, applicant must consider city owned property for construction of any new tower. If the applicant determines that city owned property is not feasible it shall submit to the city a written statement of the reasons for the infeasibility. The city may retain a technical expert in the field of radio frequency (RF) engineering to determine whether the site is feasible. The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant. 
(3)  The city may deny the permit unless the applicant demonstrates to the city by substantial evidence that existing telecommunications facilities or city owned property cannot accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(b)  A telecommunications tower shall not be permitted unless the owner of the proposed tower certifies to the city that the tower is available for use by other telecommunications service providers on a reasonable and nondiscriminatory basis. Towers shall be designed and built to accommodate a minimum of three telecommunications facilities. 
(c)  To facilitate co-location and coordination of telecommunication sites, all telecommunication service providers shall, within 90 days of the passage of this division, provide the city with their respective master antenna plans. Said plans shall include detailed maps, showing the locations of all telecommunications towers serving any portion of the city and indicating their coverage area. 
(d)  Providers shall also provide the city with any updates to the above documents within 90 days of their creation. 
(Ord. No. 761, § 4, 12-5-00)  
Sec. 122-890. - Telecommunication facility standards. 
(a)  The exterior of equipment buildings and/or metal equipment cabinets visible from residential areas or public rights-of-way must have a neutral aggregate finish or be painted to reflect the color and character of adjoining structures or blend with adjacent landscaping and other surroundings. 
(b)  At the telecommunications facility, the design of the buildings and related structures used in conjunction with telecommunications facilities shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the telecommunications facilities to the natural setting and the built environment. 
(c)  Guy wires must be anchored no closer than 25 feet from any property line. Guy wires shall not cross or encroach any overhead telephone or electric power lines. 
(d)  The height of a single user tower shall not exceed 150 feet. The height of a tower with two or more users shall not exceed 195 feet. 
(e)  Applicants will be required to demonstrate that the planned telecommunications facility will not cause radio frequency interference with other existing equipment. Such interference is prohibited. 
(f)  All telecommunications facilities must have a five foot buffer of landscaping outside the perimeter of the compound. 
(g)  Illumination of a tower is prohibited except as required by the FAA. Strobes shall not be used for nighttime lighting. Any required lighting shall be directed upward and away from adjoining properties. In addition, the ground level security lighting shall not be more than 20 feet in height. 
(h)  The applicant will be required to provide ingress/egress only from approved access points and a minimum of one off-street parking space per provider. 
(i)  The base of the tower and any accessory support facilities such as anchored locations of guy wires shall be screened from view with a solid fence, which shall be a minimum of six feet in height. 
(j)  If the tower is more than 75 feet high and adjacent to or separated by a public right-of-way from property zoned residential, the setback shall be one foot for every foot in height, or the setback of the zoning district, whichever is greater. If it is separated from nonresidential property, the setback must be at least 50 feet and an additional one foot for every foot of tower height over 150 feet. The be setback may not be less than 50 feet. 
Towers in excess of 400 feet in height shall be setback a minimum of 260 feet from the right-of-way of all controlled access federal and state roadways. 
(k)  Signs on telecommunication towers shall only display the name, registration and emergency contact number of the tower owner with the exception of signs required by FCC regulations or signs containing warning or safety instructions. Signs are limited to four square feet in size and advertising is expressly prohibited. 
(l)  No tower shall be closer than 500 feet from another tower any new telecommunications tower in excess of 180 feet in height must be located a minimum of one mile from any existing tower in excess of 180 feet in height. 
(m)  Support facilities can be no more than 350 square feet of gross floor area nor more than twelve feet in height per user. Minimum setback requirements of the zoning district apply to the accessory support facilities. 
(Ord. No. 761, § 5, 12-5-00)  
Sec. 122-891. - Alternative structures standard. 
(a)  Telecommunications facilities may be permitted on an alternative tower structure at least 30 feet tall under the following conditions, which shall be in addition to the requirements of sections 5 and 7: 
(1)  The facility and its accessory support facilities comply with all zoning requirements applicable to the alternate structure and the provisions of section 122-890 of this division; 
(2)  If the facility or an accessory support facility is located upon the roof of a structure, each such facility shall be set back a distance at least equal to the height of the telecommunications facility unless the facilities are screened or camouflaged in a manner that is compatible with the surrounding property. The top of the antenna or other facility shall not be more than 30 percent of the height of the alternate structure, or 75 feet whichever is less. 
(3)  The alternative structure must be similar in color, scale and character to adjoining buildings or structures or blend with the landscaping and other surroundings immediately adjacent to them so as to generally avoid the creation of unique visual objects that stand out in the environment; and 
(4)  Prior to the installation of any building/roof mounted telecommunications facility, the applicant shall furnish to the city an engineer's certification that the structure will support and not be adversely affected by the proposed antenna and accessory support facility or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 761, § 6, 12-5-00)  
Sec. 122-892. - Specific standards. 
(a)  All telecommunications facilities shall be erected and operated in compliance with current Federal Communication Commission (FCC) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) rules and regulations and other applicable federal, state and local standards. 
(b)  Ordinances variously require the tower owner to provide documentation that the power density levels do not exceed federally approved levels or American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards, whichever provides the stricter requirements. An applicant must provide a copy of its FCC license or, if the applicant is not an FCC license holder, a copy of at least one letter of commitment from an FCC license holder to locate at least one antenna on the applicant's tower. 
(c)  Telecommunications facilities shall not be permitted in any wetland, floodplain or wilderness or wildlife area and disturbance to wetland buffer areas shall be minimized. A telecommunications facility shall not be permitted in any area where it would threaten endangered species or critical habitats. Telecommunications facilities shall not be permitted where they would significantly change surface area, contribute significantly to deforestation or create significant water diversions. Stormwater run-off shall be contained onsite at all telecommunications facilities. Ground-mounted equipment for personal wireless service facilities shall not generate noise in excess of 50 db at the property line. Roof-mounted or side-mounted equipment for personal wireless service facilities shall not generate noise in excess of 50 db at ground level at the base of the building closest to the antenna. 
(d)  Telecommunications tower structures must conform to the most current revision of EIA 222 standards. Guyed telecommunications towers shall be designed and located such that, if the structure should fall, it will avoid habitable structures and public ways. The applicant must supply an engineer's certification of the structural integrity of the tower and associated equipment If more than one user is involved the applicant shall supply certification that the tower has sufficient integrity to accommodate more than one user. 
(e)  Telecommunications facilities shall be designed and engineered to withstand wind loadings and other design standards as defined by BOCA and ANSI for Canadian County, Oklahoma 
(Ord. No. 761, § 7, 12-5-00)  
Sec. 122-893. - Permit condition. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of property within the city shall permit, leave or cause to be left on said property any telecommunications facility which has been abandoned or discontinued for use. The provider shall remove its facility within 90 days of the date that it discontinues its use of the facility. If the provider fails to remove the facility within the required time, the facility shall be deemed to be abandoned. The city shall have authority to enter the premises and remove the abandoned facilities. All costs of removal shall be collected from the provider in the manner provided for [in the] summary abatement of nuisances. This requirement shall apply to co-located facilities unless the co-location agreement provides for the removal of abandoned facilities by the tower operator. 
(b)  Defective or unsafe antennas, telecommunication towers or telecommunications facilities are to be repaired or removed within six months at the owner or operator's expense. If the facilities are not operated for a continuous period of 24 months they shall be considered abandoned and must be removed within 90 days. If not removed, the city may remove at the expense of the owner or operator. 
(c)  Existing towers that do not comply with the new regulations may continue. They may not be expanded or replaced unless they meet the new regulations. If they are damaged or destroyed, they may be repaired or restored to their former use, location and physical dimensions without complying with the new regulations. The existing tower may be replaced, repaired, rebuilt and/or expanded to accommodate co-located antennas or facilities, or to upgrade the facilities to current engineering, technological or communications standards by obtaining zoning approval under the city zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 761, § 8, 12-5-00)  
Sec. 122-894. - Permit approval process. 
(a)  Except for a proposed telecommunications facility which will co-locate on an existing tower, the applicant for a telecommunications facility permit shall provide city with a certified list of properties within 300 feet. The city shall notify all property owners within 300 feet of the outer boundary of the property proposed for location of the facility. Such notice shall describe the boundaries of the property included in the application, explain the character and dimensions of the proposed telecommunications facility and give an address for the property owners to submit written comments to the city. The notice shall include a drawing or other representation of the visual aspect of the proposed facility. The notice shall also contain the date, which shall be not less than 15 days after the mailing date, set for consideration of the application by the city. 
(b)  Applicant will provide city with a copy of the deed to the subject property and, if applicable, a signed agreement with property owner consenting to the action requested. 
(c)  The permit process will be administered by the director of the planning and engineering department. 
(d)  Applicant shall pay a fee of $100.00 to cover the cost of the permit process. That permit fee is nonrefundable even if the permit is denied. 
(e)  The applicant must submit to the office of the director of planning and engineering along with his application, an inventory and contour map of existing facilities that are within the city and at least five miles from the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, coverage, capacity and design of each telecommunications facility, telecommunication tower and antenna. 
(f)  The director of planning and engineering will develop, update and maintain an inventory of towers and antennas. 
(Ord. No. 761, § 9, 12-5-00)  
Secs. 122-895—122-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking generally, § 114-386 et seq.; loading zones, § 114-426 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 122-901. - Purpose and applicability of article. 
It is the intent of this article that adequate parking and loading facilities be provided off the street for each use of land covered by this chapter. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use. Unless otherwise stated, these requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.010)  
Sec. 122-902. - Off-street parking and loading areas required. 
Permanent off-street parking and loading areas in the amount specified by this article for each use shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased, in the amount required for the enlargement or increase in capacity by adding dwelling units, guestrooms, seats or floor area, or before conversion from one type of use or occupancy to another. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.020)  
Sec. 122-903. - Use of public right-of-way. 
No portion of any off-street space required by this article shall occupy or use any public street, right-of-way, alley or other public property. Parking spaces which use any street or public right-of-way as a direct means of access without the intermediate use of service aisles and entrances of at least the minimum standards specified by this article shall be prohibited. A public alley shall be the only public right-of-way area permitted for maneuvering space to reach a required parking stall. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.030)  
Secs. 122-904—122-920. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING 
 
Sec. 122-921. - Location of parking lots in relation to principal use. 
The off-street parking lot shall be located within 200 feet, exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal use. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.040)  
Sec. 122-922. - Joint parking facilities. 
Whenever two or more uses are located together in a common building, shopping center or other integrated building complex, the parking requirements may be complied with by providing a permanent common parking facility, cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements. Spaces provided for permanent residents of dwellings shall be clearly designated and separated from spaces provided for employees, customers and service. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.050)  
Sec. 122-923. - Ownership of land on which parking lot is located. 
The land upon which the off-street parking lot is located shall be owned or controlled by the same entity which owns or controls the land on which the principal use is located. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.060)  
Sec. 122-924. - Size and design of parking spaces. 
The size and design of a parking space for one vehicle shall be a minimum of nine feet by 20 feet and conform to that shown in table 1. 
TABLE 1. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES 
ADD FIGURE page 331-24 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.070)  
Sec. 122-925. - Number of handicapped parking spaces. 
Parking spaces for vehicles with handicapped drivers shall be provided per the following schedule: 
Total Parking 
  in Lot 	Required 
Number of 
Accessible 
Spaces 
Up to 25 	1 
26 to 50 	2 
51 to 75 	3 
76 to 100 	4 
101 to 150 	5 
151 to 200 	6 
201 to 300 	7 
301 to 400 	8 
401 to 500 	9 
501 to 1,000 	2% of total 
Over 1,000 	20 plus 1 for 
each 100 over 1,000 
 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.080)  
Sec. 122-926. - Size of handicapped parking spaces. 
The size of a parking space for vehicles with handicapped drivers shall be 12 feet six inches by 20 feet, as shown in table 1 in section 122-924. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.081) 
_____ 
Sec. 122-927. - Required number of spaces for specific uses. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in all districts in accordance with the schedule found in table 2. For uses not specifically covered in table 2, the director of community development shall make a determination of the parking demand to be created by the proposed use, and the amount of parking thus determined shall be the off-street parking requirement for the permitted use. This decision can be appealed to the board of adjustment. 
TABLE 2. USE UNIT CLASSIFICATION WITH APPLICABLE PARKING STANDARDS 
Use Unit 	Parking Standard 
Residential uses: 	
	Single-family residential 	2 spaces per dwelling unit. 
	Two-family residential 	2 spaces per dwelling unit. 
	Three- and four-family residential 	2 spaces per dwelling unit. 
	Multiple-family residential: 	
		Efficiency and 1 bedroom 	1.5 spaces per dwelling unit. 
		2 or more bedrooms 	2 spaces per dwelling unit. 
	Mobile or manufactured home, residential 	2 spaces per dwelling unit. 
	Group residential 	1 space per 2 occupants. 
Civic uses: 	
	Low intensity institutional—neighborhood related: 	
		Kindergarten, elementary and middle schools 	1 space per 10 classroom seats. 
		Churches, temples and synagogues 	1 space per 4 seats in chapel. 
	Moderate intensity institutional: 	
		High schools 	1 space per 4 classroom seats. 
		Vocational schools 	1 space per 2 classroom seats. 
	High intensity institutional: 	
		Hospitals and sanitariums 	2 spaces per bed, plus 1 space per 500 square feet GFA of emergency room and outpatient care (where such care is specifically provided). 
	Library services and community centers: 	
		Libraries 	1 space per 400 square feet GFA. 
		Community centers 	1 space per 300 square feet GFA. 
	Community recreation—public: 	
		Golf course 	5 spaces per green, plus 1 space per 200 square feet GFA of public building area. 
		Swimming pools 	1 space per 150 square feet of pool area. 
		Game courts: tennis, squash, racquetball, handball 	5 spaces per court. 
		Playgrounds, playfield, public park 	Director approval. 
	Community recreation—property owners' association: 	
		Clubhouse 	1 space per 300 square feet GFA. 
		Game courts: tennis, squash, racquetball, handball 	2 spaces per court. 
		Swimming pool 	1 space per 300 square feet of pool area. 
		Playgrounds 	Director approval. 
Commercial uses: 	
	Administrative and professional office 	See table B, office. 
	Agricultural supplies and services 	See table A, retail. 
	Animal sales and services: 	
		Grooming 	See table A, retail. 
		Horse stables 	Director approval. 
		Kennels and veterinary 	See table A, retail. 
	Auctioning 	See table A, retail. 
	Automotive and equipment: 	
		Storage 	Director approval. 
		Cleaning and repairs, light equipment 	1 space per 500 square feet GFA, 5 spaces minimum. 
		Repairs, heavy equipment 	1 space per 500 square feet GFA, 5 spaces minimum. 
	Automotive sales and rentals: 	
		For showroom area 	See table A, retail. 
		For outside lot 	See table D, warehousing (substitute lot area for GFA). 
		For service area and body shop 	See table C, industrial and manufacturing. 
	Automotive and equipment: sales and rentals, light equipment: 	
		For showroom area 	See table A, retail. 
		For outside lot 	See table D, warehousing (substitute lot area for GFA). 
		For service area and body shop 	See table C, industrial and manufacturing. 
	Automotive and equipment: sales and rentals, farm and heavy equipment: 	
		For showroom area 	See table A, retail. 
		For outside lot 	See table D, warehousing (substitute lot area for GFA). 
		For service area and body shop 	See table C, industrial and manufacturing. 
	Building maintenance services 	See table A, retail. 
	Business support services 	See table B, office. 
	Communications services 	See table B, office. 
	Construction sales and services: 	
		For showroom area 	See table A, retail. 
		For outside lot 	See table D, warehousing (substitute lot area for GFA). 
	Convenience sales and personal services 	See table A, retail. 
	Eating establishments, sit-down, alcohol not permitted 	1 space per 100 square feet. 
	Eating establishments, sit-down, alcohol permitted 	1 space per 100 square feet. 
	Eating establishments, fast food 	1 space per 50 square feet; provided, however, that cold storage areas shall not be included in the computation of GFA for parking purposes. 
	Eating establishments, drive-in 	1 space per 50 square feet GFA, 12 spaces minimum; provided, however, that cold storage areas shall not be included in the computation of GFA for parking purposes. 
	Drinking establishments: sit-down, alcohol permitted 	1 space per 50 square feet GFA. 
	Food and beverage retail sales 	See table A, retail. 
	Alcoholic beverage retail sales 	See table A, retail. 
	Funeral and interment services: Undertaking 	See table B, office. 
	Funeral and interment services: Cremating 	Director approval. 
	Funeral and interment services: Interring 	Director approval. 
	Gasoline sales: Restricted for building area 	See table A, retail. 
	Gasoline sales: Truckstop 	Director approval. 
	Laundry services 	See table A, retail. 
	Medical services: Restricted 	See table A, office. 
	Medical services: General 	See table A, retail. 
	Participant recreation and entertainment: 	
		Bowling alleys 	5 spaces per lane. 
		Billiard parlors 	See table A, retail. 
		Dancehalls 	1 space per 50 square feet of club area and 1 space per 100 square feet of remaining GFA. 
		Gymnasiums 	Director approval. 
		Health clubs 	See table A, retail. 
		Skating rinks 	Director approval. 
		Arcades 	See table A, retail. 
		Theaters 	1 space per 4 seats. 
	Participant recreation and entertainment: Outdoor: 	
		Driving range 	1 space per 2 driving stations. 
		Miniature golf 	2 spaces per 3 holes. 
		Go-cart tracks 	Director approval. 
		Drive-in theater 	6 spaces minimum, plus adequate spaces for viewing. 
		Amusement park 	Director approval. 
	Retail sales and services: General 	See table A, retail. 
	Retail sales and services: Outdoor swap meets 	Director approval. 
	Motel or hotel 	1 space per rental, plus 1 space per 200 square feet GFA of restaurant area (including kitchen), plus 1 space per 100 square feet GFA of club area (excluding office and meeting rooms), plus 1 space per 200 square feet GFA for any retail area. 
	Ministorage 	See table D, warehouse. 
	Day care center 	1 space per 10 children enrolled, plus 1 space per employee. 
	Custom manufacturing 	See table C, Manufacturing and industrial. 
	Wholesaling, storage and distribution: Restricted 	See table D, warehousing. 
	Wholesaling, storage and distribution: General 	See table D, warehousing (substitute total site area for GFA). 
	Light industrial 	See table C, manufacturing and industrial. 
	Moderate industrial 	See table C, manufacturing and industrial. 
	Heavy industrial 	See table C, manufacturing and industrial. 
	Hazardous industrial 	See table C, manufacturing and industrial. 
	Stockyards 	Director approval. 
	Scrap operations 	Director approval. 
	Horticulture 	See table A, retail, for building area (exclusive of greenhouse); for greenhouse, see table D, warehousing. 
	Row and field crops 	Director approval. 
	Animal raising: Personal 	Director approval. 
	Animal raising: Commercial 	Director approval. 
	Animal raising: Commercial feedlots 	Director approval. 
	Animal waste processing: Limited 	Director approval. 
	Agricultural processing: Limited 	Director approval. 
	Agricultural processing: General 	Director approval. 
 
TABLE 3. MINIMUM PARKING STANDARDS 
Table A. Retail 
For the first 12,000 square feet GLA 		From 12,001 to 48,000 square feet GLA 		Over 50,000 square feet GLA 
1 space/200 square feet GLA 	Plus 	1 space/225 square feet GLA 	Plus 	1 space/250 square feet GLA 
 
Table B. Office 
For the first 12,000 square feet GLA 		From 12,001 to 48,000 square feet GLA 		Over 48,000 square feet GLA 
1 space/200 square feet GLA 	Plus 	1 space/300 square feet GLA 	Plus 	1 space/350 square feet GLA 
 
Table C. Manufacturing and Industrial 
For the first 20,000 square feet GFA 		Over 20,000 square feet GFA 
1 space/500 square feet GFA 	Plus 	1 space/1,000 square feet GFA 
 
Table D. Warehousing 
For the first 20,000 square feet GFA 		Over 20,000 square feet GFA 
1 space/1,000 square feet GFA 	Plus 	1 space/5,000 square feet GFA 
 
GLA = Gross leasable area. 
GFA = Gross floor area. 
Note 1: For mixed uses containing any combination of retail, office, manufacturing and industrial, or warehousing activity, parking requirements shall be tabulated separately for each use within the development using the list of specific standards or table 3. When types of uses are not known at the time of development, then the director shall make the determination as to the type of parking, e.g., retail, which will be required. Mixed uses regulated under separate parking requirements shall not be combined to achieve a larger square footage total that would result in a reduced parking requirement. Where any part of a mixed use is converted to another use category, then the parking requirements shall be recalculated based on the new square footage figure. 
Note 2: Where a manufacturing and industrial use has more than one working shift of employees, parking facilities shall be adequate to accommodate overlap requirements during transition periods. 
Note 3: Where a multiple-purpose retail or industrial building is proposed to be occupied by a use which can be demonstrated by the occupant to require less parking than the standards contained in this section, the director may permit paving of a smaller parking area to meet the estimated need; provided, however, that the balance of the land to be created by the proposed use and the amount of parking thus determined shall be the off-street parking requirement for the permitted use. This decision can be appealed to the board of adjustment. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.090) 
_____ 
Sec. 122-928. - Parking lot construction and maintenance. 
Off-street parking lots for commercial, industrial or multiple-family complexes of more than four units shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Screening. All sides of the lot abutting a residential use shall be enclosed with an opaque ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge having a height of not less than six feet. Such fence, wall or hedge shall be maintained in good condition. 
(2)  Setbacks. No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line established ten feet back of the property line of interior and corner lots whenever the parking lot is located in a residential district or immediately abuts the front yard of a residential unit. In all other cases, no setback shall be required; provided, however, that on any corner lot formed by two intersecting streets no parking shall be permitted within the area defined by section 122-837. 
(3)  Landscaping. All yards shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs and evergreen ground cover, and maintained in good condition the year round as required in article IX, division 2 of this chapter. 
(4)  Width of driveways. Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall not exceed 30 feet in width, exclusive of curb returns, except as provided in chapter 102. 
(5)  Paving. All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes shall be paved as follows in a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continued use. Minimum pavement requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  One-and-one-half-inch asphaltic concrete hot mix with five-inch compacted base; 
b.  A double surface treatment with five-inch compacted base, or four-inch concrete slab; and 
c.  Appropriate bumper guards where needed as required by the director. 
(6)  Lighting. The intensity of light and arrangement of reflectors shall be such as not to interfere with residential district use. 
(7)  Signs. No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used to guide traffic and to state the conditions and terms of the use of the lot. Only non-intermittent incandescent lighting of signs shall be permitted. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.100)  
Sec. 122-929. - Interior parking lot landscaping. 
Every required parking space on any site shall be within 75 feet of a landscaped area (including landscaped street right-of-way, landscaped medians and site perimeters, and landscaping at the base of buildings); every landscaped island in the interior of a parking lot shall be at least 50 square feet in size, with a minimum width of three feet, and shall have at least one tree planted therein. 
(Ord. No. 859, § 1, 8-19-2003)  
Secs. 122-930—122-950. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OFF-STREET LOADING 
 
Sec. 122-951. - Required. 
Every industrial, commercial and civic building hereafter erected or expanded shall provide space, as indicated in this division, for loading and unloading of vehicles. The number of off-street loading spaces required by this division shall be considered as the absolute minimum, and the owner/applicant shall evaluate his own needs to determine if they are greater than the minimum specified by this division. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.110)  
Sec. 122-952. - Size of spaces. 
Unless otherwise specified, all off-street loading spaces shall have the minimum dimensions of ten feet by 25 feet and 14 feet overhead clearance. In no case shall required off-street loading space encroach upon off-street parking space required under this article, or on a public right-of-way. No maneuvering shall be permitted on a public right-of-way. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.120)  
Sec. 122-953. - Number of spaces. 
Table 4 illustrates the number of required loading spaces required by use category according to floor area. 
_____
TABLE 4. LOADING STANDARDS 
Land Use 	Gross Floor Area 
(square feet) 	Total Number of 
Berths Required 
Commercial 	0—4,999 	0 
	5,000—9,999 	1 
	10,000—39,999 	2 
Industrial 	40,000—100,000 	3 
	Each additional 100,000 	1 additional 
 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.130) 
_____ 
Sec. 122-954. - Design of spaces. 
The following requirements shall apply to all loading spaces: 
(1)  Off-street loading spaces shall be designed so that vehicles shall maneuver entirely within the property lines of the premises and not on a public right-of-way. Unenclosed off-street loading areas shall be permanently paved with hard-surface pavement. A six-inch header curb must also be constructed to separate a loading area from public right-of-way. 
(2)  All motor vehicle loading berths which abut or are adjacent to a residential district shall be completely screened therefrom by building walls, or a uniformly solid fence, wall or door, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet in height. No permitted or required loading space or berth shall be located within 40 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets or highways. No loading space or berth shall be located in a required front or side yard, and any loading space or berth located in a required yard shall be open to the sky. 
(Code 1977, § 17.42.140)  
APPENDIX A - CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Cable Franchise Agreement adopted December 1, 2015, by and between the City of Mustang and CoxCom, LLC. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
ARTICLE 1 - GRANT, TERM AND NATURE OF FRANCHISE 
 
Section 1. - Short title. 
This cable television franchise agreement shall be known and may be cited as the "Cox Cable Franchise."  
Section 2. - Definitions. 
The word "City" as used herein shall mean The City of Mustang, Oklahoma, and the word "Company" as used herein shall mean CoxCom, LLC, d/b/a Cox, a limited liability company organized and existing under the laws of the State of Delaware and licensed to do business in the State of Oklahoma, and its successors and assigns. All of the definitions contained in section 22-102 of the Cable Ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time, are expressly incorporated herein.  
Section 3. - Grant. 
The City hereby grants to the Company a non-exclusive Franchise to install, construct, operate and maintain a Cable System and to provide Cable Services under such terms and conditions as are set forth in this Agreement. This franchise does not grant the Company any right of eminent domain. This franchise does not grant the authority to Company to provide telecommunications information services, nor may such services, if provided by Company, be regulated pursuant to this franchise. Any requirement, duty, obligation, or privilege arising from the Cable Ordinance not specifically mentioned herein, is incorporated into this Franchise Agreement just as if it had been fully set forth.  
Section 4. - Franchise Area. 
This Franchise is granted for the entire corporate boundaries of the City as of the Effective Date of December 1, 2015, and shall also include any additions thereto, by annexation or other legal means, during the term of the Franchise. The Company shall provide Cable Service to the entire franchise area pursuant to Section 22-181 of the Cable Ordinance.  
Section 5. - Service Discrimination Prohibited. 
The Company shall not deny access to Cable Service to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. The Company shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal nondiscrimination statutes and regulations.  
Section 6. - Legal Compliance. 
The Company shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and standards with respect to the construction, maintenance and operation of a cable system.  
Section 7. - Term. 
The City hereby grants to the Company the right and privilege, for a term of ten (10) years, commencing on December 1, 2015, to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain, in, upon, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, easements and other public ways and places now laid out or dedicated within the City, and all extensions thereof or additions thereto within the City, such towers, antennas, cables, electronic equipment and other network appurtenances necessary for the operation and maintenance of a Cable System within the City.  
Section 8. - Rights and Privileges. 
The rights and privileges granted by this Franchise are expressly made subject to and shall be limited by: (1) the provisions of the Cable Ordinance, as it presently exists or may hereafter be amended; (2) the provisions of this Franchise Agreement entered into by and between The City and the Company; (3) the City's City Charter; (4) the Oklahoma State Constitution; (5) Oklahoma State law; and (6) the Federal Cable Act of 1984, as amended.  
Section 9. - Effective Date. 
This Franchise Ordinance shall become effective on December 1, 2015. The Oklahoma Attorney General has opined (2002 OK AG 21) that the Oklahoma Constitutional provision requiring a vote of the people to approve the grant or renewal of franchises is preempted by 47 U.S.C. §§ 541 and 546 of the Communications Act of 1934 as amended; therefore, renewal of this franchise shall not be submitted to a vote of the citizens of the City of Mustang.  
Section 10. - Additional Cable Franchises. 
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent the City from granting a cable franchise to any other person, firm or corporation. The City shall comply with applicable law concerning the granting of additional cable franchises. In the event the City grants any other entity a cable franchise with terms and conditions that are more favorable or less burdensome, to use the public streets or rights-of-way to deliver cable services to residents, the Company may request that this Cable Franchise be modified consistent with applicable law.  
Section 11. - Non-Waiver. 
Neither the Company nor the City shall be relieved of its obligations to comply, promptly and completely, with any provision of the Franchise by reason of any failure of the other party to promptly enforce compliance with this Franchise, nor does either party waive or limit any of its rights under this Franchise by reason of such failure or neglect.  
ARTICLE 2 - GENERAL RIGHT-OF-WAY USE AND CONSTRUCTION 
 
Section 1. - Right to Construct. 
The Company may perform all construction in the Public Rights-of-Way for any facility needed for the maintenance, operation or extension of the Company's Cable System, subject to the terms of this Franchise, the Mustang Municipal Code and generally applicable laws.  
Section 2. - General Standard. 
All work authorized and required hereunder shall be done in a safe, thorough and workmanlike manner. All equipment shall be durable and installed and maintained in accordance with good engineering practices and comply with applicable law.  
Section 3. - Joint Trenching/Boring. 
To the extent it makes economic sense, the Company shall joint trench or share bores or cuts and work with other providers (such as, but not limited to, telecommunications, gas and electric companies), licensees, permittees and franchisees so as to reduce the number of Public Right-of-Way cuts within the City. The Company may request assistance from the City to facilitate access to joint trenches or shared bores that are approved by the City.  
Section 4. - Removal at Expiration of the Franchise. 
At the expiration of the term for which this Franchise is granted, or upon the expiration of any renewal or extension period which may be granted, the City shall, subject to any other lawful and valid authorizations the Company may have to use the System in Public Rights-of-Way, have the right to require the Company, at the Company's sole expense: (i) to remove all portions of the System from all Rights-of-Way within the City; and (ii) to restore affected sites to their original condition. The City may not order removal of the System, or portions thereof, until the parties have exhausted all applicable processes governing cable franchise renewals set forth in 47 U.S.C. §546. Should the Company fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the City's directive, all portions of the System, or any part thereof, may at the option of the City become the sole property of the City, at no expense to the City, or be removed, altered or relocated by the City at the cost of the Company. The City shall not be liable to the Company for damages resulting from such removal, alteration or relocation.  
Section 5. - Obligations of the City. 
(a)  The City agrees not to unreasonably block, restrict, or limit the construction, installation, maintenance or upgrade of Company's Cable system. 
(b)  The City agrees to process any and all applicable permits for the installation, construction, maintenance, repair, removal, and other activities associated with the placement of Company's communications or transmission facilities of any kind in a timely and prompt manner.  
Section 6. - Right-of-Way Use Conditions. 
In addition to complying with the construction and street occupancy standards set forth in the Mustang Municipal Code, the Company shall comply with the following: 
(a)  The Company shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities, on public property, until written approval of the City, is obtained, which approval by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld. However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the Company shall be a vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the Company at its own expense whenever the City determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. 
(b)  The facilities of the Company shall be installed underground in those areas of the City where existing telephone and electric services are both underground at the time of network construction. In the areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are installed aerially at the time of network construction, the Company may install its facilities aerially with the understanding that at such time as the existing aerial facilities are required to be placed underground by the City, the Company shall likewise place its facilities underground. 
(c)  The Company shall notify the City prior to beginning any work, of the Company's intention to commence any construction in any streets. The City shall cooperate with the Company in granting any permits required, providing such grant and subsequent construction by the Company shall not unduly interfere with the use of such streets and that proposed construction shall be done in accordance with applicable ordinances. 
(d)  All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. The Company shall at all times use ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other safety devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the Company shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way. 
(e)  The Company shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the City, restore to City standards and specifications any damage or disturbance caused to the public way as a result of its operations or construction on its behalf. Company shall guarantee and maintain such restoration for a period of one year against defective materials or workmanship. 
(f)  Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the City Manager or the Chief of the Fire or Police Department, to remove or damage any of the Company's facilities, no charge shall be made by the Company against the City for restoration and repair, unless such acts taken by the City amount to gross negligence. 
(g)  The Company shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to the supervision and direction of the City. Trimming of trees on private property shall require written consent of the private property owner. 
(h)  The Company at its expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of the Company when in the opinion of the City Manager the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction or reconstruction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other types of structures or improvements by governmental agencies whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure or public improvement, including, but not limited to, movement of buildings, urban renewal and redevelopment, and any general program under which the City shall undertake to cause all such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. The Company shall in all cases have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligations, to abandon any property of the Company in place. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of the Company and the Company shall not be entitled to any costs, fees, damages or surcharges by reason of anything hereunder. To the extent there are state or federal funds available to compensate the Company for the cost of relocating its facilities, the Company shall be offered such compensation on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
(i)  Upon failure of the Company to commence, pursue or complete any work to be done in any street and required by law or by the provisions of the Cable Ordinance, within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the City Council, the City Council may, at its option, cause such work to be done and the Company shall pay to the City the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the City Manager to the Company within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report. 
(j)  The Company shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless absolutely necessary, but only after written permission has been given by the City Manager. 
(k)  The Company shall install, in conduit, all cable passing under any roadway. 
(l)  Except as provided for herein and in applicable ordinances, the City shall not unreasonably block, restrict, or limit the construction of the Company's Cable System and shall process any and all applicable permits for the installation, construction, maintenance, repair, removal or other activities associated with the Company's Cable System of any kind in a timely and prompt manner. 
(m)  Except as provided for herein and in applicable ordinances, the City shall process any and all applicable permits for the installation, construction, maintenance, repair, removal, and other activities associated with the placement of the Company's Cable System in a timely and prompt manner.  
Section 7. - Insurance. 
The Company shall maintain insurance in the amounts and pursuant to the conditions set forth in Section 22-161 of the Cable Ordinance. Further, the Company shall indemnify and hold the City harmless in compliance with, and to the extent as set forth in, Section 22-162 of the Cable Ordinance.  
ARTICLE 3 - FRANCHISE FEE/CONSIDERATION 
 
Section 1. - Franchise Fee. 
(a)  In consideration for the franchise grant of authority contained herein, the Company shall pay to the City a franchise fee of five percent (5%) of the annual gross revenues derived from operation of the Cable System by the Company as provided in section 22-156 of the Cable Ordinance to provide Cable Service. Nothing in this Franchise shall be construed to limit any authority of the City to impose any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability. 
(b)  Such payment shall be in addition to any other payment, charge, permit, fee or bond owed to the City by the Company and shall not be construed as payment in lieu of personal or real property taxes levied by State, County or local authorities; provided, however, such fee shall include and be in lieu of any fee required by the City for any construction, building, or other permit for use or occupation of, or work in, the streets, except for the inspection fee and service charge levied under the Mustang Municipal Code.  
Section 2. - Additional Commitments Not Franchise Fees. 
No term or condition in this Franchise shall in any way modify or affect the Company's obligation to pay franchise fees. Although the total sum of franchise fee payments and additional commitments set forth elsewhere in this Franchise may total more than five percent (5%) of the Company's Gross Revenues in any 12-month period, the Company agrees that the additional commitments herein are not franchise fees, nor are they to be offset or credited against any franchise fee payments due to the City, nor do they represent an increase in franchise fees to be passed through to subscribers.  
Section 3. - Alternative Compensation. 
In the event the obligation of the Company to compensate the City through franchise fee payments is lawfully suspended or eliminated, in whole or part, then the Company shall pay to the City such other compensation as is permitted by state or federal law.  
Section 4. - Audit. 
The City shall have the right to conduct audits pursuant to Sections 22-156 and 22-164 of the Cable Ordinance.  
ARTICLE 4 - CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS 
The Company shall comply with all applicable customer service standards of the Federal Communications Commission, as may be set forth in the applicable sections of the Code of Federal Regulations, including without limitation 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.309, 76.1602, 76.1603, 76.1604, and 76.1619. To the extent such standards are in conflict with those set forth in Section 22-187 of the Cable Ordinance, the parties agree that the federal standards shall prevail.  
ARTICLE 5 - TERMINATION 
If this franchise ordinance is terminated, the Company shall comply with all further requirements as set forth in the Cable Ordinance.  
ARTICLE 6 - ACCESS CHANNELS AND SERVICES 
 
Section 1. - Public, Educational and Governmental Access Channels. 
The Company shall provide two (2) Public, Educational and Governmental Access Channels to Subscribers on the basic service tier within the Franchise Area throughout the term of this Franchise for non-commercial access programming. One channel is designated as a Government Access Channel, programmed by the City, and the second channel is designated as an Educational Access Channel, programmed by an educational consortium designated by the City. The City may designate an Access Channel as a governmental access or educational access channel at its sole discretion and shall have sole editorial control over such channels.  
Section 2. - Location of Access Channels. 
The Company shall locate the Access Channels on the Basic Service Tier, and shall provide Access Channels to all subscribers, regardless of the package of service. The Company shall provide ninety (90) days' written notice to the City prior to any relocation of the Government Access Channel.  
Section 3. - Access Interconnections. 
The Company may interconnect the Access Channels of the Cable System with the Access Channels of any other cable service provider in the City in accordance with applicable law.  
Section 4. - Access Channel Quality. 
The Company shall retransmit the Access Channels received from the City or its designee without any material degrading of the signal and shall retransmit any program related material received from the City or its designee as part of the Access channel signals. "Program related material" shall mean (i) closed captioning for the hearing impaired, (ii) one alternative language or secondary audio program feed, (iii) program ratings information, (iv) such other material as may be essential to or necessary for the delivery of distribution of the primary video stream in a digital form; (v) video description information; and (vi) any material the FCC specifically identifies as program-related material that a cable operator retransmitting a broadcast television signal pursuant to FCC must-carry rules is required to retransmit as part of a broadcast television signal on the Company's basic service tier; provided, however, that Company is technically capable of passing through any such program related material; and provided, further, that program related material shall not include any interactive element or transactional application that requires the functionality of a two-way cable or similar plant or otherwise suggests that a return path will be provided, including, without limitation, any feature that prompts a customer to attempt to utilize "triggers" or other options that are enabled by a return path. All such related audio and other material shall be provided as part of the Access Channel programming feed transmitted to the Company.  
Section 5. - Return Lines. 
The Company shall provide an activated cable or fiber connection to the Company's headend from 1501 North Mustang Road, Mustang, Oklahoma and to the Company's headend from 612 N. Sara Rd. Oklahoma City Ok. 73127, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, that will allow video programming produced by the City and the education consortium to be cablecast on the Access Channels. The parties shall agree on the location of a demarcation point at City Hall and at 612 N. Sara Rd. Oklahoma City Ok. 73127. The Company shall provide such activated cable or fiber connection at no cost to the City and shall have no obligation to require any third party access to such video path on the Company's side of the demarcation point, unless required by state or federal law.  
Section 6. - Connection of Public Facilities. 
(a)  Existing Service Locations. Until the third anniversary of the Effective Date of this Agreement, the Company shall continue to provide, at no cost to the City, Basic Service to the number of outlets at the service locations listed on Exhibit A and to all public schools. In the event separate equipment is needed to receive basic service at these outlets, the Company agrees to provide upon request, and at no cost to the City, the necessary digital converter equipment to receive Cable Service for each complimentary outlet. 
(b)  Audit. Upon request of either party, the Company and the City shall conduct an audit to ascertain the existing service locations and number of existing outlets and equipment provided pursuant to this Section 6. The results of the audit must be mutually agreed upon by the parties. The parties agree to cooperate with each other to complete such audit. 
(c)  New Installations. If during the three (3) years commencing on the Effective Date of this Agreement the City or the public schools shall occupy a new building or facility for governmental purposes and such building is located within the service area, the Company shall provide, without charge for installation, one (1) service drop to each occupied municipal building or public school located within one hundred-twenty-five (125) feet of the Company's activated cable network. The Company shall provide its basic service, at no charge, to one (1) service outlet at each new installation location. Such outlets shall not be located in areas of buildings generally available to the public, such as waiting rooms and lobbies. 
(d)  Service Extensions. The service provided in subsection (a) and (c) above, shall not be extended by the persons receiving such service to other outlets within the building without the approval of the Company, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. All requests for service connections, or extensions of service within existing locations shall be made by the City Manager or his designee to the Company. The entity receiving such service shall pay all costs, including installation and monthly service charges, for any extension beyond the existing outlets provided in subsections (a) and (c), above.  
ARTICLE 7 - DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
 
Section 1. - Notice of Noncompliance and Opportunity to Cure. 
In the event either party believes that the other party has not complied with the terms of the Franchise, it shall notify the other party in writing with reasonably specific details regarding the nature of the alleged noncompliance or default. Prior to issuing the written notice of noncompliance or default, the City shall make a good faith effort to contact the Company in an attempt to resolve the issue through good faith consultation in the ordinary course of business. The City Manager, or his designee, has the authority to make initial determinations regarding noncompliance with the Franchise and to issue written notice of any alleged violations. The City Manager, or his designee, may mediate any controversy or charge arising from the operations of the Company under this Franchise Agreement.  
Section 2. - Informal Resolution. 
Following written notice of any alleged violation, the parties shall expeditiously schedule a meeting to discuss the dispute informally. In the event that the dispute is not resolved by the City and the Company's primary staff contact to the City within thirty (30) days of the Company's receipt of the City's written notice, either party may upon written notice to the other initiate formal resolution under Section 3, below.  
Section 3. - Formal Resolution. 
If the matter is not resolved informally under Section 2 (Informal Resolution) of this Article, the matter shall be referred to a committee of the City Council (the "Committee"), which Committee shall consist of three (3) members of the City Council to be selected by the City Council. In a meeting before the Committee, the City Manager or his designee shall present information and make a brief oral presentation demonstrating reasonable cause of a franchise violation. The Company may present information and make a brief oral presentation to the Committee. The Committee shall forward its recommendation on whether reasonable cause of a Franchise violation exists to the City Council. If the City Council determines there is reasonable cause that a Franchise violation has occurred, the matter shall be submitted to a mutually-selected mediator. If the Parties cannot agree upon a mutually-selected mediator within thirty (30) days of the end of the informal resolution period contained in Section 2 of this Article, each Party shall within twenty (20) days provide a list of the names of three (3) mediators acceptable to that Party to the Chief Judge of the Canadian County District Court who shall select a mediator for the Parties from the submitted names. If the Parties, with the assistance of the mediator, do not resolve the dispute within 75 days of selection of the mediator, they may enforce their rights solely and exclusively in Canadian County District Court. The court shall have jurisdiction to demand and compel compliance with this Agreement and to impose the remedies contained herein.  
Section 4. - Remedies for Non-Compliance. 
The Canadian County District Court shall, without limitation, have all rights and remedies provided for herein or otherwise available under the law, including termination of the Franchise, and the assessment of damages. 
(a)  Relationship of Remedies. 
(1)  Non-Exclusivity of Remedies. Subject to applicable law and this Franchise, the remedies provided for in this Franchise, are cumulative and not exclusive; the exercise of one remedy shall not prevent the exercise of another remedy, or the exercise of any rights of the City at law or equity. 
(2)  No Election of Remedies. Without limitation, the recovery of amounts under the insurance, indemnity, or bonding provisions of this Franchise shall not be construed as a limit on the liability of the Company under the Franchise or an excuse of faithful performance of any obligation of the Company. 
(b)  Non-Waiver. The Company shall not be relieved of its obligations to comply, promptly and completely, with any provision of the Franchise by reason of any failure of the City to promptly enforce compliance with this Franchise, nor does the City waive or limit any of its rights under this Franchise by reason of such failure or neglect.  
ARTICLE 8 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Section 1. - Severability. 
If any section, provision or clause of this Franchise is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, or is preempted by federal or state laws or regulations, the remainder of this Franchise shall not be affected, except as is otherwise provided in this Franchise.  
Section 2. - Choice of Forum. 
Any litigation between the City and the Company arising under or regarding this Franchise shall occur, if in the state courts, in Canadian County District Court, and if in the federal courts, in the United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma.  
Section 3. - Force Majeure. 
The Company shall have no liability to City for penalties or damages, nor shall City have the right to terminate this Franchise as a result of any failure or delay of the Company to perform its obligations hereunder if such failure or delay is caused by factors beyond the control of the Company, including without limitation, war, civil disturbance, flood or other Act of God, laws, regulations, rules or orders of any governmental agency, sabotage, or strikes. In the event that delay in performance or failure to perform affects only part of the Company's capacity to perform, then the Company shall perform to the extent it is reasonably able to do so. In correcting any causes of non-performance or delay, and in effecting any partial performance, the Company shall take all necessary corrective actions as expeditiously as possible without unduly endangering the health, safety and integrity of the Company's employees or property, or the health, safety and integrity of the public, the rights-of-way, public property or private property.  
Section 4. - Notice. 
Unless otherwise agreed to by the parties, any notice provided for under this Franchise shall be sufficient if in writing and delivered personally to the following addressee or deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed as follows, or to such other address as the receiving party specifies in writing: 
(a)  Notices to the Company shall be mailed to: 
Cox Communications - Oklahoma 
ATTN: Vice President, Government Affairs 
6301 Waterford Blvd. 
Oklahoma City, OK 73118 
  
with a copy to: 
  
Cox Communications, Inc. 
ATTN: Law & Policy 
6205-B Peachtree-Dunwoody Rd. 
Atlanta, GA 30328 
  
(b)  Notices to the City shall be mailed to: 
  
City of Mustang 
City Manager 
1501 North Mustang Road 
Mustang, Oklahoma 73064 
  
(c)  The Company shall at all times keep the City advised as to which individual(s) are authorized to act on behalf of the Company and whose acts will be considered to bind the Company.  
Section 5. - Binding Acceptance. 
This Agreement shall bind and benefit the parties hereto and their respective heirs, beneficiaries, administrators, executors, receivers, trustees, successors and assigns.  
Section 6. - Governing Law. 
This Franchise Agreement shall be governed in all respects by the law of the State of Oklahoma and the federal cable Cable Act.  
Section 7. - Captions and References. 
The captions and headings of sections throughout this Agreement are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this Agreement. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this Agreement.  
Section 8. - Contractual Obligation. 
The preemption or preclusion of the exercise by the City of any of its police power shall not diminish, impair, alter, or affect any contractual benefit to the City or Company nor any contractual obligation of the Company under this Agreement. Any and all rights, powers, privileges and authorities arising under this Agreement are each and all hereby declared by the City and Company to be contractual in nature and to be for the benefit of the parties.  
Section 9. - No Third Party Beneficiaries. 
This Franchise is for the benefit of the City and the Company. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement grants or is intended to grant any claim, cause of action or right of action for breach of this Franchise Agreement to any person not a party to or the grantor of this Franchise, it being the explicit intent of the parties that this Franchise shall not be construed as a third-party beneficiary contract.  
Section 10. - Modification. 
This Agreement may be amended or modified only by a written instrument executed by both parties. 
