THE CITY CODE OF MOORE, OKLAHOMA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
>  
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Glenn Lewis (Mayor) 
Adam Webb (Ward 1) 
Danielle McKenzie (Ward 1) 
Mark Hamm (Ward 2) 
Melissa Hunt (Ward 2) 
Jason Blair (Ward 3) 
Louie Williams (Ward 3) 
City Council 
____________ 
Brooks Mitchell 
City Manager 
____________ 
Randy Brink 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Vanessa Kemp 
City Clerk  
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1999 Code, as supplemented through November 4, 2013, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1999 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a part of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the part. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Ramona Connors, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Randy Brink, City Attorney, and Ms. Linda Stewart, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Moore, Oklahoma. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 2018. 
ORDINANCE NO. 885(18) 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MOORE; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MOORE, OKLAHOMA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Moore, Oklahoma," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of parts 1 through 17, each inclusive is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 7, 2017, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part there of that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City of Moore to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 7, 2017, that amended or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
PASSED AND APPROVED THIS 16TH DAY OF JULY, 2018. 
      _____
GLENN LEWIS, Mayor 
  
ATTEST: (Seal) 
_____     
LINDA STEWART, City Clerk 
  
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY: 
_____     
RANDY C. BRINK, City Attorney  
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF MOORE, OKLAHOMA[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the City Charter. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines (and punctuation therein) have been made uniform. Capitalization and expression of numbers in text have been made consistent with the scheme of the document. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Editor's notes following textual section of the Charter were present in the Charter as furnished to Municipal Code Corporation. 
 
PREAMBLE 
We, the people of the City of Moore, exercising the powers of home rule granted to us by the constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma, in order to provide for more efficient, adequate, and economical government, do hereby ordain, ratify, and establish this Charter of the City of Moore, Oklahoma.  
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS 
 
Section 1-1. - Incorporation, annexation, merging. 
When this charter goes into full effect, the Town of Moore, Oklahoma, shall become a city, and within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter may be established, shall be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the "City of Moore." The city shall be the legal successor of the town; and as such, it shall succeed to and possess all the property and rights belonging to the town, and shall be liable for all debts and other obligations for which the town is legally bound at the time of the succession in government. 
The City of Moore, Oklahoma, may not be annexed by any other city or be merged into a combined city-county government or other governmental unit unless a majority of the qualified electors of the City of Moore voting on the question at an election approve such annexation or merging.  
Section 1-2. - Form of government. 
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as a "council-manager government." All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or, if the manner is not thus prescribed, then in such manner as the council may prescribe by ordinance.  
Section 1-3. - Powers of the city. 
The city shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises, and immunities granted to cities by the state constitution and law, and all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. Except as prohibited by the state constitution or law, the city shall have all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
The city shall have power to adopt a corporate seal and to alter it at pleasure, to sue and to be sued, and to make contracts. It shall have power to acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any city purpose, including public utilities, works, and ways, in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease condemnation, or other legal means; and to hold, maintain, improve, enlarge, manage, control, operate, lease, sell, convey, or otherwise dispose of, such property as its interests may require, including public utilities, works, and ways. It shall have power to incur indebtedness and to issue bonds within the limitations prescribed by the state constitution. It shall have power to accept and administer federal and state grants-in-aid and to do everything necessary to accomplish the purpose or purposes for which such grants may be made. It shall have power to ordain and to enforce local legislation for the proper organization and functioning of the city government, for the preservation and enforcement of good government and order, for the protection of health, life, morals, and property, for the prevention, summary abatement, and removal of nuisances, and otherwise for the promotion of the common welfare. It shall have power to grant, extend, and renew franchises in accordance with the state constitution. 
The enumeration or mention of particular powers by this charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive or limiting; and in addition to the powers enumerated or mentioned herein or implied hereby, the city shall have all powers which, under the state constitution and law, it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate or mention. 
Provisions of state law relating to matters which may be regulated by cities operating under charters, shall be in effect only insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by this charter or by ordinance.  
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL 
 
Section 2-1. - Councilmen: number, qualification. 
There shall be a council of seven members, which shall consist of a councilman at large and two councilmen from each of the three wards of the city as the wards are constituted in this charter or as they may hereafter be constituted by ordinance. Only qualified electors of the city who are freeholders in the city shall be qualified for the office of councilman at large. Only qualified electors residing in the city and at the time of their election, in their respective wards, who are freeholders in the city, shall be qualified for the offices of councilmen from the wards. Candidates for councilpersons [councilmen] shall be nominated and elected by the qualified electors of their respective wards, of which wards said candidates must be at all times during the term of office a resident. No councilman may hold any office or position in the city government by appointment by the city manager or by any subordinate of the city manager. If a councilman is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, his office shall become immediately vacant at the expiration of the period during which he may appeal or, in case of appeal, when the case is finally determined. 
(Res. No. 195 (87), 1-5-1987) 
Editor's note— Resolution 195(87) amended the fourth sentence and was approved by the voters on March 17, 1987.  
Section 2-2. - Mayor and vice mayor. 
Beginning with the primary and/or general elections for the City of Moore, Oklahoma, on the third Tuesday in March 1970, and thereafter, according to the charter for the City of Moore, Oklahoma, there shall be nominated or elected a mayor of the City of Moore. Said mayor shall be the councilman at large. The mayor and councilman at large shall have all the duties and responsibilities now possessed by those enumerated in the charter of the City of Moore, Oklahoma, for the councilman at large. 
At the first meeting after the time prescribed for the beginning of the terms of newly elected councilmen, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council shall elect from its membership a vice mayor, who shall serve until the time prescribed for the beginning of the terms of newly elected councilmen. 
The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council. He shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law. He shall have no regular administrative duties except that he shall sign such written obligations of the city as the council may require. As a councilman, he shall have all powers, rights, privileges, duties, and responsibilities of a councilman, including the right to vote on questions. 
The vice mayor shall act as mayor during the absence, disability, or suspension of the mayor, or, if a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, until another mayor is elected for completion of the unexpired term and qualifies. If the office of vice mayor becomes vacant, the council shall elect from its membership another vice mayor for completion of the unexpired term.  
Section 2-3. - Councilmen: compensation. 
Each councilman shall be paid one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month beginning in April 1999, but shall not be paid for any other services rendered the city. The mayor or councilman at large shall be paid the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month for each and every month or any part thereof that he holds office. The councilmen and the mayor may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the discharge of their official duties. 
(Res. No. 116(81), § 1, 2-2-1981; Res. No. 432(99), 1-7-1999) 
Editor's note— The amendment of Charter § 2-3 proposed by Res. No. 116(81), § 1, enacted February 2, 1981, was approved by the voters at the general municipal election held on March 17, 1981. The text as amended above was approved March 16, 1999.  
Section 2-4. - Council powers. 
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all powers of the city, including the determination of all matters of policy, shall be vested in the council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the council shall have power, subject to the provisions of this charter: 
(1)  To appoint and remove the city manager; 
(2)  By ordinance to enact municipal legislation; 
(3)  To raise revenue and make appropriations, and to regulate bond elections, the issuance of bonds, sinking funds, the refunding of indebtedness, salaries and wages, and all other fiscal affairs of the city; 
(4)  To inquire into the conduct of any office, department, or agency of the city government, and investigate municipal affairs; 
(5)  To appoint or elect and remove the members of the personnel board, the members of the planning commission, the members of the board of adjustment, and other quasi-legislative, quasi-judicial, or advisory officers and authorities, now or when and if established, or to prescribe the method of remission of fines and costs; 
(6)  To grant pardons for violations of the charter and ordinances, including the remission of fines and costs; 
(7)  To regulate elections, the initiative and referendum, and recall; 
(8)  To regulate the organization, powers, duties, and functions of the municipal court and of the minor violations bureau when and if established; 
(9)  To create, change, and abolish all offices, departments, and agencies of the city government other than the offices, departments, and agencies created by this charter; and to assign additional powers, duties, and functions to offices, departments, and agencies created by this charter.  
Section 2-5. - Council not to interfere in appointments and removals. 
Neither the council, the mayor, nor any of its other members may direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office or employment by the city manager or by any other authority, or, except as provided in this charter, participate in any manner in the appointment or removal of officers and employees of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager; and neither the council nor any member thereof may give orders on administrative matters to any subordinate of the city manager either publicly or privately.  
Section 2-6. - City clerk to be clerical officer of council. 
The city clerk hereinafter provided for, shall also serve as clerical officer of the council. He shall keep the journal of its proceedings, and shall enroll in a book or books kept for the purpose [of] all ordinances and resolutions passed by it; shall be custodian of such documents, records, and archives as may be provided by applicable law or ordinance; shall be custodian of the seal of the city; and shall attest, and affix the seal to, documents when required in accordance with applicable law or ordinance.  
Section 2-7. - Council: meetings. 
The council shall hold at least two (2) regular meetings every month, at such time as it may prescribe by ordinance or otherwise. The mayor or any four (4) councilmen may call special meetings. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public, and the journal of its proceedings shall be open to public inspection, except personnel or executive sessions may be conducted, as may be authorized by the statutes of the State of Oklahoma. 
(Res. No. 116(81), § 1, 2-2-1981) 
Editor's note— Amendments to Charter § 2-7, as proposed by Res. No. 116(81), § 1, enacted February 2, 1981, and as herein set out, were approved by the voters at the municipal election of March 17, 1981.  
Section 2-8. - Councilmen: absences to terminate membership. 
If the mayor or any other councilman shall be absent from more than one-half of all the meetings of the council, regular and special, held within any period of six consecutive calendar months, he shall thereupon cease to hold office.  
Section 2-9. - Councilmen: removal. 
The mayor or any other councilman may be removed from office for any cause specified by applicable state law for the removal of officers, and by the method or methods prescribed thereby, and by recall as provided in this charter.  
Section 2-10. - Council vacancies. 
The council, by majority vote of its remaining members, shall fill vacancies in its own membership for the unexpired terms or until successors are elected as provided in this section. If a vacancy occurs before the beginning of a regular filing period for candidates for councilmen, and the unexpired term extends beyond the time when the terms of councilmen elected that year begin, then a councilman for that place shall be elected at the elections of that year to serve the rest of the unexpired term beginning at the time the terms of councilmen elected that year begin.  
Section 2-11. - Council: quorum, rules, yeas and nays. 
A majority of all of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day or from time to time. The council may determine its own rules. On the demand of any member, the vote on any question shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the journal.  
Section 2-12. - Ordinances: enacting clause. 
The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall be, "Be it ordained by the Council of the City of Moore, Oklahoma," and of all ordinances proposed by the voters under their power of initiative, "Be it ordained by the People of the City of Moore, Oklahoma."  
Section 2-13. - Ordinances: passage, when in effect. 
Every proposed ordinance shall be read, and a vote of a majority of all the councilmen shall be required for its passage. The vote on final passage of every ordinance shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the journal. The mayor shall have no power of veto. Within ten days after its passage, every ordinance shall be published in full or by number and title in a newspaper authorized to publish legal publications. Every ordinance except an emergency ordinance shall become effective thirty days after its final passage and publication unless it specifies a later time; provided that a franchise for a public utility shall not go into effect until the ordinance granting it has been published in full in a newspaper authorized to publish legal publications and has been approved at an election by a vote of a majority of the qualified electors voting on the question.  
Section 2-14. - Ordinances: emergency. 
An emergency ordinance is an ordinance which in the judgment of the council is necessary for the immediate preservation of peace, health or safety, and which should become effective prior to the time when an ordinary ordinance would become effective. Every such ordinance shall contain as a part of its title, the words, "and declaring an emergency" and in a separation section, herein called the emergency section, shall declare the emergency. An affirmative vote of at least six councilmen shall be required for the passage of an emergency ordinance. An emergency ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication unless it specifies a later time.  
Section 2-15. - Ordinances: adoption by reference. 
The council by ordinance may adopt by reference codes, ordinances, standards, and regulations relating to building, plumbing, electrical installations, milk and milk products, and other matters which it has power to regulate otherwise. Such code, ordinance, standard, or regulation so adopted need not be enrolled in the book of ordinances; but a copy shall be kept in the office of the city clerk.  
Section 2-16. - Ordinances: codification. 
The permanent, general ordinances of the city shall be codified and published in a book or pamphlet form at least every ten (10) years unless the council, by use of a loose-leaf system, provides for keeping the code up-to-date. The ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the code may be revised, rearranged, and reorganized; and the code may contain new matter, provisions of the state constitution and law applicable to the city, and this charter. A copy of the published code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk after the council adopts the code by ordinance, but the code need not be enrolled in the book of ordinances.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 
 
Section 3-1. - City manager: appointment, term, qualifications, removal. 
There shall be a city manager. The council shall appoint him for an indefinite term by a vote of a majority of all its members. It shall choose him on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the city or state; but, during his tenure of office, he shall reside within the city. A councilman may not be appointed city manager or acting city manager during his term nor within one year after the expiration of his term. The council may suspend or remove the city manager at any time by a vote of a majority of all its members; provided, that the council shall give him a written statement of the reason for his removal at least twenty days before removal, and on request shall give him an opportunity for a public hearing thereon after the expiration of such time before removing him.  
Section 3-2. - Absence or disability of city manager. 
To perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability, the city manager may designate by letter filed with the city clerk a qualified administrative officer of the city to be acting city manager. If the city manager fails to make such designation, the council may appoint an acting city manager to serve during such time.  
Section 3-3. - City manager: powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be chief administrative officer and head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall execute the laws and ordinances and administer the government of the city, and shall be responsible therefor to the council. He shall: 
(1)  Appoint, and when deemed necessary for the good of the service, lay off, suspend, demote, or remove all directors, or heads, of administrative departments and all other administrative officers and employees of the city except as he may authorize the head of a department, an officer, or an agency to appoint, lay off, suspend, demote, and remove subordinates in such department, office, or agency; 
(2)  Supervise and control directly or indirectly, all administrative department[s], agencies, officers, and employees; 
(3)  Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council, be responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect, and recommend to the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable; 
(4)  Submit to the council a report as of the end of the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year; 
(5)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the council on matters of policy and other matters as may seem to him desirable; 
(6)  Have such other powers, duties and functions as this charter may prescribe, and such powers, duties, and functions consistent with this charter as the council may prescribe.  
Section 3-4. - Administrative departments, offices, and agencies. 
There shall be a department of finance, a department of law headed by a city attorney, and such other administrative departments, offices, and agencies as this charter establishes and as the council may establish.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, FISCAL AFFAIRS 
 
Section 4-1. - City clerk: office created, duties. 
There shall be a city clerk, who shall be an officer of the city appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and who shall be head of the department of finance. Except as the council by ordinance provides otherwise, the city clerk shall collect or receive revenue and other money for the city, shall deposit the same with the city treasurer or for the city treasurer in an account or accounts maintained by the city treasurer in a depository or depositories, and shall maintain a general accounting system for the city government. He shall have such other powers, duties, and functions as may be prescribed by the charter, by applicable law, or by ordinance.  
Section 4-2. - City treasurer: office created, duties. 
Within the department of finance, there shall be a city treasurer, who shall be an officer of the city appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term; provided also that the same person may be appointed both city clerk and city treasurer, and that the council by ordinance may provide that the city clerk shall be ex officio city treasurer and that an acting city clerk shall be ex officio acting city treasurer. Subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe, the city treasurer shall deposit funds received for the city in such depositories as the council may designate. He shall have such other powers, duties, and functions as may be prescribed by the charter, by applicable law, or by ordinance.  
Section 4-3. - Purchases and sales. 
The city manager, subject to any regulations which the council may prescribe, shall contract for and purchase, or issue purchase authorizations for, all supplies, materials, and equipment for the offices, departments, and agencies of the city government. Every such contract or purchase exceeding an amount to be established by ordinance, shall require the prior approval of the council. The city manager also may transfer to or between offices, departments, and agencies, or sell, surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, and equipment, subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe. 
Before the purchase of, or contract for, any supplies, materials, or equipment, or the sale of any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment, ample opportunity for competitive bidding, under such regulations, and with such exceptions, as the council may prescribe, shall be given; but the council shall not except an individual contract, purchase, or sale from the requirement of competitive bidding. 
The council by ordinance may transfer some or all of the power granted to the city manager by this section to an administrative officer subordinate to the city manager.  
Section 4-4. - Sale of property valued at more than $25,000. 
The sale of any property, real or personal, including public utilities, or of any interest therein, the value of which is more than $25,000, shall be made only (1) by authority of an affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the city who vote on the question of approving or authorizing the sale at an election, or (2) by authority of a special nonemergency ordinance. Such ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper authorized to publish legal publications within ten days after its passage, and shall include a section reading substantially as follows: "Section . This ordinance shall be referred to a vote of the electors of the city if a legal and sufficient referendum petition is properly filed within thirty days after its passage; otherwise it shall go into effect thirty days after its passage and publication." The sale of an entire public utility may be authorized only as provided in (1) hereinabove.  
Section 4-5. - Public improvements. 
Public improvements may be made by the city government itself or by contract. The council shall award all contracts for such improvements; provided that the council may authorize the city manager to award such contracts not exceeding an amount to be determined by the council and subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe. A contract for public improvements of more than $1,000 may be awarded only to the lowest and best responsible bidder after such notice and opportunity for competitive bidding as the council may prescribe. All bids may be rejected and further notice and opportunity for competitive bidding may be given.  
Section 4-6. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July and shall end on the last day of June of every calendar year.  
Section 4-7. - Independent annual audit. 
The council shall designate a qualified public accountant or accountants who shall make an independent audit of the accounts and evidences of financial transactions of the department of finance and of all other departments, offices, and agencies keeping separate or subordinance [subordinate] accounts or making financial transactions as of the end of every fiscal year at least, and who shall report to the council and to the city manager. In lieu of the above, the council may arrange with an appropriate state authority for such an audit when and if permitted by law.  
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
Section 5-1. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a municipal judge, who shall be an officer of the city appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term. Only the council may suspend or remove the municipal judge or an acting municipal judge, and by a vote of a majority of all its members. The municipal judge shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases involving offenses against the charter and ordinances of the city; provided that the council by ordinance may create a minor violations bureau with authority to dispose of cases arising out of designated minor violations, such as minor traffic and parking violations, when the accused waives his right to be heard in court, pleads guilty, and pays fines and costs. The municipal judge shall keep a record of all proceedings of the municipal court, of the disposition of all cases, and of all fines and other money collected. The municipal judge may issue warrants of arrest and subpoenas, administer oaths and affirmations, make and enforce all proper orders, rules, and judgments, and punish for contempt.  
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS 
 
Section 6-1. - Overlapping terms of four years; nominated and elected at large; nonpartisan elections. 
The councilperson at large shall be elected at the elections herein provided for in even numbered years, and one councilperson from each ward shall be elected at said elections. Beginning in the year 2000 the councilperson shall serve for terms of four years beginning on the first council meeting following the statutory general election date in the respective years when they are elected. If a councilperson-elect fails to qualify within one month thereafter, his office shall become vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as other vacancies in the council are filled. 
All candidates for councilmen [councilman at large] shall be nominated, and all councilmen [the councilman at large] shall be elected, at large, by the qualified electors of the entire city; but candidates for councilmen from the wards must be [nominated and elected by the] qualified electors of their respective wards. 
Both the primary and the general election shall be nonpartisan; and no party designation or emblem shall be placed on the ballots. 
Nothing in this charter shall prohibit the use of voting machines. 
(Res. No. 432(99), 1-7-1999; Res. No. 589(05), § 1, 1-18-2005) 
Editor's note— Charter election held March 17, 1987, approved new language in Charter § 2-1 regarding nomination and election of councilmen from wards. Although this section was not specifically amended, the language in brackets above inserts the effect of the voter approval of amendments to § 2-1. The text as amended above was approved at the election held March 16, 1999. The amendment of Charter § 6-1, proposed by Res. No. 589(05), § 1, adopted January 18, 2005, was approved by the voters at a special municipal election held on March 15, 2005.  
Section 6-2. - Primary election: filing. 
Any qualified person may have his name placed on the ballot for the primary election as a candidate for councilman or mayor by filing, during the time required by the statutes of the State of Oklahoma, but if not provided for by the legislature, then not more than one month and at least two (2) weeks prior to the primary election, with the secretary of the county election board, a sworn statement of his or her candidacy. The mayor or councilman may be a candidate for re-election but a councilman may not be a candidate for mayor or the other seat or office in the same ward as the councilman serves. 
(Res. No. 142(83), § 1, 1-17-1983) 
Editor's note— The amendment of Charter § 6-2, as proposed by Res. No. 142(83), § 1, enacted January 17, 1983, was approved by the voters at the regular primary election held March 15, 1983.  
Section 6-3. - Primary election: time, etc. 
A primary election shall be held on the statutory election date in each election year to nominate candidates for councilperson to succeed those whose terms are expiring. If only one person is a candidate for the office to be filled, he shall be not only nominated, but also elected ipsa facto; and his name shall not appear on the primary or general election ballot. Every qualified elector of the city shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for [the office of councilperson at large to be filled; qualified electors within each ward shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for] each office [of councilperson from that respective ward] to be filled. 
(Res. No. 589(05), § 1, 1-18-2005) 
Editor's note— Charter election held March 17, 1987, approved new language in Charter § 2-1 regarding nomination and election of councilmen from wards. Although this section was not specifically amended, the language in brackets above inserts the effect of the voter approval of amendments to § 2-1. The amendment of Charter § 6-3, proposed by Res. No. 589(05), § 1, adopted January 18, 2005, was approved by the voters at a special municipal election held on March 15, 2005.  
Section 6-4. - Primary election: who nominated or elected. 
In a primary election, the two candidates for each office to be filled receiving the greatest number of votes for that office, shall be nominated. If one of the candidates for an office receives a majority of all votes cast for all candidates for that office, he alone shall be not only nominated, but also elected ipso facto; and his name shall not appear on the ballot for the general election. In case of failure to nominate one or both candidates for an office because of a tie, the nominee or nominees shall be determined from among those tying, fairly by lot, by the county election board in a public meeting. If one of the two candidates for an office nominated in a primary election dies or withdraws before the general election, the remaining candidate shall be elected ipso facto; and his name need not appear on the ballot for the general election.  
Section 6-5. - General election: time, who elected. 
A general election shall be held in the city on the statutory general election date to elect the councilperson to succeed those whose terms are expiring. Every qualified elector of the City shall be entitled to vote for one of the two candidates for each office [the office of councilperson at large] to be filled, [and every qualified elector of each ward shall be entitled to vote for one of the two candidates for the office of councilperson from that respective ward to be filled], but may not vote for any other person. The candidate for each office receiving the greater number of votes, shall be elected. In case of a tie, the election shall be determined, fairly by lot, by the county election board in a public meeting. 
(Res. No. 432(99), 1-7-1999; Res. No. 589(05), § 1, 1-18-2005) 
Editor's note— Charter election held March 17, 1987, approved new language in Charter § 2-1 regarding nomination and election of councilmen from wards. Although this section was not specifically amended, the language in brackets above inserts the effect of the voter approval of amendments to § 2-1. The section as amended above was approved at the March, 16, 1999, election. The amendment of Charter § 6-5, proposed by Res. No. 589(05), § 1, adopted January 18, 2005, was approved by the voters at a special municipal election held on March 15, 2005.  
Section 6-6. - Primary and general elections: when not held. 
If there are no candidates and no questions to be voted upon at a primary or general election, the election shall not be held.  
Section 6-7. - Registered qualified electors. 
Only electors residing in this city who have the qualifications prescribed for electors by the state constitution and law, and who are registered as may be required by law, may vote in city elections.  
Section 6-8. - Political activity of officers and employees. 
No officer or employee of the city except the councilmen and personnel who receive no compensation for their services, may work for or against, or attempt to influence, the nomination, election, or defeat of any candidate for councilman, or the recall of any councilman; provided that this shall not prohibit the ordinary exercise of one's right to express his opinions and to vote. Any person who violates this section shall be punished, upon conviction thereof, by a fine not exceeding twenty dollars including costs. Such violation shall constitute cause for removal from office or employment; and if the regular removal authority has not already removed a person who violates this section, he shall be automatically removed by the said conviction of violating this section effective at the expiration of his right of appeal or, in the case of appeal, when the case is finally determined.  
Section 6-9. - State constitution and law to govern. 
The provisions of the state constitution and law applicable to city elections, shall govern such elections in this city insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by this charter or by ordinance. 
A proclamation of the mayor calling a special election need not (but may) set forth the names of the precinct officers who are to conduct the election but shall give the locations of polling places.  
Section 6-10. - Authorizing absentee voting. 
Voting by absentee ballots shall be permitted in all municipal, primary, general or special elections to be held in the City of Moore, Oklahoma, beginning in the year 1982 A.D. 
(Res. No. 116(81), § 1, 2-2-1981) 
Editor's note— The amendments to Charter § 6-10 set out by Res. No. 116(81), § 1, enacted February 2, 1981, were approved by the voters at the regular general municipal election held on March 17, 1981.  
ARTICLE VII. - RECALL 
 
Section 7-1. - Recall authorized. 
The incumbent of any elective city office, including a person appointed to fill a vacancy in any such office, may be recalled from office by the electors qualified to vote for the election of a successor to the incumbent, in the manner provided herein; provided, that the recall statement or petition shall be for official misconduct of said official, which shall include, but not be limited to, willful neglect of duty, corruption in office, habitual drunkenness, incompetency, or a conviction of any offense involving moral turpitude committed while in office. 
(Res. No. 131(82), § 1, 2-12-1982) 
Editor's note— The amendment of Charter § 7-1, proposed by Res. No. 131(82), § 1, enacted February 12, 1982, was approved by the electors of the city at the regular municipal primary election held on March 16, 1982.  
Section 7-2. - Recall petition. 
(1)  To initiate recall proceedings, a written statement in duplicate proposing the recall of the incumbent of an elective office, shall be signed by twenty or more registered qualified electors of the city, and shall be filed with the city clerk after the incumbent has held the office at least four months. The statement shall also contain the reason or reasons for which the recall is sought, in not more than two hundred words. Within five days, the city clerk shall mail a copy of such statement by registered, certified, or similar special mail to the officer at his residential address. Within ten days after the statement is mailed to the officer, the officer may make and file with the city clerk a written statement in duplicate justifying his conduct in office, in not more than two hundred words; and the city clerk on request shall deliver one copy to one of the persons filing the statement proposing the recall. 
(2)  The petition for recall shall include a demand that a successor to the incumbent sought to be recalled be elected, and shall also include before the space where the signatures are to be written the statement giving the reason or reasons for recall under the heading "STATEMENT FOR RECALL," and if the officer has filed a statement as authorized, the statement justifying his conduct in office under the heading "STATEMENT AGAINST RECALL." The two statements shall be in letters of the same size. A copy of the petition shall be filed with the city clerk within one month after recall proceedings are initiated by the filing of the first statement, and before the petition is circulated. 
(3)  A number of registered qualified electors of the city equal at least to thirty-five percent (35%) of the number of electors who voted in the last general municipal election, must sign the petition. Each signer shall write after his name his address within the city, giving street or avenue and number, if any. Not more than one hundred signatures may appear on a single copy of the petition. Petitions may be circulated only by registered qualified electors of the city; and the person who circulates each copy of the petition shall sign an affidavit on the copy stating that each signer signed the petition in his presence, that each signature on the petition is genuine, and that he believes each signer to be a registered qualified elector of the city. 
(4)  The circulated petition shall be filed with the city clerk not later than one month after the filing of a copy as provided above. Within one month after date of filing of the circulated petition, the city clerk shall examine it and ascertain whether it has been prepared and circulated as required, and whether the required number of registered qualified electors of the city have signed it. He shall then attach his certificate to the petition. If his certificate states that the petition has not been prepared and circulated as required and/or lacks a sufficient number of signatures, the petition shall have no effect unless the decision of the city clerk is appealed from and reversed by the district court. But, if the city clerk's certificate states that the petition has been prepared and circulated as required and has a sufficient number of signatures, he shall submit the petition and certificate to the council at its next meeting. Provided that any qualified elector who has signed said petition or the officer affected may appeal from the decision of the city clerk within five days from the date of such decision to the district court.  
Section 7-3. - Recall election: council to order. 
The council, by resolution or ordinance passed within ten days after receiving the petition and certificate of the city clerk or after the decision of the court, shall order and fix the date for a recall election, which shall be held not less than forty days, nor more than fifty days, after passage of the resolution or ordinance. The city clerk shall cause the resolution or ordinance ordering the election to be published in full in a newspaper authorized to publish legal publications within ten days after its passage; and such publication shall be sufficient notice of the election. 
The qualified electors of the city may vote in a recall election on the election of successors to more than one incumbent of an elective office on the same day.  
Section 7-4. - Recall election: how held. 
The recall election shall be an election to fill the office held by the incumbent sought to be recalled. There shall be no primary. Any qualified person, including the incumbent, may file as a candidate for the office. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in the recall election shall be elected. If a candidate other than the incumbent is elected, the incumbent shall be recalled from office effective as of the time when the result of the election is certified. The said successful candidate must qualify within one month thereafter; and if he fails to do so, the office shall be vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as other vacancies in the council are filled. A candidate thus elected and qualifying shall serve for the unexpired term. If the incumbent is a candidate an receives the greatest number of votes, he shall continue in office without interruption; and recall proceedings may not again be initiated against him within one year after the election. 
The provisions of this charter relating to city elections shall also govern recall elections insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by the provisions of this article.  
Section 7-5. - Person recalled or resigning. 
No person who has been recalled from an office, or who has resigned from office while recall proceedings were pending against him, may hold any office or position of employment in the city government within two years after his recall or resignation.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY 
 
Section 8-1. - Appointments, removals, etc., personnel regulations. 
Appointments and promotions in the service of the city shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness; and removals, demotions, suspensions, and layoffs shall be made solely for the good of the service. The council, consistently with this charter, by ordinance or personnel rules, may regulate personnel matters and provide for proper personnel administration.  
Section 8-2. - Personnel board created. 
There shall be a personnel board consisting of three members appointed by the council for overlapping six-year terms. The term of one member shall begin July 1 in every even-numbered year. The council shall appoint the three original members so that the term of one will expire at that time in each of the first three succeeding even-numbered years. A member may not hold any other office or position in the city government. The council, by a vote of at least five members, after adequate opportunity for a public hearing, may remove a member for the good of the service; and the vote shall be by yeas and nays and shall be entered in the journal. The council shall fill vacancies for the unexpired terms. Members shall serve without compensation unless the council provides otherwise. 
At the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of a newly appointed member or as soon thereafter as practicable, the board shall elect a chairman, a vice-chairman, and a secretary; and the secretary need not be a member of the board. The board shall determine the time and place of its regular meetings, and the chairman or two members may call special meetings. 
The personnel board shall have power to subpoena officers and employees of the city and other persons to testify and to produce documents and other effects as evidence. The chairman shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations.  
Section 8-3. - Classified and unclassified services. 
All officers and employees of the city shall be divided into the classified and the unclassified service. 
(1)  The following shall constitute the unclassified service: 
(a)  The mayor and other councilmen, and the municipal judge; 
(b)  The city manager, and one secretary to the city manager, if any; 
(c)  Members and secretary of each board, commission, or other plural authority; 
(d)  All personnel who serve without compensation; 
(e)  Persons appointed or employed on a temporary basis to make or conduct a special audit, inquiry, investigation, study, examination, or installation, or to perform a temporary professional or technical service, subject to such exceptions, limitations, and regulations as the ordinances or personnel rules may prescribe; and such other temporary personnel as may be placed in the unclassified service by ordinance or personnel rules. 
(2)  All other officers and employees shall be in the classified service; provided that, when the city has over 30,000 people as shown by any last preceding federal census, any of the following may be placed in the unclassified service by ordinance or personnel rules: One assistant city manager if any; the heads, or directors, of administrative departments; and one secretary for each such head, or director, who has a secretary. 
(3)  Nothing herein shall prohibit including personnel in the unclassified service in the classification plan.  
Section 8-4. - Removal, etc., hearing before the personnel board. 
The city manager or any other authority who lays off, suspends without pay for more than ten days, demotes, or removes any regular (that is, nontemporary) officer or employee in the classified service after a probationary period of six months, shall, at that time or within two days thereafter, deliver, or have delivered, or mail by registered, certified, or similar special mail, to the officer or employee a written statement of the reason or reasons for the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal. Such officer or employee may appeal in writing to the personnel board. The appeal must be filed with the secretary of the board, or with the city clerk for transmittal to the board, within ten (10) days after receipt of notice of the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal (which appeal may thus be filed either before or after the time of effectiveness of the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal). As soon as practicable thereafter, the board shall hold a public hearing on the appeal, or give an adequate opportunity therefor, and shall report in writing its findings and recommendations, in cases of subordinates of the city manager, to the city manager, and in other cases to the respective authorities having power of removal; and the city manager or other authority having power of removal shall then make a final decision in writing regarding the appellant's layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal, as the case may be; provided that, if the board finds that the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal was made for a political reason or reasons or for any other reason or reasons than the good of the service, it shall veto the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal, and the action by the city manager or other authority shall be nullified thereby.  
Section 8-5. - Qualifications of officers and employees. 
Officers and employees of the city shall have the qualifications prescribed by this charter and such additional qualifications as the council may prescribe; but the council shall not prescribe additional qualifications for councilmen.  
Section 8-6. - Nepotism. 
Neither the city manager, the council, nor any other authority of the city government, may appoint or elect any person related to any councilman, to the city manager, or to himself, or, in the case of a plural authority, to one of its members, by affinity or consanguinity within the third degree, to any office or position of profit in the city government; but this shall not prohibit an officer or employee from continuing in the service of the city.  
Section 8-7. - Holding more than one office. 
Except as may be otherwise provided by this charter or by ordinance, the same person may hold more than one office in the city government. The city manager may hold more than one such office, through appointment by himself, by the council, or by other city authority having power to fill the particular office, subject to any regulations which the council may make by ordinance; but he may not receive compensation for service in such other offices. Also the council by ordinance may provide that the city manager shall hold ex officio designated offices subordinance [subordinate] to the city manager as well as other designated compatible city offices.  
Section 8-8. - Official bonds. 
The city manager, the city clerk, the city treasurer, and such other officers and employees as the council may designate, before entering upon their duties, shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their respective duties, payable to the city, in such form and in such amounts as the council may prescribe, with a surety company authorized to operate within the state. The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds.  
Section 8-9. - Oath or affirmation of office. 
Every officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office prescribed by the state constitution. The oath or affirmation shall be filed in the city clerk's office.  
Section 8-10. - Who may administer oaths and affirmations. 
All officers authorized by federal or state law, the mayor, the city manager, the city clerk, the municipal judge, and such other officers as the council may authorize, may administer oaths and affirmations in any matter pertaining to the affairs and government of the city.  
Section 8-11. - Removal, etc., of officers and employees. 
Except in the case of the municipal judge, the power [to] lay off, suspend, demote, and remove accompanies the power to appoint or elect, and the city manager, the council, or other appointing or electing authority at any time lay off, suspend, demote, or remove any officer or employee to whom he, the council, or the other appointing or electing authority respectively may appoint or elect a successor.  
Section 8-12. - Acting officers and employees. 
The appointing or electing authority who may appoint or elect the successor of an officer or employee, may appoint or elect a person to act during the temporary absence, leave, disability, or suspension of such officer or employee, or, in case of a vacancy, until a successor is appointed or elected and qualifies, unless the council provides by general ordinance that a particular superior or subordinate of such officer or employee shall act. The council by general ordinance may provide for a deputy to act in such cases. Also an acting municipal judge may be appointed to serve in any case or proceeding for which the municipal judge is disqualified.  
Section 8-13. - Officers to continue until successors are elected or appointed and qualify. 
Every officer who is elected or appointed for a term ending at a definite time, shall continue to serve thereafter until his successor is elected or appointed and qualifies unless his services are sooner terminated by resignation, removal, disqualification, death, abolition of the office, or other legal manner.  
Section 8-14. - Conflict of interests. 
Neither any councilman nor the city manager shall sell or barter anything to the city or to a contractor to be supplied to the city; or make any contract with the city; or purchase anything from the city other than those things which the city offers generally to the public (as for example, utility services), and then only on the same terms as are offered to the public. Any such officer violating this section, upon conviction thereof, shall thereby forfeit his office. Any violation of this section, with knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city, shall render the contract voidable by the city manager or the council. This section shall not apply in cases in which the city acquires property by condemnation. 
The council by ordinance or personnel rules may further regulate conflict of interests and ethics of officers and employees of the city.  
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Section 9-1. - Gender. 
When the masculine gender is used in this charter, it shall also mean the feminine unless the masculine alone is clearly indicated.  
Section 9-2. - Initiative and referendum. 
The powers of the initiative and referendum are reserved to the people of the city. In the exercise of these powers, the requirements of the state constitution and law shall be observed.  
Section 9-3. - Publicity of records. 
All records and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the city government, except records and documents the disclosure of which would tend to defeat the lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish, shall be open to public inspection.  
ARTICLE X. - AMENDMENT AND SEPARABILITY OF CHARTER 
 
Section 10-1. - Amendment: proposal, ratification, approval. 
This charter may be amended by proposals therefor submitted by the council, or by the mayor upon initiative petition of the electors as provided by the state constitution, at a general or special election, ratified by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon, and approved by the governor as provided by the state constitution. If more than one amendment is proposed, all of them except those which are so interrelated that they should be ratified or rejected together, shall be submitted in such manner that the electors may vote on them separately. A proposition to amend this charter may be either in the form of a proposed amendment to a part or parts of the charter or of a proposed new charter.  
Section 10-2. - Separability. 
If a court of competent jurisdiction should hold any section or part of this charter invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which such section or part so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with that section or part. 
If a court of competent jurisdiction holds a part of this charter invalid, or if a change in the state constitution or law renders a part of this charter invalid or inapplicable, the council by ordinance may take such appropriate action as will enable the city government to function properly.  
ARTICLE XI. - SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT 
 
Section 11-1. - Wards. 
Editor's note— Charter § 11-1, as adopted in 1962, provided that the wards of the city would be as therein set out until the council provided by ordinance otherwise. The city council has established the boundaries of the three wards within the city by Ordinance No. 20, passed and approved January 21, 1965. This ordinance repealed the former boundaries of the city. For the present ward boundaries see pt. 1, ch. 3 of the Code.  
Section 11-2. - When charter goes into effect. 
If a majority of the qualified electors of the town voting on the question vote to ratify this charter, the provisions of this charter relating to elections shall go into effect immediately upon approval by the governor as provided by the state constitution, for the purpose of electing the first councilmen; and the charter shall go into full effect at 7:30 o'clock P.M. on the first Monday in May, 1962. The council shall hold its first meeting at that time.  
Section 11-3. - First elections under this charter. 
A primary election shall be held on the third Tuesday in March, 1962, and a general election shall be held on the first Tuesday in April, 1962, to elect a councilman at large and two councilmen from each of the three wards of the city. 
In said primary election, every qualified elector of the city shall be entitled to vote for two candidates for councilman from each ward, and the instruction "Vote for two" shall be placed above the names of the candidates for councilman from each ward. The four candidates receiving the greatest number of votes shall be nominated. Provided that, if there are not more than two candidates for councilman from a ward, they shall be elected ipso facto, and their names shall not appear on the primary or general election ballots. Provided further that, if there are not more than four candidates for councilman from a ward, the two who receive the greatest number of votes shall be not only nominated, but also elected ipso facto, and their names shall not appear on the general election ballot. 
In the general election on the first Tuesday in April, 1962, every qualified elector of the city shall be entitled to vote for two of the candidates for councilman from each ward unless the councilmen from a particular ward have already been elected as provided hereinabove, and the instruction "Vote for two" shall be placed above the names of the candidates for councilman from each ward. The two candidates receiving the greatest number of votes shall be elected. 
The councilman from each ward (whether elected at the primary or the general election) who receives more votes shall serve for a term of two years, and the other councilman from the ward shall serve for a term of one year. Provided that, if, because of a tie or for any other reason, it is not thus determined which of the two shall serve for a term of two years and which shall serve for a term of one year, then such determination shall be made fairly by lot by the county election board in a public meeting. 
The provisions of article 6 [VI] of this charter shall apply to the said elections in 1962 insofar as such provisions are applicable and are not superseded by the provisions of this section.  
Section 11-4. - Officers and employees under the town government. 
It is hereby declared to be the desire of the people of the city that all incumbents of administrative offices and positions of employment under the town government (including the incumbents of the offices of town clerk and town treasurer) shall be continued in the service of the city under this charter if they are qualified and if the good of the service permits; but this general statement of desire shall not limit the power of appointment and removal. 
The offices of the town trustees shall terminate when this charter goes into full effect.  
Section 11-5. - Ordinances continued. 
All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this charter, shall continue in effect until they are repealed or until they expire by their own limitations.  
Section 11-6. - Pending actions and proceedings. 
The adoption of this charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending when it takes effect, brought by or against the municipality or any office, department, agency, or officer thereof.  
Part 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
CHAPTER 1. - DEFINITIONS, INTERPRETATION, APPLICABILITY, FINES 
 
Sec. 1-101. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "City Code of Moore, Oklahoma," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "City Code" or in the provisions which follow, as the "Code." 
(Prior Code, § 1-1; Code 1999, § 1-101) 
State Law reference— Adoption, revision of codes of ordinances, 11 O.S. §§ 14-108, 14-109.  
Sec. 1-102. - Rules of Code construction; definitions. 
(a)  In the construction of this Code and all ordinances, the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Administrative regulations. The term "administrative regulations" means written orders which are issued by approval of the mayor or city manager. 
Bond. The term "bond" means an obligation in writing, binding the signatory to pay a sum certain upon the happening or failure of an event. 
Building. The term "building" means any structure intended to have walls and a roof. 
Building official. The term "building official" means the person appointed by the city manager and designated as the city's building official. 
Business. The term "business" means any profession, trade, occupation and any other commercial enterprise conducted for monetary reward. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Moore. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Moore, in the County of Cleveland and State of Oklahoma. 
City limits. The term "city limits" means within the city and includes not only the corporate limits of the city but also any property which it owns or which is under its jurisdiction. 
Clerk. The term "clerk" means the city clerk. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that the term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
Council. The term "council" means the governing body of the city; the city council. 
County. The term "county" means Cleveland County, Oklahoma. 
Definitions. Definitions given within a chapter or article apply only to words or phrases used in such chapter or article unless otherwise provided. 
Designee. The term "designee," following an official of the city, means the authorized agent, employee or representative of such official. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter as well as the masculine. 
Health officer. The term "health officer" means the administrator of the cooperative department of the county and the city. 
Keeper. The term "keeper" means one in possession of or who has the care, custody or superintendence of a thing, place or business, whether or not the owner or proprietor, and includes any person, firm, association, corporation, club and copartnership, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" means applicable federal law and court decisions, court decisions and provisions of the constitution and statutes of the state, ordinances and Charter of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
Manager. The term "manager" means the city manager. 
May. The term "may" is permissive and discretionary. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the city. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" means any form of attestation by which a person signifies that he is bound in conscience to perform an act or to speak faithfully and truthfully, and includes an affirmation or declaration in cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
Occupant. The term "occupant" means the tenant or person in actual possession. 
Operate. The term "operate" means carry on, keep, conduct, maintain, manage, direct or superintend. 
Ordinances. The term "ordinances" means the ordinances of the city and all amendments and supplements thereto. 
O.S. The abbreviation "O.S." means the latest edition of the Oklahoma Statutes, as now or hereafter amended. 
Owner. The term "owner" means one who has complete dominion over particular property and who is the one in whom legal or equitable title rests. When applied to a building or land, the term "owner" means any part owner, joint owner, owner of a community or partnership interest, life tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" means any individual, natural person, joint stock company, partnership, voluntary association, club, firm, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or any other bodies corporate or politic or group acting as a unit, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, partner, member, director, officer or employee of any of them, including an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver, or other representative appointed according to law. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means any money, goods, movable chattels, things in action, evidence of debt, all objects and rights which are capable of ownership, and every other species of property except real property. 
Preceding; following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Proprietor. The term "proprietor" means an owner of the property or premises, including any person, firm, association, corporation, club, partnership or other group acting as a unit, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. 
Public place. The term "public place" means and includes any public street, road or highway, alley, lane, sidewalk, crosswalk, or other public way, or any public resort, place of amusement, stadium, athletic field, park, playground, public building or grounds appurtenant thereto, school building or school grounds, public parking lot or any vacant lot, the elevator, lobby, halls, corridors and areas open to the public of any store, office, or apartment building, or any other place commonly open to the public. 
Real property. The term "real property" means land together with all things attached to the land so as to become a part thereof. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property along the margin of a street or other highway, designed, constructed and intended for the use of pedestrians to the exclusion of vehicles. 
Signature; subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" mean the name of a person, mark or symbol appended by him to a writing with intent to authenticate the instrument as one made or put into effect by him. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Oklahoma. 
Statutes. The term "statutes" means the Oklahoma Statutes as they are now or as they may be amended to be. 
Street. The term "street" means all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways, roads, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, docks built on the public street, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, recreation and park lands used for vehicular traffic, or other public ways or thoroughfares in the city, over which it has jurisdiction, which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state. 
Tenant. The term "tenant" means any person occupying the premises, building or land of another in subordination to such other person's title and with his express or implied assent, whether he occupies the whole or a part of those premises, buildings or lands, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, past and present where applicable unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Time. The term "time" means the hour of the day according to the official time of the day. 
Time of performance. The term "time of performance" means the time within which an act is to be done as provided in any section or any order issued pursuant to any section, when expressed in days, and is computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall not be counted in the computation. When the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday from midnight to midnight is excluded. 
Treasurer. The term "treasurer" means the city treasurer. 
Watercourse. The term "watercourse" means any drain, ditch and stream, flowing in a definite direction or course in a bed with banks. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Writing; written. The terms "writing" and "written" mean any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise, capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(b)  Words and phrases are construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and others that have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law are construed and understood according to such meaning. 
(Prior Code, § 1-4; Code 1999, § 1-102)  
Sec. 1-103. - Authority of Code. 
This Code is a revision and codification of the general ordinances of the city which have been enacted and published in accordance with the authority granted in 11 O.S. §§ 14-108 and 14-109. 
(Code 1999, § 1-103)  
Sec. 1-104. - Conflicting provisions. 
(a)  If the provisions of different parts, chapters, articles, divisions or sections of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each part, chapter, article, division or section shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of that part, chapter, article, division or section. 
(b)  If clearly conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the section last enacted shall prevail unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of that section. 
(c)  Where any conflict exists between a part, chapter, article, division or section of this Code and any chapter or section of the Charter, the latter shall prevail. 
(Code 1999, § 1-104)  
Sec. 1-105. - References include amendments; construction. 
(a)  Any reference in this Code to an ordinance or provision of this Code means such ordinance or provision as may now exist or is hereafter amended. 
(b)  Any references in this Code to parts, chapters, articles, divisions or sections shall be to the parts, chapters, articles, divisions or sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1999, § 1-105)  
Sec. 1-106. - Catchlines and headings; construction. 
(a)  All designations and headings of parts, chapters, articles, divisions and sections are intended only for convenience in arrangement and as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of such parts, chapters, articles, divisions or sections, whether printed in capital letters or bold face type. They shall not be deemed or taken to be any part or title of such parts, chapters, articles, divisions or sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed upon amendment or reenactment; nor shall they be construed to govern, limit, modify, alter or in any other manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of any of the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Editor's notes, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(Prior Code, § 1-2; Code 1999, § 1-106)  
Sec. 1-107. - Code provisions as continuance of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they relate to the same subject matter and are substantially the same as those ordinance provisions previously adopted by the city and existing at the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1999, § 1-107)  
Sec. 1-108. - General and specific penalties; suspension or revocation of license or permit. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code, in any ordinance of the city, or in any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this Code, any act or failure to do a required act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided herein or therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance or rule shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, unless the penalty is limited by state law, in which case the violations shall be punishable by not to exceed the maximum permitted by state law or the amount declared by the city, whichever is greater. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to impose a penalty upon city officers or city employees for failure to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that such failure shall be punished as provided in this section. 
(b)  The following specific offenses, unless provided in this Code, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, or 30 days imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment: 
Offense 	Code Section 
Sales tax 	7-316 
Hotel tax 	7-525 
Eluding a police officer 	10-608 
Battery on an officer 	10-605 
 
(c)  The following specific offenses, unless otherwise provided in this Code, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $800.00. 
The court shall remit $50.00 of each alcohol fine or deferral fee to a fund of the city that shall be used to defray costs for enforcement of laws relating to juvenile access to alcohol, other laws relating to alcohol and other intoxicating substances, and traffic-related offenses involving alcohol or other intoxicating substances. 
(d)  The suspension or revocation of any license, certificate or other privilege conferred by the city shall not be regarded as a penalty for the purposes of this Code but shall be in addition thereto. 
(Prior Code, § 1-10; Code 1999, § 1-108; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 7(91), 12-16-1991; Ord. No. 20(92), 4-6-1992; Ord. No. 62(93), 10-4-1993; Ord. No. 65(93), 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994; Ord. No. 72(94), 1-3-1994; Ord. No. 269(00), 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 482(04), 10-18-2004; Ord. No. 552(06), 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 896(18) , 12-3-2018) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, 11 O.S. § 14-111  
Sec. 1-109. - Each day of violation of Code a separate offense. 
Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  With respect to violations that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to other violations, each violation constitutes separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 1-10, in part; Code 1999, § 1-109)  
Sec. 1-110. - Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, concealing. 
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful or prohibited, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Code 1999, § 1-110)  
Sec. 1-111. - Civil relief from violations of Code of Ordinances. 
No penalty imposed by or pursuant to section 1-108 or any other section of this Code or other ordinance of the city shall interfere with the right of the city to apply to the proper courts of the state for a writ of mandamus, an injunction or other appropriate relief in the case of violations of this Code or other ordinances. 
(Code 1999, § 1-111)  
Sec. 1-112. - Territorial applicability. 
Except as provided otherwise, this Code refers only to the commission or omission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction, ownership or control by virtue of any constitutional or Charter provision, or any law. 
(Code 1999, § 1-112)  
Sec. 1-113. - Ordinances in effect in outlying territory of city. 
All ordinances of the city now in effect within the city are hereby extended to all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city outside the corporate limits of the city, and is in full effect therein, insofar as they are applicable. All ordinances of the city which shall go into effect in the future shall also apply to, and be in full effect within, the boundaries of all outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable. Any words in any ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance provision is limited to the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include also the outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(Prior Code, § 1-7; Code 1999, § 1-113)  
Sec. 1-114. - Official seal. 
The seal of the city shall be of circular form and shall have lettered in the upper portion of its outer circumference the words "City of Moore" and in the lower portion of its outer circumference the words "Moore, Oklahoma." The words "Corporate Seal" shall be lettered within the inner circle of the seal. The seal shall be the corporate seal of the city and shall be used for the authentication of all documents required by law to be sealed with the seal of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 1-8; Code 1999, § 1-114)  
Sec. 1-115. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Moore City Code is hereby amended to read as follow:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Moore City Code is hereby amended by adding a section, to be number _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Prior Code, § 1-11; Code 1999, § 1-115)  
Sec. 1-116. - Code severability. 
It is declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code are severable. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or word is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, its unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code, since the sections or parts of sections would have been enacted by the council without and irrespective of any unconstitutional or otherwise invalid section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or word being incorporated into this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 1-13; Code 1999, § 1-116)  
CHAPTER 2. - STANDARD RULES; NOTICES, WARRANTS, INSPECTIONS, FEES, BONDS 
 
Sec. 1-201. - Acts by deputy or designee. 
Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be performed by an authorized deputy or designee or by any person authorized pursuant to law or ordinances, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Code 1999, § 1-201)  
Sec. 1-202. - Notices; service and proof. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code or applicable law, whenever a notice is required to be given pursuant to any section of this Code, such notice shall be given either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last-known business or residence address as the same appears in applicable city records or other records pertaining to the matter for which such notice is served, or by any other method of delivery approved by law. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office or any United States mailbox. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city or by affidavit of any person over the age of 18 years who actually accomplished personal service in conformity with this Code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned, or by a return receipt signed by the recipient notified by United States mail. 
(Code 1999, § 1-202)  
Sec. 1-203. - Inspections and right of entry. 
(a)  To enforce the provisions of this Code, the city manager or his designee or any other person designated by this Code or otherwise shall have a right of entry on premises for inspection purposes in the manner and to the extent as may be authorized by applicable law. This right of entry shall be a condition of any permit, license, grant or any utility service with or provided by the city. For the purpose of this section, inspection includes records and papers on the premises or of the permittee, licensee, grantee or customer relating to the permit, license, grant or service. 
(b)  Emergency inspections may be authorized if the city manager or his designated representative has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall take place in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  Where the city manager or other designated representative is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this section. 
(Code 1999, § 1-203)  
Sec. 1-204. - Schedule of fees and charges created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a schedule of fees and charges, which shall contain those fees and charges for the various licenses, permits and other fees and charges as designated by the council. Where a fee or charge is authorized to be collected by the city in any ordinance, the amount of the fee or charge shall be set by resolution or motion and entered into the schedule of fees and charges. The schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk, to whom all fees and charges shall be paid unless otherwise provided. A copy may be obtained upon payment of a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  The schedule of fees and charges hereby created shall also be known and may be cited as the fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 1-205)  
Sec. 1-205. - Bonds, schedule created. 
There is hereby created a schedule of surety and other bonds required by this Code which shall contain the amounts of those bonds as designated by the council by resolution or motion. The schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk and may be known and cited as the bond schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 1-206)  
CHAPTER 3. - CORPORATE AND WARD LIMITS 
 
Sec. 1-301. - Map of the city. 
The map of the city showing its territorial limits, as maintained in the office of the city clerk, is hereby designated as the official map of the city, and the corporate limits as shown thereon, and as amended, are declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the city, including all annexations made to the city through and including the date of September 30, 1990. 
(Prior Code, § 1-14; Code 1999, § 1-301)  
Sec. 1-302. - Ward boundaries. 
(a)  The three wards of the city shall consist of the following area, as amended from time to time: 
(1)  Ward One consists of all that land or area lying within the limits of the city, and within the following described boundaries: the southwest quarter of Section 28, the south half of Section 29, all of Sections 19 and 30, the north half of Sections 31 and 32, and that portion of Section 32 lying within the existing city limits, and the northwest quarter of Section 33, all in Township 10 North, Range 2 West of the Indian Meridian, Cleveland County, Oklahoma; and all of Section 13, all of Section 14 lying east of I-35 and south of Main Street, all of Section 23 lying east of I-35, all of Sections 24 and 25, and all of Section 36, all in Township 10 North, Range 3 West of the Indian Meridian, Cleveland County, Oklahoma. 
(2)  Ward Two consists of all that land or area lying within the limits of the city, and within the following described boundaries: the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 7, the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 7, the southwest quarter of Section 7, and all of Section 18, all in Township 10 North, Range 2 West of the Indian Meridian, Cleveland County, Oklahoma; and the south half of Sections 1, 2 and 3, the southeast quarter of Section 9, all of Sections 10, 11, and 12, the northeast quarter of Section 16, that portion of Section 14 lying east of Broadway and north of Main Street, all in Township 10 North, Range 3 West of the Indian Meridian, Cleveland County, Oklahoma. 
(3)  Ward Three consists of all that land or area lying within the limits of the city, and within the following described boundaries: all of Section 14 lying west of Broadway and north of Main Street, all of Section 14 lying west of I-35, all of Sections 15 and 22, all of Section 23 lying west of I-35, all of Sections 26 and 27, the east half of Section 28, the north half of Section 34, and all of Section 35 lying within the existing city limits, all in Township 10 North, Range 3 West, of the Indian Meridian, Cleveland County, Oklahoma. 
(b)  References to streets, avenues, highways, roads and rights-of-way in subsection (a) of this section shall mean the centerlines thereof; and reference to the boundary of the city limits shall mean the boundary or limits of the city as it now exists or as it may hereafter exist. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-258, 2-259; Code 1999, § 1-302; Ord. No. 13(92), 1-21-1992; Ord. No. 347(02), 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 708(11), 11-21-2011) 
State Law reference— Wards 11 O.S. § 20-101 et seq.  
Part 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT  
CHAPTER 1. - GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Form of government. 
The city is governed under the council-manager form of government. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by the city Charter, by this Code, by state statute and in such manner prescribed by ordinances adopted by the city council, only if not in conflict with the city Charter. 
(Code 1999, § 2-101)  
Sec. 2-102. - Meetings of the council. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at 6:30 p.m. on the first and third Monday of each month unless the Monday is a holiday or a day formally recognized as a holiday by the city council. Meetings that fall on a Monday which are a formal holiday shall be held on the next business day thereafter, at the same times and specified location. 
(1)  No regular meeting of the city council shall continue past 10:00 p.m. unless extended by a majority vote of the city council pursuant to the guidelines set forth below. Under no circumstances shall a regular meeting of the city council extend past 12:00 midnight. 
(2)  Regular scheduled meetings of the city council may be continued past 10:00 p.m. by majority vote of the city council under the following provisions: 
a.  To ensure that the city meets its financial obligations council may extend a meeting to consider items on the "claims list" and consent docket; 
b.  A regularly scheduled meeting may be extended past 10:00 p.m. to allow the city council to consider any agenda item which is of critical importance to the operation of municipal government or is an item which significantly affects the health, safety, and welfare of the community. To enable the city council to efficiently and properly conclude its business after 10:00 p.m. the council should consider only those items which are necessary, or those items sponsored or requested by private individuals; 
c.  Regular meetings of the city council which extend beyond the 10:00 p.m. curfew may be recessed and reconvened to a date and time certain. The recessed meeting should be reconvened within seven days following the suspended meeting. Only matters appearing on the agenda of the meeting which is continued may be discussed at the reconvened meeting; 
d.  Nothing in this policy shall prevent council from exercising other aspects of Robert's Rules of Order or any council policies or procedures that may hereinafter be enacted in conducting its business. (For example, council may vote to table any number of agenda items to the following regularly scheduled meeting instead of having to hold a reconvened or recessed meeting.) 
(b)  The mayor with the assistance of the city manager and city staff shall, no later than five days prior to each regular council meeting of the city council, prepare and deliver to each councilmember's home address, an agenda comprised of matters to be presented to, considered by, discussed or resolved at or acted upon by the council at its next regular meeting, and shall include thereon all matters of city business to come before the council. No matter shall be presented to or discussed at any meeting of the council except matters so placed on the agenda and matters so necessarily concerned or directly connected therewith. Provided, an entirely new matter may be so presented, discussed and acted upon in accordance with the provisions of the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act (25 O.S. § 301 et seq.). No claim shall be acted upon or allowed by the council unless it has been listed within the agenda delivered to the council as prescribed herein. Payment of emergency claims, not included in the agenda, may be submitted and paid upon six affirmative votes or a three-quarter majority of the councilmembers present. 
(c)  The council may meet in executive or closed session as authorized by the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act (25 O.S. § 301 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-16—2-19; Code 1999, § 2-102; Ord. No. 56(93), 7-6-1993; Ord. No. 94(94), 9-19-1994; Ord. No. 107(94), 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 126(95), 6-5-1995; Ord. No. 132(95), 10-2-1995)  
Sec. 2-103. - Citizen participation in council and public works meetings. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that participation of residents of the city and other interested persons be encouraged in the meetings of the city council. The rights of freedom of speech and to petition the city's governing bodies for redress of grievances shall not be abridged, and no regulation of time, place or manner of such participation shall be construed to regulate speech on the basis of content. 
(b)  There shall be no restriction on the rights of residents of the city to verbally address the city council, nor upon the legal representatives of such residents, except as follows: 
(1)  Any resident or legal representative may speak on any agenda item or upon any proper item of discussion permitted by the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act for five minutes only. The city council may call for the pending question with a two-thirds majority of all members present and voting. The city council may vote by a simple majority of all members present and voting to end an item set for discussion only, in the event that the city council determines that any further discussion would be cumulative; 
(2)  Nonresidents of the city and their legal representatives may speak for five minutes only on any agenda item or upon any proper item of discussion in which they are directly interested, or upon which proposed action or discussion they would or may experience a legally recognized harm, subject to the limitations on debate/discussion set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section; 
(3)  Time spent by councilmen who verbally respond to resident or nonresident participants under this section shall not count against the five-minute time limit; 
(4)  During new matters, emergency matters and discussion only items, the five-minute time shall apply regardless of the number of issues the speaker wishes to address. Speaking time may not be loaned or shared; 
(5)  The city council, by a majority vote, may permit additional discussion by technical experts, consultants and professionals who are in favor of or opposed to any proposed action by the city council upon terms that are neutral and which are in furtherance of open debate; 
(6)  Those who wish to be heard at city council meetings shall fill out a "Request to be Heard" form for each agenda item to be discussed or commented upon. The form is to be adopted by order of the city manager or by resolution, giving name, address and the agenda item the person wishes to comment on. Completed forms will be given to the city clerk or the assistant or deputy thereof, prior to the beginning of each meeting. Blank forms, sufficient in number, shall be available inside the city council chambers prior to each meeting; 
(7)  Any person shall be permitted to submit written materials or documents to the city council; 
(8)  This subsection (b) shall not apply to those officers, agents, servants or employees of the city or the public works authority who have been requested by the city manager, mayor or city council to speak on a specific agenda item. 
(c)  No person, whether a city resident, nonresident, a legal representative or otherwise, may, alone or in concert with others, willfully disturb, disrupt or interfere with any meeting of the city council or the public works authority by: 
(1)  Engaging in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior; 
(2)  Using abusive or obscene language or making an obscene gesture; 
(3)  Failure to yield the floor or podium when the speaker is requested to do so by the presiding officer of the meeting pursuant to a lawful order, such as in cases when the speaker's time is expired, or the question successfully called for the requisite number of councilmen; or 
(4)  Failure to state, when requested by the presiding officer of the meeting, the speaker's own name and address for the record of the meeting. 
(d)  A digest stating in laymen's terms the requirements for participation in city council meetings shall be available to the public prior to each city council meeting. 
(e)  Violation of this section shall be an offense, punishable as provided in section 1-108. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the senior city law enforcement officer present at the meeting, including the public works authority, with or without the direction of the presiding officer. 
(Code 1999, § 2-103; Ord. No. 450, 6-20-1988; Ord. No. 55(93), 6-21-1993)  
Sec. 2-104. - Mayor's powers and duties, vice-mayor. 
The mayor and vice-mayor shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by the Charter, and state law, and as may be prescribed by ordinance only if not in conflict with the Charter. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-51, 2-53, in part; Code 1999, § 2-104)  
Sec. 2-105. - City manager appointment by council; powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be appointed by the city council and shall be the administrative officer and head the administrative branch of the city government and shall exercise the powers and duties granted him by the city Charter. 
(Code 1999, § 2-105)  
Sec. 2-106. - City clerk appointment; duties. 
(a)  The city clerk shall have the custody of the records, books and papers of the city and shall perform all other duties pertaining to the office as required by law. 
(b)  The clerk shall keep and preserve in his office the corporate seal of the city, all records and public papers and documents of the city, not belonging to any other officer. He shall perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by ordinance or law. 
(c)  The city manager, or the city clerk when empowered by the city manager, may designate some person as deputy clerk of the city and shall prescribe the duties of such deputy clerk from time to time. The deputy clerk shall perform all of the duties of the city clerk upon the death, disability or resignation or illness of the clerk. Such deputy clerk shall perform the duties only until the selection of a successor to the clerk, or until return or recovery of the clerk. The deputy clerk shall render such aid and assistance and perform such duties in the conduct of the clerk's office as may be required by the clerk. The deputy clerk shall take and subscribe to the oath and in all respects qualify for such office in the same manner as the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-81, 2-82, 2-85; Code 1999, § 2-106)  
Sec. 2-107. - City treasurer appointment; duties. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall receive all monies due the city from any and all sources, except as are received by other officers and by them paid to the city treasurer, and pay out the same on order of the city council, drawn, signed and attested in accordance with law. 
(b)  The treasurer shall keep his records in accordance with an accounting system acceptable for governmental accounting and financial recordkeeping. 
(c)  The treasurer shall deposit daily all funds coming into his hands for the city in such depositories as the council may designate; and shall disburse such funds in the manner provided by applicable laws or ordinances. He shall have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by the Charter, by applicable law or by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-106—2-108, in part; Code 1999, § 2-107)  
Sec. 2-108. - City attorney. 
(a)  The office of city attorney is created. The attorney shall be a person licensed to practice law in the state, appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  The city attorney shall advise the council and all city officers in the performance of their duties. He is authorized to appear, prosecute and defend all actions where the city is a part. He shall perform such other professional services as may be required of him by the city manager or council, for such compensation as shall be fixed by the city manager. 
(c)  The city attorney shall be entitled to engage in the private practice of law to the extent that the same does not interfere with or conflict with his duties as city attorney. The attorney may be retained on a part-time or consulting basis as the city manager determines. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-71—2-73; Code 1999, § 2-108)  
Sec. 2-109. - Administrative departments, officers, and agencies. 
There shall be such administrative departments, officers, and agencies as the council may establish. 
(Code 1999, § 2-109)  
Sec. 2-110. - Bonds for city officers and employees. 
The city manager, the clerk, the treasurer, the alternate treasurer and such officers and employees as are designated by the city council shall, before entering upon the discharge of their duties, execute and file with the city clerk surety bonds issued by a surety company authorized to operate in the state conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. The city shall pay the premium on such bonds. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-36, 18-18; Code 1999, § 2-110)  
Sec. 2-111. - Removal of officers and employees. 
Except in the case of the municipal judge, the power to lay off, suspend, demote and remove accompanies the power to appoint or elect. The city manager, the council or other appointing or electing authority at any time may lay off, suspend, demote or remove any officer or employee to whom he, the council or the other appointing or electing authority respectively may appoint or elect a successor. 
(Prior Code, § 2-37; Code 1999, § 2-111)  
Sec. 2-112. - Compensation of officers and employees. 
Compensation of officers and permanent employees of the city shall be paid on the basis of annual salaries, on a schedule as specified by the city council. The compensation of the city manager shall be established by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 2-38; Code 1999, § 2-112)  
Sec. 2-113. - Books delivered to successor. 
All books, vouchers, monies or other property belonging to the corporation in charge or possession of any officer of the same shall be delivered to his successor when qualified. 
(Prior Code, § 2-39; Code 1999, § 2-113)  
Sec. 2-114. - Conduct of hearings for city manager termination. 
(a)  This section applies to the procedures to be followed at the public hearing afforded by section 3-1 of the city Charter. 
(b)  The municipal judge shall appear at the public hearing and preside at the hearing. He shall make all rulings regarding the admission of evidence and on procedures and other rulings which he may deem reasonable and necessary to conduct a fair public hearing. He shall see that the city manager and the city council are afforded procedural due process and to do all things necessary to conduct the public hearing in a proper and orderly fashion. 
(c)  The municipal judge is hereby directed to employ an official court reporter to appear at the public hearing and to administer the oath to witnesses, take custody of exhibits and to report the entire public hearing and to do all things necessary to preserve the entire public hearing record. 
(d)  The city attorney or some other attorney that may be selected by a majority of the city councilmen shall appear at the public hearing to present evidence to support the reason as given for the termination of the city manager at the public hearing. 
(e)  The city clerk shall issue all subpoenas for the compulsory attendance of witnesses and the production of exhibits required by the city manager or the attorney selected by the city council to present evidence of the reasons to terminate the city manager. The city clerk shall also appear and keep minutes of the public hearing. 
(f)  The chief of police of the city or a police officer of the department chosen by the city manager or chosen by the attorney for either side and at least two members of the city council shall, only after the receipt of a request for a public hearing from the city manager, investigate any and all matters or information that may be requested. The requested information must clearly be relevant evidence and must relate to a reason for termination. Any information secured during the investigation shall not be released except at the public hearing, but shall be released only to the party requesting the investigation. 
(g)  The public hearing shall commence and be held at all times in the city council chambers of the city or at such other place as may be determined by the council, but may only be held within the corporate limits of the city. 
(h)  The evidence to support the reasons to terminate the city manager shall first be introduced. The city manager may then present his evidence. Each attorney may cross examine the other witnesses and both sides shall have the right of rebuttal. Any members of the city council may examine any offered exhibit or any witness at any time and may present any relevant evidence that he may have. 
(i)  The city manager shall file his request for a public hearing with the city clerk and forward a copy thereof, along with the reasons for termination, to the city attorney and mayor. After receiving the request for public hearing, the mayor shall cause the public hearing to commence within 20 days after receipt of the request for public hearing. The public hearing shall conclude within 30 days after the date of commencement, unless extended by agreement of the parties. At the public hearing, the rules of evidence used in administrative hearings shall be used and adhered to and all procedures shall afford both the council and the city manager a fair hearing and proper procedural due process. 
(j)  City employees shall receive additional compensation for any overtime or for extra duties not regularly performed as may be required at or in preparation of the public hearing herein. 
(k)  At the conclusion of the public hearing, the council shall decide and determine if the city manager shall be retained, terminated or suspended. No finding of facts, conclusions of law or any written reports, orders or decision shall be filed. 
(Code 1999, § 2-114; Ord. No. 409, 7-21-1986)  
Sec. 2-115. - Risk management program. 
(a)  There is hereby established a risk management and risk reduction program to be implemented by the city risk management board ("board"), which board is established for this purpose by the public works authority. It is the policy of the city to provide for comprehensive risk management and risk reduction through a self-insurance plan administered by the board on behalf of the public works authority. The city council explicitly delegates to the board the obligation to defend city employees pursuant to the Governmental Tort Claims Act (51 O.S. § 151 et seq.). 
(b)  All officers and employees of the city are hereby authorized to accept appointments to, and to cooperate with, the board. Such participation or cooperation shall be as provided for in the rules, regulations or bylaws pertaining to the board insofar as such participation or cooperation is not inconsistent with obligations arising under this Code or city Charter. 
(c)  In addition to the delegation of certain duties of the city arising under the Governmental Tort Claims Act (51 O.S. § 151 et seq.), the officers and employees of the city may be provided, and may participate in, such other self-insurance programs which may be established form time to time by the board, including, but not limited to, medical, dental, vision, property, workers' compensation, retirement, or disability coverages. The city and the board may pay all or a portion of the costs for the risk management and risk reduction program in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code as well as state and federal law. In accordance with the requirements of the risk management and risk reduction program the city, the public works authority or the board may pay a portion or all of the costs of the risk management and risk reduction program from any fund, and may deduct from the wages or salary of any such officer or employee upon written authority signed by such officer or employee for the payment of costs required under the program. 
(d)  To the extent that the board enacts and implements programs, rules, regulations or bylaws which are inconsistent with the personnel rules of the city with respect to workers' compensation, safety administration or accident review, such duties and responsibilities shall be deemed to be delegated to the board directly in connection with the board's responsibility for the administration of such coverages and risk management concerns. Any personnel rule inconsistent with a rule, regulation or bylaw of the board shall be deemed to be amended to delete inconsistent provisions as of the effective date of the action of the board. 
(Code 1999, § 2-115; Ord. No. 466, 10-3-1988)  
Sec. 2-116. - Personnel regulations. 
The city council may adopt personnel rules and regulations and position classification and pay plan and amend them from time to time. A copy of the current city personnel rules and regulations and classification and pay plan are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 2-116) 
Editor's note— The council adopted personnel rules and regulations and a pay plan in 1990. The latest copies are on file with the city clerk.  
CHAPTER 2. - RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS  
ARTICLE A. - SOCIAL SECURITY 
 
Sec. 2-201. - City officers and employees under federal Social Security. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or this section, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of federal old-age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal Social Security Act, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of this policy, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state department of human services as agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in subsection (a) of this section are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by the laws or regulations. 
(d)  There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, which shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws or regulations. 
(e)  The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(f)  There is hereby excluded from this section any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city. 
(g)  There is hereby excluded from this section any authority to make an agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official, compensation for which is on a fee basis, or any position or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-176—2-181; Code 1999, § 2-201) 
State Law reference— Social security for public officers and employees, 51 O.S. § 121 et seq.  
ARTICLE B. - FIREFIGHTERS PENSION AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-211. - System created. 
There is hereby created, for the purpose of providing pension retirement allowance and other benefits for firefighters of the city, a firefighters pension and retirement system. It is declared to be the official policy of the city to participate in the pension system as provided by state law. 
(Prior Code, § 9-36; Code 1999, § 2-211) 
State Law reference— Firefighter's pension system, 11 O.S. § 49-101 et seq.  
Sec. 2-212. - System to be operated in accordance with law. 
(a)  The firefighters pension and retirement system as established by 11 O.S. § 49-100.1 et seq., is hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  The local board of trustees of the firefighters pension and retirement system, servicing the firefighters of the city, shall be constituted as provided by state law and shall have the powers and duties prescribed thereby. 
(Prior Code, § 9-36, in part; Code 1999, § 2-212)  
ARTICLE C. - POLICE PENSION AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-221. - System created. 
There is hereby created, for the purpose of providing pension retirement allowance and other benefits for police officers of the city, a police pension and retirement system. It is declared to be the official policy of the city to participate in the pension system as provided by state law. 
(Prior Code, §§ 18-26—18-33, in part; Code 1999, § 2-221) 
State Law reference— Police pension system, 11 O.S. § 50-100.1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-222. - System to be operated in accordance with law. 
(a)  The police pension and retirement system as established by 11 O.S. § 50-100.1 et seq., is hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  The local board of trustees of the police pension and retirement system, servicing the police officers of the city, shall be constituted as provided by state law and shall have the powers and duties prescribed thereby. 
(Prior Code, §§ 18-26—18-37; Code 1999, § 2-222)  
ARTICLE D. - EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
System means the employees retirement system established by this article. 
System instrument means Exhibit A, as attached to the ordinances adopting and amending and referred to in this article. 
(Code 1999, § 2-231)  
Sec. 2-232. - Established; effective date. 
For the purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the part of city employees and thereby promoting public efficiency, there is hereby authorized, created, established, approved and adopted, effective upon the date established by the city council, the funded pension plan designated "Municipal Employees Retirement System of the City of Moore, Oklahoma," and all amendments thereto, an executed counterpart of which is marked "Exhibit A" and attached to and made a part of the ordinances adopting the system, and all amendatory ordinances, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 2-232)  
Sec. 2-233. - Execution and ratification of system instrument. 
The mayor and city clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute (in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original) the system instrument, and to do all other acts and things necessary, advisable and proper to put the system and related trust into full force and effect, and to make such changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same under sections 401(a) and 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States. The counterpart attached to the ordinances adopting the system as Exhibit A, and duly executed as aforesaid simultaneously with the passage of the ordinances, is hereby ratified and confirmed in all respects. 
(Code 1999, § 2-233) 
State Law reference— Municipal employee retirement system, 11 O.S. § 48-101 et seq.  
Sec. 2-234. - Board of trustees. 
For the purpose of administration of the system there is hereby established a board of trustees, which shall be the members of the city council as now existing or as from time to time duly elected or appointed and constituted. The powers and duties of the board of trustees shall be as set forth in the system instrument. 
(Code 1999, § 2-234)  
CHAPTER 3. - CITY RECORDS AND PROPERTY  
ARTICLE A. - ACCESS TO CITY RECORDS 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Appointment of official custodians. 
The following city official is hereby appointed as official custodian for purposes of the Oklahoma Open Records Act and is charged with responsibility for compliance with that Act with respect to the following listed public records: 
City clerk: All public records kept and maintained in the city clerk's office and all other public records not provided for elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 2-301) 
State Law reference— Open Records Act, 51 O.S. § 24A.1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-302. - Designation of additional record custodians. 
(a)  Each of the official custodians appointed in section 2-301 is hereby authorized to designate any subordinate officers or employees to serve as record custodian. The record custodians shall have such duties and powers as are set out in the Oklahoma Open Records Act (51 O.S. § 24A.1 et seq.). 
(b)  Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a record custodian, he shall notify the city clerk of such designation and the city clerk shall maintain a register of all such designations. 
(Code 1999, § 2-302)  
Sec. 2-303. - Duties of custodians. 
All city officials and employees appointed or designated under this article shall protect public records from damage and disorganization; prevent excessive disruption of the essential functions of the city; provide assistance and information upon request; ensure efficient and timely action and response to all applications for inspection of public records; and carry out the procedures adopted by the city for inspecting and copying open public records. 
(Code 1999, § 2-303)  
Sec. 2-304. - Requests to be directed to custodians. 
(a)  All members of the public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a public record in accordance with the provisions of the Oklahoma Open Records Act, shall address their requests to the custodian charged with responsibility for the maintenance of the record sought to be inspected or copied. 
(b)  Whenever any city official or employee appointed or designated as a custodian under this article is presented with a request for access to, or copy of, a public record which record the custodian does not have in his possession and which he has not been given responsibility to keep and maintain, the custodian shall so advise the person requesting the record. The person making the request shall be informed as to which custodian the request should be addressed to, if such is known by the custodian receiving the request. 
(Code 1999, § 2-304)  
Sec. 2-305. - Procedures regarding both inspection and copying of open public records. 
The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by each official custodian and record custodian: 
(1)  Consistent with the policy, duties and procedures established by the Oklahoma Open Records Act, record custodians shall provide full access and assistance in a timely and efficient manner to persons who request access to open public records; 
(2)  Record custodians shall protect the integrity and organization of public records with respect to the manner in which such records are inspected and copied; 
(3)  Record custodians may prevent excessive disruptions of essential functions and provide the record at the earliest possible time; 
(4)  All inspections and copying of open public records shall be performed by, or under the supervision of, the record custodian responsible for such records; 
(5)  All persons requesting the inspection of or a copy of open public records shall make such request in writing prior to the request being honored, except that no form shall be required for requests made for records which have been reproduced for free public distribution; 
(6)  All record inspection and copying forms are to be completed by the person requesting the record. The record custodian may demand reasonable identification of any person requesting a record; 
(7)  Any fees for record inspection or for copies are due at the time the records, or copies thereof, are provided to the requester, unless the record custodian has demanded that prepayment of all or part of such fees be made. Fees are to be paid to the record custodian or city clerk; 
(8)  The record custodian or city clerk shall demand full or partial prepayment of fees whenever the estimate for such fees exceeds the amount set out in section 2-312; 
(9)  No record search or copying fee shall be assessed against officers or employees of the city who make requests which are reasonably necessary to the performance of their official duties; 
(10)  Hours for making requests for inspection or copying shall be all regular working hours for each day the office maintains regular office hours; 
(11)  Removal of open public records from the office where kept and maintained, for purposes of inspection or the making of copies, shall not be permitted; and 
(12)  The above procedures, as well as any other inspection and copying procedures, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the record custodian. 
(Code 1999, § 2-305)  
Sec. 2-306. - Procedures regarding inspection of open public records. 
The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by every official custodian and record custodian: 
(1)  Record custodians shall handle all inspection requests in accordance with their duties to protect and preserve public records and to assist persons requesting inspection of open public records; 
(2)  All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the record. In all cases, the party so requesting must sign his individual name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the record custodian and presented to the record custodian; 
(3)  A written request is sufficient if it reasonably describes the record sought. In instances where the requester cannot provide sufficient information to identify a record, the custodian shall assist in making such identification; and 
(4)  The record custodian shall, upon making a denial of an inspection request, forward a copy of the denial to the city manager. 
(Code 1999, § 2-306)  
Sec. 2-307. - Procedures regarding copies of open public records. 
The following procedures apply regarding copies of records: 
(1)  Record custodians shall handle all copy requests in accordance with their duties to protect and preserve public records and to assist persons requesting copies of open public records; 
(2)  All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the copies. In all cases, the party so requesting must sign his individual name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the record custodian; 
(3)  Mechanical reproduction of a record shall not be undertaken when it is the judgment of the record custodian that any available means of mechanically reproducing the subject record is likely to cause damage to such records; and 
(4)  No copy fee shall be assessed when multiple copies of the record requested have been prepared for free public distribution, or when the record custodian determines that the cost of charging and handling the fee exceeds the cost of providing a copy without charge. 
(Code 1999, § 2-307)  
Sec. 2-308. - No fee for inspection. 
Where a request has been made for the inspection of an open public record, no fee shall be charged. 
(Code 1999, § 2-308)  
Sec. 2-309. - Copying fee. 
A fee per page as set by the council by motion or resolution shall be charged for photocopying an open public record, such fee to cover the cost of labor, materials and equipment. 
(Code 1999, § 2-309)  
Sec. 2-310. - Fee for mechanical reproduction. 
For copying any open public record which cannot be reproduced by photocopying, such as a computer printout or a blueprint, the requester shall be charged the actual cost to the city, including the cost of labor, materials and equipment. 
(Code 1999, § 2-310)  
Sec. 2-311. - Search fee. 
A search fee shall be charged a requester who is using the record solely for a commercial purpose. Such fee shall be the actual cost to the city of producing the record, including the cost of labor, materials and equipment. 
(Code 1999, § 2-311)  
Sec. 2-312. - Prepayment of fees. 
A record custodian may demand prepayment of a fee whenever the estimated amount exceeds $20.00. The prepayment amount shall be an estimate of the cost of copying, mechanical reproduction or searching for the record. Any overage or underage in the prepayment amount shall be settled prior to producing the requested record or delivering the copy or mechanical reproduction of the record. 
(Code 1999, § 2-312)  
ARTICLE B. - USE OF CITY PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 2-321. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Computer means any electronic device used for storing information and supplying information. Unless the context indicates a limited meaning is intended, the term "computer" shall include not only the device enclosed in a casing but also all cards, tapes, disks and other devices used to store or retrieve information, and all hardware and software. The term "computer" shall also include a computer system. 
Computer program means any set of instructions intended to cause a computer to perform a particular operation or service of operations. A computer program may be in written form or electronic form. 
Employee means an employee of the city or an employee of any public trust of which the city is a beneficiary. 
Official means any person elected to serve on the city council, or any person appointed to serve on a board, commission or public trust wherein the city is a beneficiary. 
Person means any person, firm or corporation, except that provisions of imprisonment for punishment for violation of this article shall apply to natural persons only. 
Stationery means any paper, letter, form or envelope bearing writing, markings, or symbols identifying the city, the city public works authority or any department thereof as the originator. 
Trust means the city public works authority or any other public trust of which the city is a beneficiary. 
(Code 1999, § 2-321; Ord. No. 49(93), 2-16-1993)  
Sec. 2-322. - Unauthorized use of city or department stationery. 
No elected official, city employee, private citizen, corporation, employee or official of a public trust of which the city is a beneficiary shall use city, trust or department stationery for personal correspondence or private use, nor shall such stationery be used to promote any private or public purpose without the authority of the city council, public trust, or city manager acting within their official duties. 
(Code 1999, § 2-322; Ord. No. 49(93), 2-16-1993)  
Sec. 2-323. - Unauthorized use of city equipment. 
No official or employee shall request, use or permit the use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or any other person. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit an official or employee from requesting, using or permitting the use of such publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service which is the general practice to make available to the public at large or which is provided as a matter of stated public policy for the use of officials and employees in the conduct of official business. 
(Code 1999, § 2-323; Ord. No. 49(93), 2-16-1993)  
Sec. 2-324. - Theft from city by altering computer data. 
No person, official or employee shall knowingly alter any data stored or intended to be stored on any computer or stored on any card, tape, disk, or other item used with a computer, where such alteration results in any person or account receiving a credit to which the person or account is not entitled. No person, official or employee shall knowingly alter any data stored or intended to be stored on any computer or stored on any card, tape, disk or other item used with a computer, where such alteration results in a falsified reduction or increase in a debt owed by any person, firm or corporation. 
(Code 1999, § 2-324; Ord. No. 49(93), 2-16-1993)  
Sec. 2-325. - Unauthorized entry into city's computer. 
No unauthorized person shall obtain access by direct access, telephone connection, or other electronic means to any computer operated by the city or public trust of which the city is a beneficiary, or on behalf of the city, or to any computer software or computer equipment operated by the city or trust or on behalf of the city. As used in this section, the term "unauthorized person" shall mean any person, whether a city or trust officer or employee or a member of the public, not assigned to do work involving such access to the computer. Any other person entitled to information that is stored in a computer may obtain such information by requesting the same, whereupon a person authorized by the city to have access to the computer shall obtain the information, and deliver the same orally or by exhibiting a visual display. Any such information shall be delivered in writing at the request of the person entitled thereto. 
(Code 1999, § 2-325; Ord. No. 49(93), 2-16-1993)  
Sec. 2-326. - Unauthorized use of postage meters. 
It is prohibited and declared to be a punishable offense for any person, without lawful authority, to use a postage meter that is owned, operated, or has been installed by the city or any public trust of which the city is a beneficiary, for his own personal use or the use of any person not entitled thereto. Each city department or trust entity which has installed a postage meter machine shall place notice in the location where the machine is located that: 
(1)  The mail carried by such postage is the official city mail; and 
(2)  There is a penalty of the unlawful use of such postage meter for private purposes. 
(Code 1999, § 2-326; Ord. No. 49(93), 2-16-1993)  
Sec. 2-327. - Penalty. 
Any person, official, employee, firm or corporation violating any provision in this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-108. In addition to any criminal penalty imposed, any employee of the city or trust shall, upon conviction, forfeit their office or position. 
(Code 1999, § 2-327; Ord. No. 49(93), 2-16-1993)  
CHAPTER 4. - CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
 
Sec. 2-411. - Personnel board, membership, temporary replacement. 
The city Charter establishes the personnel board and requires three members appointed by the council for overlapping six-year terms. It is anticipated that, on occasion, an appointed member of the personnel board may need to recuse or remove himself from a particular hearing because of a conflict of interest. When such occasion arises, the council may appoint a temporary replacement to ensure that there are three non-biased members to hear all cases. The temporary replacement shall be only for a particular case and should be a person who demonstrates the requisite impartiality toward the issue to be decided. Council may consider selecting and employing a person from a public or private agency which offers such services. 
(Code 1999, § 2-411; Ord. No. 15(92), 3-2-1992)  
Sec. 2-412. - Procedure for filling a temporary position. 
Upon receipt of notice from a member of the personnel board that a conflict may exist in any pending personnel board matter, the city clerk shall promptly notify the mayor and city manager who shall, at the next immediate council meeting or at a special council meeting called for such purpose, cause an item to be placed on the meeting agenda requesting that council appoint a temporary replacement to the personnel board. 
(Code 1999, § 2-412; Ord. No. 15(92), 3-2-1992)  
Part 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages and low-point beer, 37 O.S. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37 O.S. § 501 et seq.; city powers generally as to alcoholic beverages, 37 O.S. § 503. 
 
Sec. 3-101. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definition of terms used in this chapter shall be in conformity with those provided in 37 O.S. § 506. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Beer and wine license means a license for the retail sale of beer containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight and wine which means and includes any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume and not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume. 
Caterer license authorizes the licensee, whose business is to provide food, supplies, and services at a social gathering, to sell mixed beverages for on-premises consumption incidental to the sale or distribution of food. 
Mixed beverage club means any establishment in a county which has authorized the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the individual drink to be one or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a mixed beverage caterer or special event license; it includes any association, person, firm or corporation key club, bottle club, locker club, excluding the general public from its premises or place of meeting or congregating or operating or exercising control over any other place where persons are permitted to drink alcoholic beverages other than in a private home. 
Mixed beverage license authorizes the licensee to purchase alcoholic beverages in retail containers from the holder of a wholesaler or Class B wholesaler licensee and to sell, offer for sale and possess mixed beverages for on-premises consumption only. 
Special event license authorizes the licensee to sell and distribute mixed beverages for consumption on the premises for which the license has been issued for a period not to exceed ten consecutive days. 
(Prior Code, § 3-2; Code 1999, § 3-101; Ord. No. 844(17), 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 3-102. - Amount of tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and assessed an annual occupation tax on every business or occupation relating to alcoholic beverages as specifically enumerated herein and pursuant to the provisions of 37 O.S. § 554.1 in the amount as set by the city council by motion or resolution. 
(b)  The occupation tax for a brewer and a Class B wholesaler shall be reduced by 75 percent if the brewer or Class B wholesaler is also the holder of a license from the state to manufacture or wholesale any low-point beer as provided in 37 O.S. § 518. 
(c)  The occupation tax levied herein shall be paid in advance to the city clerk who shall issue a receipt therefor. 
(d)  The occupation tax levied herein shall expire on June 30 annually. The amount of any occupation tax levied shall be computed pro rata upon the months remaining in the year ending June 30 following. Such taxes paid on or before the 15th day of any month shall be on the basis of the first day of the month, and such taxes paid after the 15th day of the month shall be on the basis of the first day of the next succeeding month. 
(e)  Any state licensee carrying on his occupation in more than one location in the corporate limits of the city shall be subject to the tax hereinabove specified for each location. 
(f)  The occupation taxes prescribed herein shall be reduced to the extent necessary to conform to applicable state law reducing the state license fee to such person, but only to such extent as may be required to conform to applicable state law, it being the intention that this chapter shall levy the maximum tax allowable for the occupations on which there is hereby levied an occupation tax. 
(g)  Upon payment of the occupation tax, the city clerk shall issue a receipt, signed by the city clerk, to the state licensee paying such occupational tax. The city clerk shall also record the name of the licensee and the address where the licensee engages in his occupation. Such record shall be duly filed and kept in the permanent files of the city for at least five years. Thereafter, upon resolution by the council, it may be destroyed. 
(h)  Any state licensee shall post his tax receipt in a conspicuous place on the premises wherein he carries on his occupation. 
(i)  The occupation tax shall cover only the person paying the tax and no other or a successor thereof, and shall not be refundable. 
(j)  The city clerk shall make and transmit to the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement ("ABLE") commission an annual report showing the number and class of licenses subject to the tax and the amount of money received therefrom. 
(k)  All sums due from any person by reason of occupation taxes imposed by this chapter and all penalties accruing from such person by reason of failure to pay such tax shall be recoverable at the suit of the city, brought against such person in any court of competent jurisdiction. In any suit, in addition to the tax and penalties, the plaintiff shall recover interest, at the rate of ten percent per annum, upon all sums due by way of tax and penalty from the date of accrual thereof, and all costs of collection, judicial or otherwise, including reasonable attorney's fees, all to be determined by the court. Prosecution for an offense against the city, arising out of the failure to pay a tax levied by this chapter, regardless of the outcome thereof or its continued pendency, shall not constitute a defense or bar in any manner to the collection of the tax and penalties, if any are due, as herein provided. 
(Prior Code, §§ 3-38, 3-39, 3-41, 3-45; Code 1999, § 3-102) 
State Law reference— State license fee amounts, 37 O.S. § 518.  
Sec. 3-103. - Application for certificate of zoning and code compliance. 
(a)  Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the zoning, fire, health and safety codes of the city required by 37 O.S. shall apply at the office of the city clerk by: 
(1)  Filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office; and 
(2)  Paying a verification and certification fee in the amount as set by the council at the time of filing. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance, the city clerk shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the premises proposed for licensed operations comply with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and any health, fire, building or other safety codes applicable to it. 
(c)  Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, a certificate of zoning shall be issued by the ABLE commission. 
(d)  Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all applicable fire, safety and health codes, a certificate of compliance shall be issued by the ABLE commission. 
(e)  The above certificates of compliance shall be signed by the mayor or by the city clerk or deputy city clerk. 
(Prior Code, §§ 3-42, 3-43; Code 1999, § 3-103)  
Sec. 3-104. - Manufacture and sale; state license required. 
No person shall produce, manufacture or sell any alcoholic beverages, or rectify any beverage, without having in his possession a valid license issued by the ABLE commission. 
(Prior Code, § 3-3; Code 1999, § 3-104)  
Sec. 3-105. - Keeping or maintaining place in violation of law prohibited. 
No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, assist or abet in keeping or maintaining, a place where alcoholic beverages are possessed, manufactured, sold, bartered or given away in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any public place where persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking alcoholic beverages. 
(Prior Code, § 3-6; Code 1999, § 3-105)  
Sec. 3-106. - Transportation of intoxicating beverages in vehicles; exception. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly transport alcoholic beverages in any vehicle upon any public highway, street or alley unless in the original container which is unopened, the seal unbroken and the original cap in place. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply if the opened container is in the rear trunk or compartment or the spare tire compartment in a vehicle commonly known as a station wagon or panel truck, or in any outside compartment which is inaccessible to the driver or any passenger while the vehicle is in motion. 
(Prior Code, § 3-17; Code 1999, § 3-106) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537.  
Sec. 3-107. - Sale to minors, incompetent or intoxicated persons prohibited; minors on premises. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Knowingly sell, furnish or give any alcoholic beverage to any person who is under the age of 21 years, or sell, furnish or give any alcoholic beverages to any person who is insane, mentally deficient or intoxicated; 
(2)  If he is under the age of 21 years, enter, be or remain on the premises of a retail package store, or allow such a person to be, enter or remain in the store. 
(b)  (1)  If the premises of a licensee of the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement (ABLE) commission contains a separate or enclosed lounge or bar area, which has as its main purpose the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, notwithstanding that as an incidental service, meals or short order foods are made available therein, no person under 21 years of age shall be admitted to such area, except for members of a musical band employed or hired as provided section 3-108 when the band is to perform within such area, or persons under 21 years of age who are on the licensed premises for the limited purpose of performing maintenance, construction, remodeling, painting or other similar services relating to the building or equipment installation, repair or maintenance on the premises during those hours when the licensed establishment is closed for business. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 21 years of age from being admitted to an area which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or mixing or serving of said beverages, in which sales or serving of said beverages are incidental to the main purpose, as long as the persons under 21 years of age are not sold or served alcoholic beverages. The incidental service of food in the bar area shall not exempt a licensee from the provisions of this section. The ABLE commission shall have the authority to designate the portions of the premises of a licensee where persons under 21 years of age shall not be admitted pursuant to this section. When determining a licensee's main purpose, low-point beer sales shall be counted separately, and it shall not be considered a food or an alcoholic beverage. 
(2)  A new licensee that claims as its main purpose some objective other than the sale of alcoholic beverages may be granted a separate or enclosed lounge or bar area for a period of 90 days. At the end of that 90-day period, the licensee shall have the burden of showing that the business continues to qualify for a separate or enclosed bar area. If the licensee fails to satisfy this burden, then that licensee's main purpose shall automatically convert to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, an admission charge shall not be considered in any calculation designed to determine the main purpose of an establishment pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. As used in this section, the term "admission charge" means any form of consideration received by an establishment from a person in order for that person to gain entrance into the establishment. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (c) of this section shall not apply: 
(1)  If only persons 18 years of age or older are permitted to enter the licensed premises; provided, however, if the licensee is claiming an exception from the requirements of subsection (c) of this section pursuant to this subsection and fails to restrict the entry by persons under age 18 into the licensed premises, the ABLE commission shall designate that only persons 21 years of age or older are allowed on the licensed premises; 
(2)  If the licensed premises are owned or operated by a service organization or fraternal establishment which is exempt under section 501(c)(19), (8), or (10) of the Internal Revenue Code; or 
(3)  To a public event held in a facility owned or operated by any agency, political subdivision or public trust of the state. 
(Code 1999, § 3-107) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. §§ 537(A)1, (A)2, 598.  
Sec. 3-108. - Employment of minors prohibited. 
No licensee of the ABLE commission shall employ any person under the age of 21 in the selling or handling of alcoholic beverages, provided that a mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special event or bottle club licensee may employ servers who are at least 18 years of age, except persons under 21 years of age may not serve in designated bar or lounge areas, and a mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special event or bottle club licensee may employ or hire musical bands who have musicians who are under 21 years of age if each such musician is either accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or has on their person, to be made available for inspection upon demand by any ABLE commission officer or law enforcement officer, a written, notarized affidavit from the parent or legal guardian giving the underage musician permission to perform in designated bar or lounge areas. 
(Prior Code, § 3-18; Code 1999, § 3-108) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537(B)(2).  
Sec. 3-109. - Minors in possession of intoxicating beverages in public prohibited. 
No person under 21 years of age shall be in possession of any alcoholic beverage while such person is upon any public street, road, highway or in any public place. 
(Prior Code, § 3-4; Code 1999, § 3-109)  
Sec. 3-110. - Misrepresentation of age. 
No person shall misrepresent his age either orally or in writing or by presenting false or altered documentation of age for the purpose of inducing any person to sell him alcoholic beverages. 
(Prior Code, § 3-14; Code 1999, § 3-110)  
Sec. 3-111. - Sale in containers, from licensed establishments. 
(a)  No person shall sell or deliver alcoholic beverages at a retail alcoholic beverage store other than: 
(1)  In retail containers; 
(2)  At ordinary room temperatures; 
(3)  In the original package; and 
(4)  For consumption off the premises. 
No person shall open or consume, or permit another person to open or consume, a retail container of alcoholic beverage on the premises of a retail package store. Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, no person shall drink any alcoholic beverage in public except on the premises of a licensee who is authorized to sell or serve alcoholic beverages by the individual drink. 
(b)  No person shall purchase any alcoholic beverage at retail or wholesale from any person other than a dealer licensed by the ABLE commission. 
(Prior Code, §§ 3-9, 3-10; Code 1999, § 3-111)  
Sec. 3-112. - Sales on credit. 
Except as may be authorized by state law, no person shall sell any alcoholic beverage on credit at any retail package store. 
(Prior Code, § 3-20; Code 1999, § 3-112)  
Sec. 3-113. - Other prohibitions; prizes, happy hours, solicitation, nudity. 
(a)  No licensee shall: 
(1)  Give any alcoholic beverage as a prize, premium or consideration for any lottery, game of chance or skill or any type of competition; or 
(2)  Advertise or offer "happy hours" or any other means or inducements to stimulate the consumption of alcoholic beverages, including: 
a.  Deliver more than two drinks to one person at one time; 
b.  Sell or offer to sell to any person or group of persons any drinks at a price less than the price regularly charged for such drinks during the same calendar week, except at private functions not open to the public; 
c.  Sell or offer to sell to any person an unlimited number of drinks during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; 
d.  Sell or offer to sell drinks to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public; 
e.  Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such drink during the same calendar week; or 
f.  Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes. 
(b)  No licensee shall: 
(1)  Allow any person on the premises where low-point beer or alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises of the licensee where such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic area, buttocks or genitalia; 
(2)  Permit any person to perform acts of, or acts which simulate sexual acts; 
(3)  Permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any lewd activities; or 
(4)  Permit the showing of films, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual reproduction depicting any of the prohibited acts in this section. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit any drink solicitation, or request from a patron to purchase any low-point beer or intoxicating alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises of the licensee, as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, §§ 3-5, 3-9, 3-10, 3-13, 3-22, 3-23; Code 1999, § 3-113) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537.  
Sec. 3-114. - Consumption of intoxicating alcoholic beverage in public places. 
No person within the city shall drink intoxicating liquor in any public place, unless authorized by the Alcoholic Control Beverage Act, nor shall any person be intoxicated in a public place within the city. 
(Prior Code, §§ 3-25, 16-38; Code 1999, § 3-114)  
Sec. 3-115. - Location of retail package store and mixed beverage establishments; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall own, operate, maintain or have any interest in any retail package store which is located at a place in the city which is forbidden as a location for such store by state laws or city ordinances. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment, or bottle club which has been licensed by the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement commission and which has as its main purpose the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, or retail package store, to be located within 300 feet of any public or private school or church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious activities; however, a college or university located within an improvement district created pursuant to 11 O.S. § 39-103.1 may waive the 300-foot requirement by providing written notice to the establishment seeking the license and to the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement commission. Provided, a college or university prior to waiving the 300-foot requirement found in this subsection shall publish a notice of its intention to waive such requirement in a legal newspaper of general circulation within the state at least 30 days but no more than 40 days prior to providing any written notice, waiving the 300-foot requirement, to the establishment seeking the license or to the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement commission. As used in this subsection, the term "legal newspaper of general circulation within the state" means a newspaper meeting the requisites of a newspaper for publication of legal notices as prescribed in 25 O.S. § 106 in a majority of the counties in the state. The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest property line of such public or private school or church to the nearest perimeter wall of the premises of any such mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment, bottle club, or retail package store which has been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. The provisions of this section shall not apply to mixed beverage establishments, beer and wine establishments, or bottle clubs, which have been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption or retail package stores prior to November 1, 2000; provided, if at the time of application for license renewal the licensed location has not been in actual operation for a continuous period of more than 60 days, the license shall not be renewed. If any school or church shall be established within 300 feet of any retail package store, mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment, or bottle club subject to the provisions of this section after such retail package store, mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment, or bottle club has been licensed, the provisions of this section shall not be a deterrent to the renewal of such license if there has not been a lapse of more than 60 days. When any mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment, or bottle club subject to the provisions of this section which has a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption or retail package store changes ownership or the operator thereof is changed and such change of ownership results in the same type of business being conducted on the premises, the provisions of this section shall not be a deterrent to the issuance of a license to the new owner or operator if he is otherwise qualified. 
(Prior Code, § 3-12, in part; Code 1999, § 3-115) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 518.3.  
Sec. 3-116. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  No package store licensee shall sell or keep a package store premises open for the purpose of selling any alcoholic beverages at any hour other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight, Monday through Saturday, and shall not be open on Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. Package store licensees shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages on the day of any general, primary, runoff primary or special election whether on a national, state, county or city election, provided that the election day does not occur on any day on which such sales are otherwise prohibited by law. 
(b)  No holder of a retail wine license or a retail beer license shall sell any beer or wine other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. the following day, Monday through Sunday. Retail wine and retail beer licensees shall be permitted to sell beer and wine on the day of any general, primary, runoff primary or special election whether on a national, state, county, or city election. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages may be sold, dispensed, served or consumed on the premises of a mixed drink beverage licensee or bottle club between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. No licensee shall permit any person, who has in his possession an open container, having as its contents an intoxicating alcoholic beverage, to remain in a mixed beverage establishment between the hours of 2:15 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. No person, having in his possession an open container, having as its contents an intoxicating alcoholic beverage, shall remain in a mixed beverage establishment between the hours of 2:15 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. For the purpose of this section, an open container shall mean any receptacle containing low-point beer or intoxicating alcoholic beverage, to include the original container of the beverage where the original seal has been broken or opened. 
(d)  Any person selling or keeping a package store open to sell any alcoholic beverage during any day or hours not authorized, and any person selling or permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages at a grocery store, convenience store or drug store during any day or hours not authorized shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for first violation and upon a conviction shall be fined not more than $500.00. 
(Prior Code, § 3-19; Code 1999, § 3-116; Ord. No. 899(19) , 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 3-117. - Sale or delivery prohibited on certain days. 
No wine or spirits wholesaler licensee shall sell or deliver, and no wine or spirits retail licensee shall receive any amount of spirits or wines to any licensee on Sunday or on New Year's Day, the Fourth of July, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. 
(Prior Code, § 3-24; Code 1999, § 3-117; Ord. No. 899(19) , 3-4-2019)  
CHAPTER 2. - LOW-POINT BEER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Low-point beer, 63 O.S. § 163.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Low-point beer means beverages containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and not more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight, including, but not limited to, beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of barley or other grain, malt or similar products. 
Minor means a person who, in accordance with state law, has not yet attained the age at which the consumption of low-point beer is permitted. 
Retail dealer means and includes any and all persons who sell, distribute or dispense any low-point beer at retail to the public for consumption or use, whether consumed on the premises or not. A dealer who is engaged in wholesaling low-point beer for resale shall not be exempt from the provisions of this chapter if he also sells, distributes or dispenses such beverages direct to the public for consumption or use. 
(Prior Code, § 3-106; Code 1999, § 3-201)  
Sec. 3-202. - State licenses. 
No person shall engage in the business of selling, offering for sale or distributing any low-point beer, at retail, for consumption or use, without first having obtained a state license to do so, and in cases where such beverages are consumed on the premises, a license as provided by the statutes of the state. 
(Prior Code, § 3-127; Code 1999, § 3-202)  
Sec. 3-203. - Retail dealer's license required; license fees. 
(a)  No person shall sell, distribute or dispense any low-point beer at retail to the public without first having obtained a license to do so from the city, and making payment in advance to the city clerk in the amount as provided herein. 
(b)  The annual fee for a license under this chapter shall be as established by resolution. 
(c)  No license issued hereunder is transferable. 
(d)  Licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment of the required fee and compliance by the applicant with all applicable ordinances of the city, and upon a satisfactory showing that the applicant has obtained such state and county permits as are required by law. 
(Prior Code, §§ 3-126, 3-128, 3-129; Code 1999, § 3-203)  
Sec. 3-204. - Application for license. 
An applicant for a retail dealer's license or renewal of such license shall deposit the required fee with the city clerk and submit an application on the form provided by the clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 3-204)  
Sec. 3-205. - Expiration of license. 
The licenses provided for in this chapter shall expire annually on June 30, and the fee therefor shall not be prorated. 
(Prior Code, § 3-130; Code 1999, § 3-205)  
Sec. 3-206. - Minors on premises prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who holds a license to sell and dispense low-point beer for consumption on the premises, or any agent, servant, or employee of said license holder, to permit any person under 21 years of age to be admitted to or remain in a separate or enclosed bar area of the licensed premises, which has as its main purpose the selling or serving of low-point beer for consumption on the premises. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 21 years of age from being admitted to an area which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or serving of low-point beer, in which sales or serving of said beverages are incidental to the main purpose, as long as persons under 21 years of age are not sold or served said beverages; however, the incidental service of food in the bar area shall not exempt a licensee, agent, servant, or employee from the provisions of this subsection. 
(b)  If the premises of a holder of a license to sell low-point beer contains a separate or enclosed bar area which has as its main purpose the sale or serving of low-point beer for consumption on the premises, no minor shall enter, attempt to enter, or remain in the area. The provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit minors from entering or remaining in an area which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or serving of low-point beer, in which sales or serving of the beverages are incidental to the main purpose, if the minors are not sold or served or do not consume low-point beer anywhere on the premises; however, the incidental service of food in the bar area shall not exempt minors from the provisions of this subsection. 
(Prior Code, § 3-108; Code 1999, § 3-206) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. §§ 241, 243, 246.  
Sec. 3-207. - Sale of low-point beer to minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person who holds a license to sell and dispense low-point beer, or any agent, servant or employee of the license holder, to sell, barter or give to any minor any low-point beer. 
(Prior Code, § 3-111; Ord. No. 486, 6-5-1989; Code 1999, § 3-207) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 241.  
Sec. 3-208. - Employment of persons under 18 years; exceptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to be employed or permitted to work, in any capacity whatsoever, in a place where low-point beer is sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any minor to be employed or permitted to work, in any capacity whatsoever, in the separate or enclosed bar area of a place where the main purpose of the area is the sale or consumption of low-point beer. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any area which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or serving of low-point beer, in which sales or serving of the beverages are incidental to the main purpose; however, the incidental service of food in the bar area shall not exempt a holder of a license to sell low-point beer for consumption on the premises from the provisions of this subsection. 
(c)  A parent in regard to the employment of his own child is exempted from the provisions of this section, provided that such employment shall in no capacity whatsoever be related to the selling or dispensing of such beverages. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any business or establishment where sales of the beverages do not exceed 25 percent of the gross sales of the business or establishment. 
(Code 1999, § 3-208) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 243.  
Sec. 3-209. - Sale of low-point beer prohibited during certain hours; exception. 
(a)  No retailer licensed to sell low-point beer shall sell such beverages for consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. Sunday morning and 7:00 a.m. Monday morning or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any other day. 
(b)  No retail dealer of any business selling low-point beer, as that term is defined in this chapter, for consumption on the premises, nor any operator, agent, or employee of the retail dealer, shall permit any person, who has in his possession an open container having as its contents a low-point beer, to remain on the premises between the hours of 2:15 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Mondays through Saturdays, or on Sundays after 7:00 a.m. No person, having in his possession an open container having as its contents a low-point beer, shall remain on the premises between the hours of 2:15 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Mondays through Saturdays, or on Sundays after the hour of 2:15 a.m. For the purpose of this section, an open container shall mean any receptacle containing low-point beer or intoxicating alcoholic beverage, to include the original container of the beverage where the original seal has been broken or opened. 
(Code 1999, § 3-209) 
State Law reference— City powers to regulate hours, Sunday hours, 37 O.S. § 213.  
Sec. 3-210. - Transportation of low-point beer in moving vehicle. 
No person shall knowingly transport in any moving vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley within the city any low-point beer except in the original container which shall have not been opened and from which the original cap or seal shall have not been removed, unless the opened container is in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion. 
(Prior Code, § 3-113; Code 1999, § 3-210) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537.  
Sec. 3-211. - Minors in possession of low-point beer prohibited while in public. 
No person under 21 years of age shall: 
(1)  Consume; or 
(2)  Possess with the intent to consume; 
low-point beer, as defined in 37 O.S. § 163.2, in any public place. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty, upon conviction, of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in section 1-108 or by appropriate community service not to exceed 20 hours. Provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply when such persons are under the direct supervision of their parent or lawful guardian, but in no instance shall this exception be interpreted to allow such persons to consume such beverages in any place licensed to dispense low-point beer as provided in 37 O.S. § 163.11. 
(Prior Code, § 3-112; Code 1999, § 3-211; Ord. No. 31(92), 7-20-1992)  
Sec. 3-212. - Consumption of low-point beer in public places; penalty; exception. 
(a)  No person shall consume, or possess with intent to consume, low-point beer in any public place, or upon any public street. 
(b)  Any person violating the provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-108, or by appropriate community service not to exceed 20 hours. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit a person who is of age from consuming such beverages in any place licensed to dispense beer as provided for in 37 O.S. § 163.11. 
(Code 1999, § 3-212; Ord. No. 31(92), 7-20-1992) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 246.  
Sec. 3-213. - Misrepresentation of age by false or altered documentation. 
No person shall represent his age either orally or in writing or by presenting false or altered documentation of age for the purpose of inducing any person to sell him low-point beer. 
(Code 1999, § 3-213)  
Sec. 3-214. - Inspections, sales tax records. 
(a)  Every person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall, at the request of the city, produce such state sales tax records as the city might request within ten working days of such request, and the application for the acceptance of any license hereunder shall conclusively be deemed to be consent of the applicant and licensee to produce such state sales tax records. 
(b)  The police department may make inspections of all places of business where low-point beer is sold, distributed, or dispensed at retail, for the purpose of enforcing the law and for ascertaining whether the operators thereof are complying with the requirements of the law relating to the handling of low-point beer. 
(Code 1999, § 3-214)  
Sec. 3-215. - Glass area and lighting requirements. 
(a)  All buildings and structures used or occupied as a place where low-point beer is offered for sale for consumption on the premises shall be so designed, constructed and maintained as to contain in the face of such building fronting upon the nearest public way to which such building is adjacent and used as the most public entrance a plate glass area forming both the interior and exterior wall equivalent to 75 percent of the total area of the face of such building computed on a square footage basis between floor level and ceiling height. 
(b)  All plate glass required by this section shall be maintained in a clear, unpainted and unobstructed condition, so as to permit clear visibility of the interior of such building from without the same. All areas of such building designed for use by the retail customers of such establishment shall be lighted with incandescent or fluorescent lights providing a minimum of 25 footcandles of light at all locations within the area. All such establishments containing less than the required percentage of glassed area on the face of the building as of the date of passage of this section shall keep and maintain all of the existing glassed area on the face of the building in a clear, unpainted and unobstructed condition and shall not enlarge or extend the building without compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 3-109, 3-110; Code 1999, § 3-215)  
CHAPTER 3. - PROHIBITING GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS ARE CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
Sec. 3-301. - Permitting or allowing gathering where minors are consuming alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. The term "alcoholic beverage" includes intoxicating beverages and low-point beer as defined herein. 
Gathering means a party, gathering, or event, where a group of three or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity. 
Intoxicating beverage includes beverages containing more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight. 
Legal guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
Low-point beer means and includes beverages containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and not more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight, including, but not limited to, beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of barley or other grain, malt or similar products. 
Minor means any person under 21 years of age. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or step-parent of another person. 
Premises means any residence or other private property, place, or premises, including any commercial or business premises. 
Response costs are the costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire, and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative costs attributable to such response; 
(2)  The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; 
(3)  The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; and 
(4)  Any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of this section. 
(b)  Consumption of alcohol by minor in public place, place open to public, or place not open to the public. Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, unless in connection with the consumption of an alcoholic beverage that minor is being supervised by his parent or legal guardian. 
(c)  Hosting, permitting, or allowing a party, gathering, or event where minors consume alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(1)  a.  It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting drivers' licenses or other government-issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering. 
b.  It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in subsection (c)(1)a of this section. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his parent or legal guardian. 
(3)  Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any family activity held in the confines of the family home from providing the use of alcohol to immediate family members within the supervision of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering intoxicated and is found in public then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as a non-family gathering. 
(4)  Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any religious practice which includes the use of alcohol. However, if a minor leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated and is found to be in public then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as a non-religious gathering. 
(5)  This section shall not apply to any premises licensed by the state to dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished pursuant to the terms of section 1-108. 
(e)  Reservation of legal options. Violations of this section may be prosecuted by the city criminally, civilly, and/or administratively as provided by this Code. The city may seek administrative fees and response costs associated with enforcement of this section through all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance, or law. This section shall not limit the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this section, nor shall they limit the city's ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this section. 
(f)  Local authority. This section shall not apply where prohibited or preempted by state or federal law. 
(Code 1999, § 3-301; Ord. No. 601(07), 11-19-2007)  
Part 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City powers to regulate animals, 11 O.S. § 22-115 et seq. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— City powers to regulate animals, 11 O.S. § 22-115 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A. - ANIMAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 4-101. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means the persons employed by the city as its enforcement officer in the impoundment of animals, controlling of animals running at large, and as otherwise provided or required in this chapter. 
Animal shelter means any premises designated by action of the council for the purposes of impounding and caring for animals. 
At large or running at large means any animal when it is off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person. As applied to animals, the term "at large" or "running at large" means: 
(1)  Off-premises. Any animal which is not restrained by means of a leash or chain of sufficient strength and not more than six feet in length to control the actions of such animal while off the owner's property; and 
(2)  On-premises. Any animal not confined within the owner's property by a substantial fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from escaping therefrom, or secured on the premises by a metal chain or leash sufficient in strength to prevent the animal from escaping from the owner's property and so arranged so that the animal will remain upon the property when the leash is stretched to full length. A dog intruding upon the property of another person other than the owner shall be termed running at large. Any animal within an automobile or other vehicle of its owner or owner's agent shall not be deemed running at large. 
Dangerous animal. See Vicious canine. 
Domestic birds means canaries, parrots, parakeets, myna birds, peacocks, birds of paradise or other birds tamed to the household or pertaining thereto. 
Enclosure means, while on the property of the owner, secure confinement indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent entry and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. 
Exposed to rabies means any animal that has been bitten by or exposed to any other animal known to have been infected with rabies. 
Fowl means chickens, guineas, geese, ducks and pigeons. 
Impoundment means placing an animal in the animal control vehicle or unit or holding an animal in custody at the animal control shelter. 
Keeper means any person, family, firm or corporation owning or actually keeping, having, using or maintaining any of the animals herein referred to. 
Kennel means any place where four or more dogs or four or more cats, more than six months of age, are kept, sheltered or fed and watered. The term "kennel" includes any place where more than one litter of puppies born to different female dogs, or one litter of kittens born to different female cats, are kept on any lot or premises or kept in any structure. 
Large animal means a horse, mule, donkey, cattle, goat, sheep or any other animal of similar size or stature. 
Muzzle means a device constructed of strong, soft material or a metal muzzle such as that used commercially with greyhounds. The muzzle must be made in a manner which will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any person, animal or livestock. 
Neuter means to render a male dog or cat unable to reproduce. 
Nuisance means the conduct or behavior of any small or large animal, cat or dog which molests passersby or passing vehicles; attacks other animals; damages private or public property; barks, whines, howls, crows or makes other noises in an excessive, continuous fashion which annoys the comfort, repose, health or safety of the people in the community; unconfined in season; or a vicious animal not confined as required by this chapter. 
Owner or keeper means any person, group of persons or corporation owning, keeping or harboring animals, fowl or birds. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city clerk. 
Potentially vicious canine means: 
(1)  Any canine which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack where such person is conducting himself peaceably and lawfully; or 
(2)  Any canine with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings, animals or livestock. 
Provoke or provocation means, with respect to an attack by an animal, that the animal was hit, kicked or struck by a person with an object or part of a person's body or that any part of the animal's body is pulled, pinched or squeezed by a person. 
Ratproof means that state of being constructed so as to effectively prevent entry of rats. 
Restraint means that an animal is controlled by leash or tether, either of which shall not exceed six feet in length, by a competent person, or is within any vehicle, trailer or other conveyance being driven, pulled or parked on the street, or is confined within the property limits of its owner or keeper. 
Sanitary means any condition of good odor and cleanliness which precludes the probability of disease transmission and insect breeding and which preserves the health of the city. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery. 
Small animal means a rabbit, hare, guinea pig, chinchilla, turkey, fowl, hamster, pigeon (except homing pigeons) or any other animal of similar size or stature. 
Spay means to remove the ovaries of a female dog or cat in order to render the animal unable to reproduce. 
Vaccination means an injection of United States Department of Agriculture approved rabies vaccine administered every 12 calendar months by a licensed veterinarian. 
Vicious canine means: 
(1)  Any canine which, according to the records of the appropriate authority, has inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property where such a person is conducting himself peaceably and lawfully; 
(2)  Any canine which, according to the records of the appropriate authority, requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury or property damage without provocation on public or private property where such a person is conducting himself peaceably and lawfully; 
(3)  Any canine which, according to the records of the appropriate authority, has killed a domestic animal or livestock without provocation while off the owner's property or has caused economic loss to the owner of livestock as a result of the canine's attacking or harassing the livestock; 
(4)  Any canine owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of canine fighting or any canine trained for canine fighting; or 
(5)  Any canine, subject to this chapter, not licensed according to law. 
(b)  All other words, terms or phrases used herein shall be defined and interpreted according to their common usage. 
(Prior Code, §§ 4-1, 4-21; Code 1999, § 4-101; Ord. No. 400, 10-7-1985; Ord. No. 438, 11-16-1987; Ord. No. 417(03), 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 4-102. - Running at large, owners cited; enclosures. 
(a)  Any animal, including fowl, running at large in the city shall be taken up by the animal control officer and impounded at the animal shelter. The animal control officer may, at his discretion, cite the owner of such animal to appear in municipal court to answer charges of violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Every person who owns or has charge of a large animal within the city shall be required to keep the domestic animal within a suitable enclosure and to restrain the animal from running at large. 
(Prior Code, § 4-2, in part; Code 1999, § 4-102)  
Sec. 4-103. - Control of animals required, at large. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any owner or person to: 
(1)  Fail to prevent any animal from running at large within the city; 
(2)  Perform, do or carry out any inhumane treatment against any animal; 
(3)  Keep, possess, own, control, maintain, use or otherwise exercise dominion over any animal which by reason of noise, odor or sanitary conditions becomes offensive to a reasonable and prudent person of ordinary tastes and sensibilities, or which constitutes or becomes a health hazard as determined by the health officer or animal control officer; or 
(4)  Turn any animal at large or release an animal which is restrained or confined in an enclosure as required by this chapter. 
(b)  (1)  No owner, keeper, or person having control of any animal or fowl shall fail to immediately remove and dispose of in a sanitary manner any solid waste deposited by such animal or fowl upon any sidewalk, public park, alley, other place open to the public, or from private property before the owner leaves the immediate area where the solid waste was deposited. 
(2)  No owner, keeper, or person having control of any animal or fowl shall fail to have in his possession the equipment necessary to remove his animal's solid waste when accompanied by said animal or fowl on public property. 
(3)  No owner, keeper or person having control of any animal or fowl shall permit such animal or fowl to destroy or damage property of any kind or to deposit solid waste or to commit a similar nuisance on the private property of a person or the property of the city, including its parks and playgrounds, or any property other than that of the owner of the animal or fowl. 
(Prior Code, §§ 4-2, 4-3, in part; Code 1999, § 4-103; Ord. No. 632(08), 10-20-2008)  
Sec. 4-104. - Offenses. 
It is an offense under the terms of this chapter for any owner within the corporate limits of the city to: 
(1)  Own, keep, possess, harbor or allow to remain on premises under his control any dog or cat unless such dog or cat over four months old has a current vaccination against rabies as required herein; 
(2)  Fail or refuse to deliver to the animal control officer, upon demand, any rabies-suspected animal, dog found at large, or any animal the keeping or harboring of which is declared to be an offense; 
(3)  Harbor, keep or have possession of any vicious animal or animal which is a nuisance; 
(4)  Remove or fail to affix or attach to the collar or harness worn by dogs, a current tag, as provided for in this chapter; 
(5)  Keep any animal, wild by nature or dangerous, except when kept by a licensed circus or show or in a zoo or accredited school; or 
(6)  Own, keep, possess or harbor any dog outdoors which is not confined in a yard, a substantial and secure pen, or under control by leash. Each time such dog shall not be confined and shall be running at large shall constitute a separate offense. The animal control officer shall cause impoundment of such dogs running at large within the city. 
(Code 1999, § 4-104)  
Sec. 4-105. - Keeping of swine. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to raise or keep any swine within the city except as may be otherwise provided in this section or other parts of this Code. This section shall not apply to the keeping within the city of no more than two Asian pot-bellied swine or similar small swine, subject to the following: 
(1)  Each pot-bellied swine shall be a pet that is to be kept for personal enjoyment and not kept or raised for human consumption; 
(2)  Each pot-bellied swine shall be registered through a bona fide registry firm; 
(3)  Each pot-bellied swine shall not exceed 75 pounds in weight and 20 inches in height; and 
(4)  There shall not be more than two pot-bellied swine of more than three months of age per residence. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or hinder city or state health enforcement personnel from restricting or removing, or requiring the removal of, any such swine from the city if such an action is deemed necessary to promote or protect the health and safety of the inhabitants of the city. Furthermore, any regulation promulgated by the state department of health or statute adopted by the legislature relating to pot-bellied pigs or other small swine shall be deemed applicable to any such swine or pot-bellied pigs authorized by this section. 
(Prior Code, § 4-5; Code 1999, § 4-105; Ord. No. 3(91), 10-7-1991)  
Sec. 4-106. - Buildings, structures for animals; location. 
(a)  Every building or place where any animal or fowl is kept shall be constructed of such material and in such manner that it can be kept clean and sanitary at all times. 
(b)  No place where an animal or fowl is kept shall be maintained closer than 100 feet to the premises of an apartment, hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, food store, building used for educational, religious or hospital purposes, or dwelling other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the animal or fowl is kept. 
(c)  Every building where any livestock is kept, if located within 200 feet of any apartment, hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, food store, building used for educational, religious or hospital purposes, or any dwelling other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the animal is kept, shall be provided with a watertight and flytight receptacle for manure, of such size as to hold all accumulation of manure. The receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such manner as to prevent it from being or becoming a nuisance, and shall be kept covered at all times except when open during the deposit or removal of manure or refuse. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate on such premises except in the receptacle. 
(d)  The animal control officer shall inspect any structure or place where an animal is kept on his own initiative or upon complaint. He may issue any such reasonable order as he may deem necessary to the owner of such animal to cause the animal to be kept as required in this chapter or in a manner so as not to constitute a nuisance. He may make a complaint before the city court against any person for violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any such reasonable order. 
(Prior Code, §§ 4-8—4-11; Code 1999, § 4-106; Ord. No. 103(94), 12-19-1994)  
Sec. 4-107. - Number of animals restricted, kennels. 
(a)  No more than four animals, more than six months of age, may be kept on any lot, premises or in any structure, except in a kennel. Not more than one litter of puppies born to different female dogs or one litter of kittens born to different female cats may be kept on any lot or premises or kept in any structure except in a kennel. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to have, run, maintain or operate any kennel or any place for the sale, exchange, breeding or training of pet animals within the city except in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 4-21, in part; Code 1999, § 4-107; Ord. No. 416(03), 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 4-108. - Noisy animals; complaint procedure for animals which disturb, are in violation of Code. 
(a)  No person shall keep any animal which causes frequent or long-continued noise so as to disturb the comfort or repose of any reasonable person in the vicinity. Any violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance and as such may be abated. 
(b)  Any person with knowledge thereof may file a complaint in the municipal court against the owner or keeper of an animal which disturbs the comfort or repose of any reasonable person in the vicinity or which is in violation of this chapter. If the court finds that an animal is a nuisance or in violation of this chapter, then the court may order the owner or keeper to prevent and abate the nuisance, or order the animal impounded with the owner or keeper to pay impoundment costs, or order punishment as provided in section 1-108. 
(Prior Code, § 4-7, in part; Code 1999, § 4-108)  
Sec. 4-109. - Keeping of wild or exotic animals. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, a wild or exotic animal means an animal which is usually not a domestic animal and which can normally be found in the wild state, with or without mean or vicious propensities, including, but not limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, alligators, crocodiles, apes, foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses, and all forms of poisonous or large snakes, including those considered dangerous, such as boas and pythons, lynxes, raccoons, skunks, monkeys and like animals. 
(b)  It is unlawful to keep or harbor any wild or exotic animal in the city limits as a pet or for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee, except as provided in this section, and except as may be licensed by the state wildlife department. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to zoological parks or zoos, performing animal exhibitions, circuses, educational or medical institutions in accordance with any applicable regulations of the council. 
(Prior Code, § 4-6, in part; Code 1999, § 4-109)  
Sec. 4-110. - Pasturing in public areas illegal. 
It is unlawful for any person to pasture any animal on any public property or private property without the consent of the person owning or controlling the property. 
(Prior Code, § 4-4; Code 1999, § 4-110)  
Sec. 4-111. - Riding on streets; racing animals. 
(a)  No person shall ride or lead any horse or other animal or drive any wagon, carriage or other vehicle on the streets in the business district or intensive residential district without a permit as may be issued by the city manager. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to race any animal or recklessly ride an animal on or over any street or on any public grounds in the city. 
(Prior Code, §§ 4-17, 4-18; Code 1999, § 4-112)  
Sec. 4-112. - Short-form complaint for prosecution in court. 
(a)  Animal control officers and police officers of the city are hereby authorized to use a short-form complaint and information to proceed against any person accused of violating any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  A short-form complaint and information meeting the requirements of this section shall be deemed sufficient to charge an accused with a violation in the municipal court and for any appellate proceedings therefrom. 
(Prior Code, § 4-19; Code 1999, § 4-113)  
ARTICLE B. - REGISTRATION AND VACCINATION OF ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 4-121. - Rabies vaccination required; certificate of vaccination; tags. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat within the city limits unless such dog or cat four months of age or older is vaccinated for rabies. 
(b)  Unless the owner of any dog or cat furnishes written proof that the dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian in the past 12 months, the owner shall be guilty of an offense. 
(c)  Inoculation must be by or under the supervision of a person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state or other states. 
(d)  Inoculation must be with a vaccine approved by the United States Department of Agriculture to prevent rabies. Rabies vaccine currently licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture will be recognized in the city for a one year immunization period. New vaccines which may be approved by the United States Department of Agriculture will be recognized as complying with this chapter. 
(e)  Thirty days shall be permitted for an owner to secure revaccination of his dog or cat after the previous time has lapsed. 
(f)  Every veterinarian, after vaccinating a dog or cat for rabies, shall issue a legible certificate, one copy to be retained by the veterinarian and one copy to be retained by the animal owner, who, upon request, shall show the certificate to the city. Such certification shall include the following information: 
(1)  Owner's full name, address, zip code and telephone number; 
(2)  Breed, date of birth, sex and color or marking of the dog or cat; 
(3)  Type of vaccine and duration of immunity; 
(4)  Signature of the veterinarian or other authorized person administering the vaccination; and 
(5)  Name of the animal, if applicable. 
(g)  When a veterinarian vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies, he shall issue to the owner of such dog or cat a metal tag or check evidencing such vaccination and the year of vaccination. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the owner of the dog or cat to attach the tag or check issued to him pursuant to subsection (g) of this section to the dog or cat and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove such tag or check without the owner's consent. 
(Prior Code, § 4-36, in part; Code 1999, § 4-121; Ord. No. 488(04), 11-15-2004) 
State Law reference— City's power to regulate dogs, 11 O.S. § 22-115.  
Sec. 4-122. - Registration of animal pets. 
Every person owning or harboring within the city any dog or cat over the age of four months shall pay an annual tax in such sums as set by the council by motion or resolution for each male or spayed female, and for each unspayed female, owned or harbored. The license shall become due and payable on the first day of each year. The animal control shelter or his designee shall issue his receipt to the payee, which shall show the date and the amount of the payment, the age as stated by the owner, and the kind, size, color and breed of the dog or cat. The pet tax receipt as herein provided shall operate as a license to own, keep or harbor the dog or cat therein described for the year ending on April 30 following date of issuance. No such license shall be issued until the provisions of this chapter relating to vaccination shall have been complied with and certified to the clerk. This section shall not apply to animals kept by licensed veterinarians or in veterinary clinics in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 4-37; Code 1999, § 4-122)  
Sec. 4-123. - Register. 
It is the duty of the animal control officer of the city to keep a register of all pet animal licenses in the city pursuant to the provisions of this article. Such register shall show the date of the issuance of the license, its date of expiration, the name of the owner or the person in whose name the license is issued and shall designate the sex of the pet animal and as nearly as possible the kind, age, size, color and breed of the animal pet. The register shall also show the date of the vaccination and by whom vaccinated. 
(Code 1999, § 4-123)  
Sec. 4-124. - Tag placed on collar; lost tags; counterfeit tags. 
(a)  The owner of a dog shall cause the tag received from the city to be affixed to the collar of the dog upon which the tax has been paid so that the tag can easily be seen by officers of the city. The owner shall see that the tag is so worn by the dog at all times. The owner of a cat shall not be required to place the tag on a cat. 
(b)  If the tag is lost before the end of the year for which it was issued, the owner may secure another for the animal by applying to the city clerk, presenting to him the original receipt and paying a fee as set by the council. 
(c)  No person shall counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit any tag issued for a dog or cat as provided herein, or take from any dog a tag legally placed upon it, or place such tag upon a dog for which the tag was not specifically issued. 
(Prior Code, §§ 4-38, 4-39; Code 1999, § 4-124)  
ARTICLE C. - IMPOUNDMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 4-131. - Impoundment record, disposition of animals. 
(a)  The city may contract with an outside agency to serve as the city's animal shelter or pound to provide for the impoundment of animals pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Any dog or cat or other small animal kept as a house pet found running at large shall be picked up and immediately impounded in the animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner. 
(c)  The city animal control officer, upon receiving an animal for impoundment which has been registered in accordance with this chapter, shall record or cause to be recorded the description, breed, color and sex of the animal and the name and address of the owner as may be shown on applicable city animal control records. If the owner is known, the officer shall: 
(1)  Notify the owner at the address shown on city records; or 
(2)  Leave a notice with a member of the owner's family, or other person residing at the owner's home, as shown in the city's records, over the age of 15 years, to notify the owner that unless reclaimed within five days after impoundment, Saturdays, Sundays and city holidays excluded, the animal will be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(Prior Code, §§ 4-56, 4-61; Code 1999, § 4-131)  
Sec. 4-132. - Breaking open pound; or interfering with officers. 
(a)  If any person breaks open, or in any manner directly or indirectly aids in, or counsels or advises the breaking open of any city pound or contract pound, or hinders, delays or obstructs any person duly authorized in taking up or taking to the city pound any animal liable to be impounded, he shall be guilty of an offense. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, or hinder, or molest any agent of the city in the performance of any duty of such agent, or seek to release any animal in the custody of the city or its agents, except as provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 4-57; Code 1999, § 4-132)  
Sec. 4-133. - Animal shelter fees. 
(a)  Fees for impounding and keeping an animal, to be paid upon redemption, are as set by the city council by motion or resolution. In computing a fee, a fraction of a day during which an animal or fowl has been fed shall be deemed a full day. 
(b)  Any person redeeming an impounded animal or fowl shall pay the fees to the city clerk and present the receipt therefor to the person in charge of the animal shelter before the latter releases the animal or fowl. The city manager or his designee may authorize payment of all fees due over a period not to exceed 90 days upon a determination of financial need of the owner. Upon the owner entering into a written installment payment agreement, the animal may be released to the owner. Failure to make the payments under this agreement will result in an impoundment order being issued for the animal released under the installment payment agreement. 
(c)  Any person redeeming a dog or any other animal or fowl not licensed as required by this Code shall pay the required license tax to the city clerk and secure a tag or other evidence of such payment and present the tag or receipt therefor to the person in charge of the animal shelter before the latter releases the animal or fowl. If the animal or fowl has been licensed but is not wearing the tag, the person in charge of the animal shelter shall require adequate evidence of the proper licensing of the animal or fowl before releasing it. 
(d)  Any dog not vaccinated against rabies being held or impounded by the city shall not be released to the owner or any other person without proof of current vaccination against rabies or without paying a deposit in such sum as is set by the city, which deposit shall be refunded to the person putting up the same upon proof of current vaccination being shown to the animal control officer within 72 hours of the release of the animal. If such proof is not presented, then the animal control officer may retake the animal into custody and deposit the deposit with the city treasurer to be retained as expenses of taking the animal into custody. 
(e)  In addition to the above fees, any person leaving an animal with the shelter shall pay a fee as set by the council. 
(Prior Code, §§ 4-58, 4-59; Code 1999, § 4-133; Ord. No. 475, 3-6-1989; Ord. No. 718(12), 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 4-134. - Redemption of animal. 
An owner of an impounded animal or his agent may redeem the animal prior to its sale or destruction as provided for herein by paying the required fees against the animal and meeting any other requirements which may be prescribed in this chapter. If the owner or his agent has not redeemed the animal within the first five days after the impoundment of the animal, the animal may be otherwise disposed of as provided for herein. 
(Prior Code, § 4-60; Code 1999, § 4-134)  
Sec. 4-135. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Dogs and cats may be released from the animal shelter for adoption if the owner of the animal has not claimed the animal within the time specified in this chapter and paid all fees required to secure its release. If the animal has not been surgically spayed or neutered, the adopting person shall pay a fee, as established by the fee schedule, for the spaying or neutering of the animal prior to adoption. The city may enter into agreements with private releasing agencies for the purpose of arranging animal adoptions. If the animal to be released is placed with a private releasing agency prior to final adoption, and the releasing agency requires sterilization prior to final adoption, the private releasing agency shall not be required to make a sterilization deposit. 
(b)  Any animal for which the owner is known and notice has been provided in this chapter, or for which the owner is unknown or cannot be ascertained by the animal control officer, shall be destroyed after the lapse of five days if not adopted as provided in this section or sold by the animal control officer. 
(c)  The proceeds of any animal which is sold shall be deposited with the city treasurer. The purchaser of an animal sold at any sale provided for in this section shall acquire absolute title to the animal purchased. 
(d)  The owner of an impounded animal sold as provided in this section may, within one month after the sale, claim the excess of the sale price of the animal above the impounding and related fees, less a fee established by resolution to reimburse the city for any expense it has had in making the sale. If no claim is made, the funds shall belong to the city. 
(Prior Code, §§ 4-61, 4-62; Code 1999, § 4-135; Ord. No. 81(94), 4-4-1994; Ord. No. 717(12), 2-21-2012)  
ARTICLE D. - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 4-141. - Cruelty to animals. 
It is unlawful for any person, willfully and maliciously, to pour on, or apply to, any animal any drug or other thing which will inflict pain on the animal; or to knowingly treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner; or to knowingly neglect an animal belonging to him or in his custody in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
(Prior Code, § 4-13; Code 1999, § 4-141) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1685.  
Sec. 4-142. - Poisoning animals. 
It is unlawful for a person willfully to poison any dog or other animal except a noxious, nondomesticated animal, or to knowingly expose poison so that the same may be taken by an animal. 
(Prior Code, § 4-14; Code 1999, § 4-142) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1681.  
Sec. 4-143. - Encouraging animals to fight. 
It is unlawful for any person to instigate or encourage a fight between animals or to encourage one animal to attack, pursue or annoy another animal except a noxious, nondomesticated animal, or to keep a house, pit or other place used for fights between animals. 
(Prior Code, § 4-15; Code 1999, § 4-143) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1696.  
Sec. 4-144. - Keeping of animals; mistreatment, abandonment. 
(a)  All dogs, cats and other small animals kept as house pets within the city limits shall be housed, fed and protected from the weather in such a manner as not to create a nuisance. 
(b)  No person shall willfully or maliciously: 
(1)  Torture, cruelly beat, injure, maim, mutilate or unjustly destroy or kill any animal belonging to himself or to another; 
(2)  Deprive any animal of food, drink or shelter or leave it confined for more than 15 minutes at a time exposed to inclement weather. Inclement weather shall be defined as less than 32 degrees Fahrenheit or greater than 90 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(3)  Unjustly administer any poison or noxious drug or substance to any animal; 
(4)  Unjustly expose any drug or substance with the intent that the same shall be taken by an animal, whether such animal is the property of that owner or another person; 
(5)  Cause any other person to do any of the above acts; or 
(6)  Abandon an animal on any private or public property in the city, including at the animal control shelter when no employees are present to receive the animal. 
(c)  If an animal is found by the animal control officer to be in one of the above-described conditions, the officer may issue a citation to the offender and shall issue a notice to the offender warning him that if the animal's condition is not improved, another citation may be issued. 
(d)  If within three days the condition of the animal is not improved to the satisfaction of the animal control officer, a citation shall be issued. 
(e)  No dogs, cats or other small animals shall be confined within or on a motor vehicle under such conditions as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal, including, but not limited to, dangerous temperatures, or lack of food or water. 
(f)  Owners and keepers of dogs, cats and other small animals shall provide food, shelter and medical attention to such animals, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Sufficient wholesome food that is nutritious for the species; 
(2)  Fresh, potable drinking water; 
(3)  Medical attention to relieve such animals from suffering; 
(4)  Shelter to allow the animal to remain dry and protected from the elements. Such shelter shall be fully enclosed on three sides, roofed and have a solid floor. The entrance to the shelter shall be flexible to allow the animal's entry and exit, and sturdy enough to block entry of wind or rain. The shelter shall be small enough to retain the animal's body heat and large enough to allow the animal to stand and turn comfortably. The enclosure shall be structurally sound and in good repair. Bedding shall be provided; and 
(5)  Any animal kept on a chain or rope shall be placed so that it cannot become entangled with the restraints of other animals or with any other objects. The chain or rope shall be of sufficient length to allow the animal complete access to shelter at all times. The chain shall be attached in a manner so as not to cause injury or discomfort to the animal. In the case of dogs, the chain or rope shall be at least three times the length of the dog as measured from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail. Cats shall not be staked outside on a leash, rope, chain or similar apparatus. 
(Code 1999, § 4-144)  
ARTICLE E. - ZONING ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 4-151. - Zoning ordinance to prevail. 
In case of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the zoning ordinance, the zoning ordinance shall prevail. 
(Prior Code, § 4-20; Code 1999, § 4-151)  
ARTICLE F. - RABIES AND ANIMAL BITES 
 
Sec. 4-161. - Animal bites; rabies examination; quarantine. 
(a)  Every animal that bites or scratches a person shall be reported within immediately to the animal control officer and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at a veterinarian hospital for a period of ten days from the date the person was bitten, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by permission of the animal control officer of the city and the veterinarian in charge of the quarantined animal. Such quarantine may be at any veterinarian hospital chosen by the owner. Failure of the owner or keeper to quarantine his animal within the four-hour period herein will make him guilty of an offense. 
(b)  The owner, upon demand by any city officer or animal control officer, shall surrender any animal that has bitten or scratched a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine testing or euthanasia, the expense for which shall be borne by the owner; and the animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies. 
(c)  In addition to powers granted by this section and section 4-165, the animal control officer may impound in the animal shelter or a veterinary hospital at the owner's expense any animal, whether on public or private property, which has bitten or scratched pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 4-40, in part; Code 1999, § 4-161)  
Sec. 4-162. - Rabies diagnoses; quarantine of city; time limit. 
(a)  When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, and dies while under such observation, the animal control officer or veterinarian shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination, and shall notify the proper public health officer of reports of human contacts and diagnosis made of the suspected animal. 
(b)  When a report shows a positive diagnosis of rabies, the animal control officer of the city may recommend a citywide quarantine for a period of six months; and upon the invoking of such quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal shall be taken or shipped from the city without written permission of the animal control officer of the city. 
(c)  During such period of rabies quarantine as herein designated, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be treated for such rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian, and be held under six months quarantine by the owner in the same manner as other animals are quarantined. 
(d)  In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional six months. 
(e)  The regulations of the state department of health, and all amendments thereto, relating to quarantine and rabies are adopted herein by reference. 
(Prior Code, § 4-40, in part; Code 1999, § 4-162) 
State Law reference— State quarantine of animals, 63 O.S. § 1-508.  
Sec. 4-163. - Killing or removing rabid animal prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting or scratching a human, except as herein provided, nor to remove the animal from the city limits without written permission from the health officer of the city, or the animal control officer. 
(b)  The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the animal control officer. 
(c)  The animal control officer shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. 
(d)  No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by an employee empowered to enforce this chapter. Such refusal shall be deemed an offense. 
(Code 1999, § 4-163)  
Sec. 4-164. - Reports of bite cases; report by veterinarian. 
(a)  It is the duty of every physician, veterinarian or other practitioner to report to the animal control officer the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. 
(b)  It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the animal control officer his diagnosis of any animal observed by him to be a rabid suspect. 
(Code 1999, § 4-164)  
Sec. 4-165. - Investigations for violation of chapter. 
(a)  For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and to enforce its provisions, the animal control or health officers are empowered to call upon the residents of any premises upon which a dog or cat or small animal is kept or harbored, and to demand the exhibition by the owner of such dog or cat or small animal. 
(b)  The animal control officer, in the manner authorized by law, may enter the premises where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner and demand to examine such animal, and to take possession of such animal when, in his opinion, it requires humane treatment. The officer may demand, at the front door of any residence, exhibition by the owner of current animal licenses at any time. 
(Code 1999, § 4-165)  
Sec. 4-166. - Records. 
The animal control officer shall keep or cause to be kept: 
(1)  An accurate and detailed record of the licensing, impounding and disposition of all animals coming into his custody; and 
(2)  An accurate and detailed record of all bite cases reported to the city, with a complete report of the investigation of each case. 
(Code 1999, § 4-166)  
ARTICLE G. - VICIOUS ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 4-171. - Requirements for registration. 
The owner of any canine who qualifies as a vicious canine or potentially vicious canine shall register the canine annually with the animal control shelter within ten days after November 16, 1987, or within ten days of the animal being brought to or being in the city. The application must be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Two color photographs of the canine clearly showing the color and approximate size of the canine; 
(2)  The fees required for a dog license as set forth in this chapter, or evidence of the fees having been paid; and 
(3)  An additional fee as set by council for each vicious or potentially vicious canine. 
(Code 1999, § 4-171; Ord. No. 438, 11-16-1987; Ord. No. 801(15), 9-8-2015)  
Sec. 4-172. - Notification of change of status. 
The owner of any animal shall notify the animal control officer immediately within 24 hours if a dangerous canine subject to registration as provided in this article is loose, unconfined, has attacked another animal or livestock or has attacked a human being, or has died or been sold or given away. If a vicious or potentially vicious canine has been sold or given away, the owner shall provide the animal control officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner, who must also comply with the terms of this article. All offspring born to a canine declared to be vicious or potentially vicious prior to October 9, 2015, shall be reported within 24 hours to the animal control officer. 
(Code 1999, § 4-172; Ord. No. 801(15), 9-8-2015)  
Sec. 4-173. - Owner's responsibility. 
The requirements of sections 4-171 through 4-173 shall be updated and complied with on an annual basis by providing the required information to the animal control shelter. All vicious or potentially vicious canines shall also obtain a city license and provide current rabies vaccination records. Structures or pens required shall be present and maintained for as long as the canine is kept within the city. Structures or pens are subject to annual inspection by the city. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be punishable by section 4-175. 
(Code 1999, § 4-173; Ord. No. 438, 11-16-1987; Ord. No. 519(05), 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 801(15), 9-8-2015; Ord. No. 821(16), 5-16-2016)  
Sec. 4-174. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of sections 4-171 through 4-173 shall not apply to the following canines: 
(1)  Dogs kept by a bona fide licensed veterinary hospital for treatment, bona fide educational or medical institution or museum, or any other place where they are kept as alive for study; 
(2)  Any K-9 or other dog owned by any police department or any law enforcement officer which is used in the performance of police work; or 
(3)  Any seeing-eye dog used for the guidance of a blind person. 
(Code 1999, § 4-174; Ord. No. 438, 11-16-1987)  
Sec. 4-175. - Actions on failure to comply. 
(a)  The following actions shall be taken upon failure to comply with requirements and conditions of this article. For the purpose of this section, the term "canine" means a "vicious canine" and a "potentially vicious canine." 
(1)  Should the defendant owner refuse to remove the canine from the city, the municipal court judge shall find the defendant owner in contempt and order confiscation and impoundment of the canine. If the owner shall continue to refuse to remove the canine from the city, the judge shall issue any other orders necessary to carry out the intent of this section; 
(2)  The license for the canine shall be revoked; 
(3)  The canine shall be immediately banished or ordered to leave the city; 
(4)  The canine shall be humanely euthanized by the animal shelter, animal control officer or licensed veterinarian, after a 14-day holding period. Any canine that has been designated as vicious under these laws may not be offered for adoption; 
(5)  Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-108; 
(6)  Any owner of a canine which causes bodily injury to or death of any person, animal or livestock shall be guilty of reckless conduct as defined under the city's criminal code; 
(7)  Any owner of a canine which causes damage to property owned by any person shall, upon conviction in court, be punished as provided in section 1-108. In addition to the fine imposed, the court may sentence the defendant to imprisonment for a period not to exceed ten days. 
(b)  Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 4-175; Ord. No. 438, 11-16-1987)  
Sec. 4-176. - Exemptions for canines that are provoked. 
No canine may be declared vicious if the threat, injury or damage was initiated by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the canine, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the canine, or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the canine or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Code 1999, § 4-176; Ord. No. 438, 11-16-1987)  
Sec. 4-177. - Affidavit of complaint. 
Upon receipt of an "Affidavit of Complaint" signed by one or more residents of the city made under oath before an individual authorized by law to take sworn statements, setting forth the nature and the date of the act, the owner of the canine, the address of the owner and the description of the canine doing such act, the animal control officer shall investigate the complaint to determine if in fact the animal is vicious or potentially vicious. 
(Code 1999, § 4-177; Ord. No. 438, 11-16-1987)  
Sec. 4-178. - Determination hearing. 
(a)  A determination hearing shall be conducted by the municipal judge whenever there is cause to believe that a dog may be a vicious or a potentially vicious canine. The hearing shall be conducted within ten days of serving notice to the owner either by delivering a copy of the notice or summons personally to the owner of the canine or by leaving copies thereof at the owners dwelling house or usual place of abode with some person then residing therein who is 15 years of age or older or by certified mail and may be held in conjunction with any criminal proceedings if so ordered by the municipal judge. In no event shall there be a delay of more than ten days in conducting the hearing on determination of viciousness. 
(b)  Pending the outcome of the hearing, the canine must be securely confined in a humane manner either by the owner or with a licensed veterinarian. 
(c)  The municipal judge shall determine whether to declare the canine to be a vicious canine or potentially vicious canine based upon evidence and testimony presented at the time of the hearing by the owner, witnesses to any incident which may be considered germane to such a determination, animal control personnel, police or any other person possessing information pertinent to such determination. 
(d)  The judge shall issue written findings within five days after the determination hearing. The owner has the right to appeal the decision to the district court. 
(Code 1999, § 4-178; Ord. No. 438, 11-16-1987; Ord. No. 430(03), 11-3-2003)  
ARTICLE H. - PENALTY 
 
Sec. 4-181. - Penalty. 
In addition to other remedies provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 4-181)  
Part 5 - BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CODES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority to regulate buildings, 11 O.S. § 21-101. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - LICENSES AND FEES, PERMITS, BOND AND INSURANCE  
ARTICLE A. - LICENSES AND FEES, PERMITS, BOND AND INSURANCE 
 
Sec. 5-101. - License required for contractors and journeymen. 
All contractors, journeymen and apprentices whose activities are regulated by any of the city's building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical codes in this part are hereby required to obtain a license or registration certificate from the city before engaging in regulated activities. 
(Code 1999, § 5-101)  
Sec. 5-102. - Fees specified. 
The fees for the registration certificates required shall be as set forth in the fee schedule and may be amended from time to time by motion or resolution of the council. 
(Code 1999, § 5-102)  
Sec. 5-103. - Term of initial license. 
The initial license or registration issued as provided for herein shall be for a term of one year. 
(Code 1999, § 5-103)  
Sec. 5-104. - Licensee prohibited from engaging in activities beyond scope of license and restrictions. 
No licensee shall engage in regulated activities beyond the scope of the license or registration together with any restrictions placed thereon issued to the licensee. 
(Code 1999, § 5-104)  
ARTICLE B. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 5-111. - Building permits. 
Whenever any building, structure, facility, or other appurtenances, is to be erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, improved, moved or removed, as provided in the city's building code, a building permit shall be obtained from the city. 
(Prior Code, § 5-66; Code 1999, § 5-121)  
Sec. 5-112. - Expiration of permits. 
If the work described in any permit has not begun within 180 days from the date of issuance thereof, the permit shall be cancelled by the building official; and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. A new permit must be obtained and the regular fee shall be collected. 
(Prior Code, § 5-66, in part; Code 1999, § 5-122)  
Sec. 5-113. - Plumbing, electrical, mechanical and other permits. 
Permits for plumbing, electrical or mechanical work, or other permits as required and as defined by this Code, shall be obtained in accordance with the terms of the respective city plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes. 
(Prior Code, § 5-66, in part; Code 1999, § 5-123)  
Sec. 5-114. - Applicability of permit requirements to federal and state agencies. 
The permit requirements of the codes adopted by this part shall be applicable to agencies of the federal government, the state and subdivisions of the state. All fees prescribed for such permits shall be waived in such cases. 
(Code 1999, § 5-124)  
Sec. 5-115. - Schedule of permit and inspection fees. 
Before any permit shall be issued or any inspection shall be made, as required by the city building or technical codes, the recipient of the permit shall pay a fee in accordance with the schedules adopted by the city council by motion or resolution. A copy of the schedules shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. All references to inspection fees in the technical codes adopted by the city are deleted when replaced by a fee in the fee schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 5-68, in part; Code 1999, § 5-125)  
Sec. 5-116. - Prepayment for fees required. 
All plumbers, electricians, and mechanical contractors shall prepay all inspection fees prior to the time the work begins or shall deposit with the city treasurer a sum which shall be retained by the city treasurer, interest free, to be used to pay for inspection fees charged to such licensee for inspections made at the request of such licensee. A minimum opening balance for deposits shall be as established by resolution. No permit shall be issued or no inspection made if the contractor's prepaid account does not have a sufficient balance to cover the cost of the requested inspection. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5-1, 5-2; Code 1999, § 5-126; Ord. No. 99(94), 11-7-1994)  
Sec. 5-117. - Plans, application. 
(a)  The applicant for permits shall file with the building department two complete sets of plans and specifications at the time of application for such permit or as otherwise required by the city. Three complete sets are required for a restaurant. 
(b)  All approved plans shall be stamped with an approval stamp. One set of plans for buildings so approved shall become a part of the file of the city and an approved set of plans shall be kept upon the site of the construction of the building. No plans shall be approved that are not in compliance with the ordinances of the city. 
(c)  All plans and drawings submitted shall be to scale and provide the information on the form required by the city. 
(d)  It is unlawful to erase, alter or modify any plans bearing the approval of the city without the consent of the city. 
(e)  Amendments to applications, plans and detail drawings may be made and the city may approve them provided the applications, plans and detail drawings, when so amended, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the official building codes, and the requirements of the city in relation thereto. 
(f)  Approval of plans shall not relieve the owner or his agent of responsibility in complying with this article and the fact that any such approved plans contain matter contrary to the provisions of this Code shall not be held as a bar to its strict enforcement. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5-55—5-57; Code 1999, § 5-127)  
Sec. 5-118. - Display of permits. 
(a)  Permits issued shall be numbered and a corresponding number shall be given to an identification card which shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the face of the structure to be constructed, altered, enlarged, repaired or removed, at all times during the course of work. The building official is hereby authorized to direct the cessation of all work on property upon which such a numbered identification card evidencing the issuance of a permit is not posted. 
(b)  Failure to cease work in compliance with the directions of the building official is hereby declared to be and constitute an offense punishable as provided in section 1-108 for each day construction is continued in violation of such direction. 
(Prior Code, § 5-68; Code 1999, § 5-128)  
Sec. 5-119. - Revocation. 
If the work in or about any building or structure shall be conducted in violation of the provisions of this Code or the official building code, the permit issued shall be revoked. It is unlawful to continue the work until such violations shall have been corrected to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 5-69; Code 1999, § 5-129)  
Sec. 5-120. - Exceptions from permit requirements. 
Ordinary repairs of buildings or structures, or the plumbing drainage, or piping thereof, the cost of which shall not exceed $500.00, may be made without notice to the city, but such repairs shall not be construed to include the removal of any stone, concrete or brick wall, or any portion thereof; the removal or cutting of any beams or supports, or the removal, change or closing of any stairway, or opening in the exterior wall; the alteration or removal of any house sewer, or drainage system, or soil waste or vent pipe or water or gas service line; or repairs or alterations of light or power wiring. 
(Prior Code, § 5-55, in part; Code 1999, § 5-130)  
ARTICLE C. - OTHER REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 5-131. - Right to enforce and stop construction. 
The building official shall have the right to stop the construction of any building or structure, or the alteration, repair or wrecking of the same, if same is being done in a careless or reckless manner or in violation of the provisions of this part. 
(Prior Code, § 5-29; Code 1999, § 5-141)  
Sec. 5-132. - Cases of urgency. 
Decisions of the building official in cases where failure to carry out his orders would endanger life and property shall be absolute and final. 
(Prior Code, § 5-31; Code 1999, § 5-142)  
Sec. 5-133. - Power to make rulings. 
The building official shall have power to make rulings and pass upon questions relating to the use of materials and methods of construction to make such materials and methods protective of life and property and in conformance with the intent and purpose of this part. 
(Prior Code, § 5-32; Code 1999, § 5-143)  
Sec. 5-134. - Power to call upon police or fire department. 
The building official shall have authority to call upon the police or fire department in enforcing this part. It shall be mandatory upon any member thereof to act in compliance with and perform such duties as the building official may require. 
(Prior Code, § 5-33; Code 1999, § 5-144)  
Sec. 5-135. - Power to enter. 
The building official may enter any building or structure whether completed or in the course of construction for the purpose of making inspections. 
(Prior Code, § 5-34; Code 1999, § 5-145)  
Sec. 5-136. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall engage in any business, trade, or vocation for which a license, permit, certificate, or registration is required by this part, without having a valid license, permit, certificate, or certificate of registration as required, or who shall fail to do anything required by this part or by any code adopted by this part, or who shall otherwise violate any provision of this part or of any code adopted by this part, or who shall violate any lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers provided for in this part, shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-108. 
(Prior Code, § 5-5; Code 1999, § 5-146)  
Sec. 5-137. - Relief in the courts. 
No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this part shall interfere with the right of the city also to apply to the proper courts of the state for a mandamus, an injunction, or other appropriate action against the person violating this part. 
(Prior Code, § 5-6; Code 1999, § 5-147)  
Sec. 5-138. - Effect of violation by corporate officers and agents. 
Violation of any of the terms or provisions of this part by any corporation or association shall subject the officers and agents in charge of the business of such corporation or association to the penalty provided in this part. 
(Prior Code, § 5-7; Code 1999, § 5-148)  
Sec. 5-139. - Conviction to be deemed cause for revocation of licenses, certificates. 
Conviction under the provisions of this part shall be deemed just cause for the revocation of any certificate or license which a person may have or hold under the provisions of this part. 
(Prior Code, § 5-8; Code 1999, § 5-149)  
CHAPTER 2. - BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE A. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 5-201. - Adoption. 
There is hereby adopted that certain code known as the International Building Code 2015, as amended and modified by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, as the building code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, referred to herein as the "building code." Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the building code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. Not less than one copy of this code is on file in the office of the clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 5-201; Ord. No. 533(90), 7-2-1990; Ord. No. 208(97), 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 378(02), 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 536(06), 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 635(08), 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 737(13), 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 856(17), 6-19-2017) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 5-202. - Amendments. 
(a)  The following additions, amendments or deletions are made to the building code adopted herein: 
Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
Section 107.3.4.1. Insert at the end of section: Exception: Plans for additions of less than 500 square feet to existing commercial structures or for any commercial remodel where the structural design of the building is not changed shall not be required to be prepared by a registered professional architect or engineer licensed by the state. 
Section 109.2. Refer: Those certain fees adopted by the city on September 7, 1997, and as they may be amended from time by motion or resolution of the city council. 
Section 113.1. Insert: "Board of Adjustment." 
Delete: "Board of Appeals." 
Insert: at end of second sentence: The appeals procedure shall be as specified in article B, sections 12-123 et seq., of the city's zoning ordinance. 
Section 114.4. Delete entire section and insert: Penalties shall be set forth in section 1-108 of the City Code. 
Section 1106.8. Insert: Accessible parking spaces shall have a painted square blue field and either a yellow or white international symbol of access in the field and shall include a sign mounted within the specifications labeled in the ADA Handbook 2010. 
(b)  Building foundation regulations. In addition to the rules, regulations, and standards set forth in the International Building Code, as adopted herein, the following additional requirements are adopted and made a part of the building code of the city: 
(1)  General. Stress analysis for any structural element considered by the building official to be unsafe shall be submitted for approval. 
(2)  Commercial foundations. The design of foundations for construction other than residential shall be prepared and certified by a professional engineer registered in the state and approved by the city. 
(3)  Concrete slab floors. All concrete slab floors shall meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  All concrete slabs on grade shall be nominal four inches think on a four-inch sand base. 
b.  All concrete shall be minimum 2,500 psi compressive strength. 
c.  It is recommended that all concrete slabs shall be reinforced with 66/.1010 wire mesh. 
d.  All slabs on grade shall be either waterproof concrete or shall have 0.006 inch vapor barrier under slab. 
e.  All concrete floors shall be a minimum of eight inches above finished grade. 
(Code 1999, § 5-202; Ord. No. 533(90), 7-2-1990; Ord. No. 208(97), 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 378(02), 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 536(06), 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 635(08), 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 737(13), 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 856(17), 6-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-203. - Provisions declared to be minimum requirements. 
The provisions of the building code in their interpretation and application shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, and general welfare. Wherever any of the provisions or requirements of the code are inconsistent with the provisions of this Code or state statutes presently existing or enacted in the future, the provisions or requirements containing the most restrictive regulation shall apply and govern. 
(Code 1999, § 5-203)  
Sec. 5-204. - Adoption of the 2015 International Residential Code, as amended and modified by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23. 
(a)  Adoption. There is hereby adopted that certain code known as the International Residential Code 2015, as amended and modified by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, as the one- and two-family dwelling code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, referred to herein as the "residential building code." Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the residential building code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. Not less than one copy of this code is on file in the office of the clerk. 
(b)  Amendments. The following sections of the dwelling code are hereby revised as follows: 
Section 109.5. Prefabricated Construction. Insert: [Modular construction, manufactured housing and any other prefabricated construction is not permitted in any zoning district within the city limits, unless approved by the board of adjustment as provided in section 12-125 of the City Code]. 
Section R401.1.2. Addition: Insert after first sentence: Any foundation approved by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) shall be accepted. 
Section P3005.2.3. Delete and replace with: There shall be two directional cleanouts with a backwater valve in between the two directional cleanouts near the junction of the building drain and building sewer. The two directional cleanouts and backwater valve shall be outside the building wall, provided that it is brought up to finish grade. 
Sections E3401 to E4304. Delete Sections E3401 to E4304 and replace with the 2014 NEC as adopted by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23 and the city. 
Section Addition: 
Part IV Energy Construction. 
Part V Mechanical. 
Part VI Fuel Gas. 
Part VII Plumbing. 
Part VIII Electrical. 
(c)  Adoption of residential wind code. The following additions are hereby included in the residential building code for the purposes of establishing minimum regulations governing residential construction for high wind resistance: 
(1)  Roof sheathing (OSB or plywood) shall be nailed with 8d ring shank (0.131" by 2.5") or 10d (0.148" by 3") nails on four-inch on center along the edges and six-inch on center in the field. Dimensional lumber decking is not allowed. 
(2)  Maximum spacing for roof framing shall be 16 inches on center. Minimum nominal sheathing panel size shall be 7/16 . Minimum wood structural panel span rating shall be 24/16. 
(3)  Connections for roof framing shall be designed for both compression and tension, and may include nail plates or steel connection plates. Connections for roof framing shall include connections on rafters, web members, purlins, kickers, bracing connections, and the connections to interior brace wall top plates or ceiling joists. 
(4)  Gable end walls shall be tied to the structure, and may include steel connection plates or straps. The connections shall be made at the top and bottom of the gable end wall. 
(5)  Structural sheathing panel (OSB or plywood) shall be required for gable end walls. 
(6)  Hurricane clip or framing anchor shall be required on all rafter to wall connections. 
(7)  The upper and lower story wall sheathing shall be nailed to the common rim board. 
(8)  All walls shall be continuously sheathed with structural sheathing (OSB or plywood) using the CS-WSP method. Garage doors shall be framed using the sheathed portal frame method CS-PF. No form of intermittent bracing shall be allowed on an outer wall. Intermittent bracing may only be used for interior braced wall lines. 
(9)  Nailing of wall sheathing (OSB or plywood) shall be increased to 8d ring shank (0.131" by 2.5") or 10d (0.148" by 3") nails on four-inch on center along the edges and six-inch on center in the field. 
(10)  Structural wood sheathing shall be extended to lap the sill plate and nailed to the sill plate using a four-inch on center along the edges. Structural wood sheathing shall be nailed to rim board if present with 8d ring shank (0.131" by 2.5") or 10d (0.148" by 3") nails on four-inch on center along both the top and bottom edges of the rim board. 
(11)  Garage doors shall be rated to 135 mph wind or above. 
(12)  Exterior wall studs shall be 16-inch on center. 
(d)  Building foundation regulations. In addition to the rules, regulations, and standards set forth in the International Residential Code, as adopted herein, the following additional requirements are adopted and made a part of the building code of the city: 
(1)  General. Stress analysis for any structural element considered by the building official to be unsafe shall be submitted for approval. 
(2)  Foundations and footings. All exterior walls shall have footings of the following minimum standards: 
a.  Minimum depths of concrete footings on exterior walls: 18 inches. 
b.  Minimum width for frame walls: ten inches. 
c.  Minimum width for veneer walls: 12 inches. 
d.  All footings shall be 3,000 psi, minimum compressive strength concrete and reinforced with four rows, two up and two down, with No. 5 bar top and bottom. 
e.  All footings shall be poured in a minimum of six inches into undisturbed soil. 
f.  Where pier and grade beam type of foundation is proposed for residential construction, design of grade beam and piers shall be: 
1.  Piers. 
(i)  Diameter: ten inches minimum. 
(ii)  Depth: 24 inches minimum. 
(iii)  Spacing: eight feet on center with one No. 5 bar for full length of pier and extending into beam. 
2.  Grade beam, minimum width. 
(i)  Frame: six inches, except that an eight-inch beam may be flared to be covered by base trim. 
(ii)  Masonry or masonry veneer: eight inches. 
(iii)  Minimum effective depth: 14 inches; however, where grade beam supports wood floor framing the minimum effective depth shall be 18 inches in order to provide required clearance under joints. 
(iv)  Reinforce with two bars at the top and bottom of the beam as follows: frame, four No. 4 bars; and masonry or masonry veneer, four No. 5 bars. Where grade beam is flared at the top, reinforce with one No. 6 bar instead of two No. 4 bars 
(3)  Concrete slab floors. All concrete slab floors shall meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  All concrete slabs on grade shall be nominal four inches think on a four-inch sand base. 
b.  All concrete shall be minim 2,500 psi compressive strength. 
c.  It is recommended that all concrete slabs shall be reinforced with 66/.1010 wire mesh. 
d.  All slabs on grade shall be either waterproof concrete or shall have 0.006 inch vapor barrier under slab. 
e.  All concrete floors shall be a minimum of eight inches above finished grade. 
(Code 1999, § 5-204; Ord. No. 534(90), 7-2-1990; Ord. No. 201(97), 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 209(97), 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 379(02)-A, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 534(06), 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 633(08), 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 724(12), 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 768(14), 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 857(17), 6-19-2017) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 5-205. - Smoke detectors required in apartment dwellings. 
(a)  All apartment structures and buildings shall have not less than one smoke detector installed and maintained in working order in each separate unit or living area within the apartment building. 
(b)  The smoke detectors required by this section shall be approved prior to their installation but shall be powered by the following methods, to wit: 
(1)  For all apartments in existence on March 4, 1982, the smoke detector shall be powered by a battery and shall be tested by the owner of such apartment building every 30 days, and the documentation of such testing shall be kept in the office of the manager of such apartment; and 
(2)  All smoke detectors installed in apartments which receive a building permit after March 4, 1982, shall be powered by the electrical system of such apartment building. 
(c)  All smoke detectors shall be of a type approved by the chief of the fire department, the International Fire Safety Code as adopted by the city or the residential building code as adopted by the city, but must be suitable to warn the occupants of the unit in which such detector is installed of the presence of smoke and the possibility of fire danger. 
(d)  Failure to install or maintain a smoke detector or failure to test a battery-powered smoke detector as required by this section, or to keep a record of such test, shall be unlawful, and, upon conviction thereof, every person, firm, corporation, manager or other person shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-108 for each violation. 
(Prior Code, § 5-4; Code 1999, § 5-205; Ord. No. 857(17), 6-10-2017)  
Sec. 5-206. - Adoption of standard specifications for the construction of water and sewer. 
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being designated as the "City of Moore Standard Specifications for the Construction of Water and Sewer," dated February 1990, as developed and prepared by Wyatt, Doyle and Butler Engineers, Inc., is hereby adopted as the construction code of water and sewer for the city. The specifications set forth the standards and specifications for the construction of water and sewer establish minimum regulations governing the installation of water mains, installation of sewer mains, incidental construction, attendant installation and maintenance of water and sewer mains, and standards for earth work, excavation, disposal of materials, adjustment of existing structures, foundations and bedding, and backfill, all relative to the construction of water and sewer. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the standard specifications are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section. 
(Code 1999, § 5-206; Ord. No. 512(90), 4-2-1990) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 5-207. - Adoption of paving, sidewalk, and driveway specifications. 
A certain document commonly known as "Standard P.C.C. Paving Details, Standard Driveway and Sidewalk Details and Standard A.C. Paving Details," one copy of which is on file in the office of community development director, is hereby adopted as the specifications for same and shall be known as the paving code of the city. Subsequent revisions, modifications, codifications or additions of the paving code shall become effective as available, for the control of paving as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the paving code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section. 
(Code 1999, § 5-207; Ord. No. 513(90), 4-2-1990) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 5-208. - Enforcement. 
The official designated as being responsible for the enforcement of the city's building codes shall be the building official. 
(Code 1999, § 5-208)  
Sec. 5-209. - Liquefied petroleum gas code adopted, penalty. 
(a)  Pamphlet No. 58, Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases, issued by the National Fire Protection Association, the latest edition thereof, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference to govern liquefied petroleum gas. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, fabricate, assemble, install or repair any system, container, apparatus or appliance to be used for the transportation, storage, dispensing or utilization of liquefied petroleum gas, or to transport, handle, or store such gas, unless such person shall comply with all the provisions of state law and this section. 
(c)  All persons, firms, corporations or government entities which own or operate underground flammable or combustible liquid tanks and associated underground piping shall test the tanks and piping for tightness at least once per year. The test shall be witnessed and certified by the fire department. The test shall consist of five pounds per square inch of pressure put on the tank and piping for a period of 30 minutes. Any reduction of tank contents or loss of air pressure experienced during the test shall constitute test failure. The fire department shall then order the tank emptied and associated equipment shut down, until such time as the faulty equipment is repaired or replaced and retested. 
(Prior Code, §§ 9-83, 9-84; Code 1999, § 5-209) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 5-210. - Private water wells prohibited. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to drill a well for the production of water upon property not owned and controlled by the city. It is unlawful and an offense for any person to produce water from any well hereafter drilled in violation of this section. This section shall not apply to any property placed in an agricultural zoning classification under the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 23-26; Code 1999, § 5-210)  
Sec. 5-211. - House, building numbering system. 
(a)  House and business structure numbering shall be east and west from Broadway and north and south from Main. The first block from the dividing line in each case shall be the 100 block, the next the 200 block, the next the 300 block, and so on, each block being numbered in multiples of 100. All lots shall be numbered consecutively from the side of the block nearest the dividing line, starting with one, but in the multiple of 100 corresponding to the block number, alternating with the odd numbers on the north and west side and with the even numbers on the south and east side of all streets and avenues; that is, starting from the dividing line, the first lot on the north or the west side of the street shall be numbered 101, and the one directly across the street shall be numbered 102, and so on through each consecutive block in numerical order. All houses and business structures shall be numbered accordingly. 
(b)  Where the long side of a lot parallels the street or avenue, and in the case of unplatted areas, each 25 feet of length shall be considered as a lot for numbering purposes. 
(c)  The areas adjoining the right-of-way of the Oklahoma Railway Company on the west, on both the north and south sides of Main Street, shall be treated as blocks and the same method of numbering such blocks and lots therein shall be followed. 
(Prior Code, § 20-93; Code 1999, § 5-211)  
Sec. 5-212. - Building standards for construction of residential dwellings within tornado damage area. 
(a)  Tornado damage area defined. For purposes of this section, the area of tornado damage resulting from any tornado that is declared a federal disaster shall be specifically referred to as the "tornado damage area." 
(b)  No person or other entity shall commence the construction of any building or structure to be used as a residential dwelling within the tornado damage area without obtaining a permit, and in order to be eligible to receive said permit, all planned construction shall conform to the applicable provisions of the building code adopted in this article, all other applicable provisions of the city, and in addition thereto, all planned construction within the tornado damage area shall specifically conform to the following basic standards: 
(1)  Each planned residential dwelling structure shall have a minimum of 50 percent coverage of brick or stone. For the May 20, 2013, Tornado, the Foxglove Addition, Section 1 and 2, shall not have a minimum bricking requirement; 
(2)  Each planned residential dwelling structure shall have the minimum square footage as plat restrictions indicate. Where the plat restrictions do not indicate a minimum square footage requirement, each planned residential dwelling structure shall have a minimum of 1,000 square feet, excluding garage; and 
(3)  Each planned residential dwelling structure is required to have an attached garage. 
(c)  In order to determine said conformity, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the city may require the submission of detailed plans and specifications covering the proposed construction of buildings and residential dwellings within the tornado damage area, and shall refuse to issue such permit unless the work so planned is in accordance with the applicable provisions of the city, including the building code and this section. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as repealing any ordinance or the authority to enact and enforce any ordinance of the city requiring the submission to the city of plans and specifications and the obtaining of permits, nor will anything herein in any way impair the power of the city to regulate the use of land by zoning, building codes or restricted fire district regulations or otherwise. 
(e)  Penalty. Unless otherwise provide herein, any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, excluding costs. Every day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to the full penalty contained herein. 
(Code 1999, § 5-212; Ord. No. 262(99), 8-16-1999; Ord. No. 751(13), 7-1-2013)  
ARTICLE B. - MOVING AND RELOCATING BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 5-221. - Permit required to move building. 
No person shall move any building or structure along or across any street, alley or roadway within the city without a permit therefor from the building official issued in accordance with the provisions of the applicable building codes and this article. No such permit shall be granted to any person except a bonded house mover. Proof of possession of a valid and current state license, and the number assigned by the state corporation commission, shall be provided to the building official prior to issuance of a permit. 
(Prior Code, § 5-331; Code 1999, § 5-221)  
Sec. 5-222. - Permit fees. 
Before any permit to move a building or structure is granted under the provisions of this section, the applicant for such permit shall pay a fee as provided in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 5-222)  
Sec. 5-223. - Application and bond required. 
Before any person shall be granted a permit for the moving of any building or structure as provided in this article, he shall file with the city an application and a bond. The application shall show the place from where the building is to be moved, the location where it is to be moved, giving the size thereof and other information required by the city. The bond, in the sum as set in the city's bond schedule which shall run in favor of the city and any private person sustaining damages under the conditions thereof, shall be entitled to sue thereon in his own name. The bond shall be conditioned, among other things, that if such permittee is granted the permit he shall promptly pay all damages and for all injuries that may accrue to any person or property, either public or private, within the city when such injury or damages are inflicted by the permittee or his agents, servants, employees, workers, contractors or subcontractors, and such bond shall be conditioned also that the permittee will save, indemnify and protect the city from all liability which may arise, either directly or indirectly, from the moving of any building or structure by the permittee, his agents, servants, employees, workers, contractors or subcontractors, and that the permittee will in all respects comply with the ordinances of the city in regard to the moving of buildings or structures and to the use or obstruction of the streets and other public places of the city. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5-332, 5-334; Code 1999, § 5-223)  
Sec. 5-224. - Issuance or denial of permit. 
(a)  At the time an application and bond is filed, the city clerk may issue a permit for moving the building along the route described if in his judgment the building can be moved without damage to the property owners along the route and without damage to city streets. If the city clerk determines that the building cannot be moved without damage to property or streets, or for other noncompliance with this article or applicable law, then he shall endorse on the application "REFUSED." 
(b)  Once a moving permit is granted, if the move is not completed within six months after issuance of the permit, the permit shall be revoked and a new permit must be applied for. 
(c)  If any mover, his servants, agents or employees, shall, while acting within the scope of this article, damage or destroy any public or private property and fail or refuse to repair, renew or pay for the same, or shall fail or refuse to pay for the expense of the raising, cutting or repair of any electric wire or cable or the removal and replacement of any pole bearing the same as required by the terms of this article, a written claim containing a statement of such damages or expense may be filed with the building official who shall investigate the same. If the building official finds the same to be just and reasonable, no further permits within the scope of this article shall be issued to such mover until the claim is satisfied. Denial of such permit may be appealed to the board of adjustment by filing a notice of appeal with the building official and city clerk within ten days of the day of denial. 
(Code 1999, § 5-224)  
Sec. 5-225. - Interference with trees and fixtures. 
No tree on any street shall be removed or the branches of any tree be cut or trimmed in order to facilitate the moving of any building, except with the consent and under the supervision of the city. No fixture on any street or alley shall be removed, displaced or otherwise interfered with to facilitate the moving of any building, except with the consent and under the supervision of the building official. 
(Code 1999, § 5-225)  
Sec. 5-226. - Interference with poles and wires. 
Whenever for the purpose of facilitating the moving of any building or structure it is necessary to raise or cut any telephone or telegraph wire or cable or any electric wire, or move any pole bearing any such wire or cable, it is the duty of the mover having charge of the moving of such building or structure to give the person owning or operating the poles, wires or cables at least 24 hours' notice of the time and place when and where the removal of such poles or the raising or cutting of such wires or cables will be necessary. After the service of the 24-hour notice, it is the duty of the person owning or operating the poles, wires or cables to furnish competent workers or linemen to remove such poles or raise or cut such wires or cables. The regular wages of the workers or linemen while engaged at such work shall be paid by such movers. No mover shall raise, cut or move any such pole, wire or cable unless the persons or authorities owning or having control of the same fail or refuse to do so after such notice. Only competent workers or linemen shall be employed in such work, and the same shall be done in a careful and workmanlike manner, and the poles, wires and cables promptly replaced and damages thereto promptly repaired at the expense of such mover. 
(Code 1999, § 5-226)  
Sec. 5-227. - Safety precautions and protection of property. 
No building or structure shall be allowed to remain at a standstill in any public street or other public place for a period longer than 24 hours without the consent in writing of the building official. When any building or structure is left in any street at night, two or more approved warning lights or signals shall be conspicuously posted at each end of such building or structure so as to give warning in both directions of the street. All other obstructions left in the street shall be safeguarded by similar lights or signals. All such lights and signals shall be in good working order when posted, and shall be securely placed in position. No such building or structure or other obstruction shall be left standing at night in any street intersection. The chief of the fire department and chief of police shall be notified of the location of any such building or structure left standing in the street at night. When necessary to protect pavement or sidewalk, plank of sufficient size and thickness to prevent injury to such pavement or sidewalk shall be laid for the wheels of the moving trucks to travel on. The building official shall have the power to require the use of other precautionary measures than those specifically mentioned in this article when necessary or proper to protect life, limb or property. 
(Prior Code, § 5-335, in part; Code 1999, § 5-227)  
Sec. 5-228. - Time limit. 
At the time of application for a moving permit, it is the duty of the mover of the building or structure to estimate the reasonable time required for the moving of the building from its present location to its proposed location. He shall state in his application for a permit what the applicant deems to be such reasonable time. The route and time allowed for the moving of the building shall be determined and fixed by the city manager. The permit shall especially provide that the building shall be, from the time any part of the street is used for the moving of same, cleared from any and all of the streets of the city within a specified number of days specified therein, Sundays and holidays excepted. The mover shall bind himself to pay the sum as set by the city per day for each and every day all or any part of the building or structure remains on the street in excess of the number of days allowed in the permit, and his cash deposit shall, in addition to his bond, be secondarily liable for the payment of the amount. Nothing but an act of God shall be a defense against the payment of these sums. The provisions of this section shall not prevent the city from revoking a permit in compliance with section 5-224 after a period of six months has elapsed from the date of issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1999, § 5-228)  
Sec. 5-229. - Relocation of used residential buildings. 
No residential dwelling building or structure shall be relocated in any zoning district within the city. 
(Code 1999, § 5-229; Ord. No. 175(96), 12-2-1996)  
ARTICLE C. - SIGN CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 5-241. - Regulations established. 
There are hereby established regulations pertaining to the construction of signs, licensing of sign contractors, and establishment of a fee schedule for sign permits. 
(Prior Code, § 5-371; Code 1999, § 5-241)  
Sec. 5-242. - License required, fee, term. 
No person except a licensed sign contractor shall engage in the business of manufacturing, installing, erecting, repairing, painting, altering, servicing, or removing signs requiring permits as provided in this Code. A sign contractor's license may be obtained from the office of the city clerk upon presentation of satisfactory evidence of qualifications for the building official and payment of a fee as set by the city. Such license shall expire annually. No reduction in fee for a partial year shall be made. Employees of duly licensed sign contractors shall not be required in the regular course of such employment to obtain such license or pay such fee in order to engage in the work of manufacturing, installing, erecting, repairing, painting, altering, servicing or removing signs in the regular course of such employment. 
(Prior Code, § 5-372; Code 1999, § 5-242)  
Sec. 5-243. - Transfer. 
It is unlawful for any person holding a license to transfer same or allow the use of same, directly or indirectly, by any other person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any of the sign work herein specified. 
(Prior Code, § 5-373; Code 1999, § 5-243)  
Sec. 5-244. - Suspension. 
The city shall have the right to suspend for a maximum period of 90 days the license of any sign contractor for a violation of any of the city ordinances relating to signs. 
(Prior Code, § 5-374; Code 1999, § 5-244)  
Sec. 5-245. - Revocation. 
The city shall have the right to revoke the license of any sign contractor for a violation of any of the city ordinances relating to signs. 
(Prior Code, § 5-375; Code 1999, § 5-245)  
Sec. 5-246. - Sign contractor's bond prerequisite to issuance. 
No sign contractor's license shall be issued to any applicant until the applicant therefor shall have deposited with the city clerk a surety bond in the sum as set by the city, to be known as the sign contractor's bond. The bond shall be executed by the sign contractor and the surety thereon shall be a corporate surety company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall be payable to the city, and as a condition shall state that the licensee will faithfully and properly conduct his business in compliance with all the ordinances of the city relating to signs and sign contractors. The bond shall provide for the payment of all fines and penalties imposed for the violation of such laws, and for the protection and indemnification of the city against all damages resulting directly or indirectly from any injury to persons or property on account of negligence or unskilled work of the licensee. 
(Prior Code, § 5-376; Code 1999, § 5-246)  
Sec. 5-247. - Inspection. 
The building official shall inspect at such times as he deems necessary each sign regulated by this article. 
(Prior Code, § 5-377; Code 1999, § 5-247)  
Sec. 5-248. - Designating sign. 
Each sign erected by a sign contractor shall have a sign designating who the sign contractor was who installed the sign, placed in a conspicuous location. Such sign shall be a size of no less than two inches in height and eight inches in width and shall be attached to the sign. 
(Prior Code, § 5-378; Code 1999, § 5-248)  
ARTICLE D. - AWNINGS, CARPORTS AND PATIO COVERS 
 
Sec. 5-251. - Definition. 
Awnings, carports, and patio covers, individually or in combinations, as used herein, are defined as any structure, whether attached to an existing structure or freestanding, which is constructed for the purpose of providing a roof type cover only, for shelter from the sun, rain, snow, sleet or hail. 
(Prior Code, § 5-316; Code 1999, § 5-251)  
Sec. 5-252. - Construction restrictions. 
Awnings, carports and patio covers which extend beyond the front building line, toward the street, or beyond the side building line on side streets, may be constructed if they meet the following requirements: 
(1)  They are not to exceed more than 20 feet beyond the front building line, but in no instance beyond the front property line of interior lots; 
(2)  They are not to extend more than 20 feet beyond the side building line, but in no case beyond the side property line of corner lots; 
(3)  They must not be, at any point on the structure, closer than five feet to an adjacent property line; except, those houses that have a one car garage as of November 2, 1995, may erect a carport within one foot of the side property line, provided the structure may not divert any stormwater to the adjacent property; 
(4)  Construction details must conform to the following: 
a.  The structure must be designed to support a load of 20 pounds per square foot in addition to the weight of the structure; 
b.  Awnings, carports and patio covers which are attached to an existing structure shall be attached with one-quarter inch or larger lag screws in a substantial manner and shall be anchored to each wall stud or to a masonry wall. One side of attached awnings, carports or patio cover structures shall be supported by 1½-inch diameter by 14 gauge steel columns, or columns of equivalent strength, set in concrete footings not less than 12 inches deep nor less than 12 inches in diameter; 
c.  Freestanding carports or patio covers shall be supported by 2½-inch diameter by 14 gauge steel columns or columns of equivalent strength, set in concrete footings not less than 24 inches deep nor less than 12 inches in diameter; 
d.  All concrete in footings shall be 2,000 pounds per square inch quality; 
e.  Roof slope shall be at least 3/16 -inch per foot; and 
f.  All bolts and screws used in the structure shall be cadmium plated or equal. 
(Prior Code, § 5-317; Code 1999, § 5-252; Ord. No. 131(95), 11-2-1995)  
Sec. 5-253. - Permits and fees. 
(a)  A permit must be obtained from the city clerk upon written application showing compliance with this article and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Such application shall contain the address of the applicant along with a detailed drawing showing the desired specification of the proposed awning, carport or patio cover and showing on such drawing compliance with this article in all particulars. The application will be on forms prepared by the city clerk and shall contain such other information as is deemed necessary by him. 
(c)  No permit will be issued until the permit fee is paid to the city clerk. It shall be an offense to construct an awning, carport or patio cover without having first secured a permit as provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 5-318; Code 1999, § 5-253)  
ARTICLE E. - FENCES 
 
Sec. 5-261. - Short title. 
This article shall hereafter be known and cited as the "fence regulations" of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-131; Code 1999, § 5-261)  
Sec. 5-262. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place or affix in any manner all fences as defined in this section. 
Fence means and includes every fence that is permanently attached to the ground, including chainlink fences, redwood fences, masonry fences, wood fences, but not limited thereto, and not including fences in agricultural zones within the limits of the city. 
Fence contractor means any person engaged in the business of constructing, installing, erecting, repairing or servicing fences as defined in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 6-132; Code 1999, § 5-262)  
Sec. 5-263. - Application. 
Before a fence contractor shall be licensed to install any fence or make alterations or additions to existing fences, he shall file with the building official an application in writing for a license to do such work. Such application shall be filed with the building official of the city and information furnished thereon shall include: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Address of the applicant; 
(3)  Number of years' experience in the fence business; 
(4)  Employment of the applicant over the last ten years; 
(5)  A record of any convictions of such applicant on any felony criminal charge; 
(6)  Three references; and 
(7)  Any other items deemed desirable by the building official. 
(Prior Code, § 6-135; Code 1999, § 5-263)  
Sec. 5-264. - Bond prerequisite to issuance. 
No fence contractor's license shall be issued to any applicant until the applicant therefor shall have deposited with the city clerk a surety bond in the sum set by the city to be known as the fence contractor's bond. Such bond shall be executed by the fence contractor and the surety thereon shall be a corporate surety company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall be payable to the city, and as a condition shall state that the licensee shall faithfully and properly conduct his business in compliance with all ordinances of the city relating to fences and fence contractors and for the payment of all fines and penalties imposed for the violation of such laws, and for the protection and indemnification of the city against all damages resulting directly or indirectly from any injury to persons or property on account of negligence or unskilled work of the licensee. 
(Prior Code, § 6-136; Code 1999, § 5-264)  
Sec. 5-265. - Transfer. 
It is unlawful for any person holding a fence contractor's license to transfer the same or allow the use of same, directly or indirectly, by any other person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any of the fence work herein specified. 
(Prior Code, § 6-138; Code 1999, § 5-265)  
Sec. 5-266. - Suspension. 
The building official shall have the right to suspend for a maximum period of 90 days the license of any fence contractor for violating any of the city ordinances relating to fences. 
(Prior Code, § 6-139; Code 1999, § 5-266)  
Sec. 5-267. - Revocation. 
The city shall have the right to revoke the license of any fence contractor for a violation of any of the city ordinances relating to fences. 
(Prior Code, § 6-140; Code 1999, § 5-267)  
Sec. 5-268. - Expiration; renewal. 
(a)  A fence contractor's license shall expire annually. No reduction in fee for a partial year shall be made. 
(b)  Any person who holds a license in his name may renew the license upon the payment of the fee to the city treasurer within 30 days after expiration thereof, unless such license has been revoked prior to expiration by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-141; Code 1999, § 5-268)  
Sec. 5-269. - Permits required. 
It is unlawful for any person acting as a fence contractor or such contractor's employee to construct, erect, install, alter, or locate within the city any fence as defined in this article without the contractor's obtaining a permit from the building department of the city and paying the fee required by this article. Employees of a contractor shall not be required to obtain a permit if the fence contractor has obtained a permit for the erection of such fence. No permit shall be required in agricultural zones. 
(Prior Code, § 6-142; Code 1999, § 5-269)  
Sec. 5-270. - Application. 
Application for fence erection permits shall be made upon blanks provided by the building official and shall contain or have attached the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Location of lot upon which the fence is to be constructed; 
(3)  The name of the person erecting such fence; and 
(4)  Such other information as the building official shall require to show full compliance with this article and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-143; Code 1999, § 5-270)  
Sec. 5-271. - Issuance. 
It is the duty of the building official upon the filing of an application for a fence erection permit, if it is in order and in compliance with all the regulations of this article and other laws and ordinances of the city, to issue the erection permit. If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed prior to 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(Prior Code, § 6-144; Code 1999, § 5-271)  
Sec. 5-272. - Fees. 
Every applicant, before being granted a fence erection permit under this article shall pay to the city clerk the permit fee for each fence. 
(Prior Code, § 6-145; Code 1999, § 5-272)  
Sec. 5-273. - Revocation. 
The building official is hereby empowered and authorized to revoke any fence erection permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with any provision of any city ordinance relating to fences. 
(Prior Code, § 6-146; Code 1999, § 5-273)  
Sec. 5-274. - Inspection. 
The building official shall inspect at such times as he deems necessary each fence regulated by this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6-147; Code 1999, § 5-274)  
Sec. 5-275. - Zoning restrictions. 
(a)  Each fence shall be defined as a structure and shall come under the regulations of any structure in the zoning ordinances. 
(b)  Special variances from the zoning ordinances relative to fences may be granted in the case of hardship upon application to the building official for a special variance. Before granting such variance, the building official shall have a favorable recommendation from the traffic and fire departments, and a fee will be required to investigate such hardships. 
(Prior Code,§ 6-148; Code 1999, § 5-275)  
Sec. 5-276. - Designating sign. 
Each fence erected by a fence contractor shall have a sign designating who the fence contractor was who installed the fence, placed in a conspicuous location on the street side of the fence. Such sign shall be a size of no less than two inches in height and eight inches in width and shall be attached to the fence. 
(Prior Code, § 6-149; Code 1999, § 5-276)  
ARTICLE F. - SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Sec. 5-281. - Short title. 
This article shall hereafter be known and cited as the "swimming pool regulations" of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 5-281; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-282. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Install means to build, construct, or erect in any manner all swimming pools as defined in this section. 
Swimming pool means and includes every swimming pool that is permanently installed in the ground or on the ground including in-ground pools and above-ground pools requiring professional installation, but not limited thereto. 
Swimming pool contractor means any person engaged in the business of constructing, installing, repairing or servicing swimming pools as defined in this section. 
(Code 1999, § 5-282; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-283. - Application for license. 
Before a swimming pool contractor shall be licensed to install any swimming pool or make alternations or additions to existing swimming pools, he shall file with the building official an application in writing for a license to do such work. A license fee shall be applicable as set forth in the city's schedule of fees. Such application shall be filed with the building official of the city and information furnished thereon shall include: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Address of the applicant; 
(3)  Number of years' experience in the swimming pool business; 
(4)  Employment of the applicant over the last ten years; 
(5)  A record of any convictions of such applicant on any felony criminal charge; 
(6)  Three references; and 
(7)  Any other items deemed desirable by the building official. 
(Code 1999, § 5-283; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-284. - Bond prerequisite to issuance. 
No swimming pool contractor's license shall be issued to any applicant until the applicant therefor shall have deposited with the city clerk a surety bond in the sum set by the city to be known as the swimming pool contractor's bond. Such bond shall be executed by the swimming pool contractor and the surety thereon shall be a corporate surety company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall be payable to the city, and as a condition shall state that the licensee shall faithfully and properly conduct his business in compliance with all ordinances of the city relating to swimming pools and swimming pool contractors and for the payment of all fines and penalties imposed for the violation of such laws, and for the protection and indemnification of the city against all damages resulting directly or indirectly from any injury to persons or property on account of negligence or unskilled work of the licensee. 
(Code 1999, § 5-284; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-285. - Transfer. 
It is unlawful for any person holding a swimming pool contractor's license to transfer the same or allow the use of same, directly or indirectly, by any other person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any of the swimming pool work herein specified. 
(Code 1999, § 5-285; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-286. - Suspension. 
The building official shall have the right to suspended for a maximum period of one year the license of any swimming pool contractor for violating any of the city ordinances relating to swimming pools. 
(Code 1999, § 5-286; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-287. - Revocation of license. 
The city shall have the right to revoke the license of any swimming pool contractor for a violation of any of the city ordinances relating to swimming pools. 
(Code 1999, § 5-287; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-288. - Expiration; renewal. 
(a)  A swimming pool contractor's license shall expire annually. No reduction in fee for a partial year shall be made. 
(b)  Any person who holds a license in his name may renew the license upon the payment of the fee to the city treasurer within 30 days after expiration thereof, unless such license has been revoked prior to expiration by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 5-288; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-289. - Permits required. 
It is unlawful for any person acting as a swimming pool contractor or such contractor's employee to construct, install, alter, or locate within the city any swimming pool as defined in this article without the contractor's obtaining a permit from the building department of the city and paying the fee required by this article. Swimming pool contractors shall be required to pull the necessary building permits, and no such permit shall be issued to a homeowner. 
(Code 1999, § 5-289; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-290. - Application for permit. 
Application for swimming pool erection permits shall be made upon blanks provided by the building official and shall contain or have attached the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Location of lot upon which the swimming pool is to be constructed; 
(3)  The name of the person erecting such swimming pool; and 
(4)  Such other information as the building official shall require to show full compliance with this article and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 5-290; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-291. - Issuance. 
It is the duty of the building official upon the filing of an application for a swimming pool erection permit, if it is in order and in compliance with all the regulations of this article and other laws and ordinances of the city, to issue the erection permit. If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed prior to 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(Code 1999, § 5-291; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-292. - Fees. 
Every applicant, before being granted a swimming pool erection permit under this article, shall pay to the city clerk the permit fee for each swimming pool. 
(Code 1999, § 5-292; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-293. - Revocation of permit. 
The building official is hereby empowered and authorized to revoke any swimming pool erection permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with any provision of any city ordinance relating to swimming pools. 
(Code 1999, § 5-293; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-294. - Inspection. 
The building official shall inspect at such times as he deems necessary each swimming pool regulated by this article. 
(Code 1999, § 5-294; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-295. - Zoning restrictions and requirements. 
(a)  Each swimming pool shall be defined as a structure and shall come under the regulations of any structure in the zoning ordinances. 
(b)  Each swimming pool falling under this article shall be required at the time of installation a hookup to the sanitary sewer system for draining and backwashing. 
(c)  When a swimming pool is removed from the premises, any holes or indentations in the ground shall be leveled so as to prevent water collection or any other public health nuisance or hazard as defined by this Code. 
(d)  All pools, regardless of in-ground or above-ground, shall be completely enclosed by a fence of at least four feet in height. Openings in the fence shall be less than four inches in width. The fence shall have self-closing and self-latching gates. 
(e)  Special variances from the zoning ordinances relative to swimming pools may be granted in the case of hardship upon application to the board of adjustment and approval of such board. 
(Code 1999, § 5-295; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-296. - Designating sign. 
Each swimming pool erected by a swimming pool contractor shall have a sign designating who the swimming pool contractor was who installed the swimming pool, placed in a conspicuous location on the street side of the swimming pool. Such sign shall be a size of no less than two inches in height and eight inches in width and shall be attached to the swimming pool. 
(Code 1999, § 5-296; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
Sec. 5-297. - Penalties. 
It shall be deemed an offense for any swimming pool contractor to engage in the business of constructing, installing, repairing or servicing swimming pools as defined in this section without a valid license from the city. Each offense is punishable by a written citation. 
(Code 1999, § 5-297; Ord. No. 589(07), 7-16-2007)  
CHAPTER 3. - PLUMBING CODE AND REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— The Plumbing License Law of 1955, 59 O.S. § 1001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 5-301. - Adoption of the 2015 International Plumbing Code, as amended and modified by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23. 
Pursuant to section 2-15 of the Charter, the council may by ordinance adopt, by reference, codes which shall be considered to have the same effect as if set out in full in this Code. Pursuant to this authority, the council hereby ordains that a certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "The International Plumbing Code 2015," as amended and modified by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the city; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, referred to herein as the "plumbing code." Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International Plumbing Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code, with the additions, insertions, and changes, if any, as prescribed and set out herein. 
(Code 1999, § 5-301; Ord. No. 494(89), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 374(02), 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 538(06), 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 637(08), 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 739(13), 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 862(17), 6-19-2017) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 5-302. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
The following sections of the plumbing code are hereby revised, deleted, or amended as set out below. Items in brackets [ ] are phrases that shall be deemed inserted into the appropriation section of the plumbing code: 
(1)  Section 101.1, insert: [City of Moore]. 
(2)  Section 106.6.2, Insert: [As provided in the city's fee schedule]. 
(3)  Section 108.4 Violation Penalties, delete existing language in this section and replace with the following: 
[Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall install plumbing work in violation of an approved plan of lawful directive of this code, shall be guilty of a municipal offense, punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed ten days, or both such fine and imprisonment]. 
(4)  Section 109.2.1 Qualifications, delete existing language in this section and replace with the following: 
[This board shall be composed of two members who shall be plumbing contractors licensed with the city and two members who shall be journeyman plumbers licensed with the city; the building official shall serve as ex officio member]. 
(5)  Section 301.8 is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
[A public water main or public sewer system shall be considered available to a building when the building is located within 200 feet of the public water or sewer]. 
(6)  Section 305.4, delete last sentence and insert: 
[Water service piping shall be installed below record frost penetration but not less than two feet below grade]. 
(7)  Insert section 703.7 to read as follows: 
[Building Sewer Sizing: Building sewer shall not be smaller than three inches in diameter. All tapping saddles shall be plastic saddle tees with one strap on each side of tee, completely secured around main line. Building sewer pipe shall be for six-inch or smaller PVC SCH-40 and for six-inch and larger either PVC SCH-40 or Heavy Duty SDR-35. 
(8)  Section 705.2.1, insert last sentence to read as follows: 
[Any elastomeric joint on an underground sewer shall be fully banded]. 
(Code 1999, § 5-302; Ord. No. 494(89), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 374(02), 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 538(06), 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 579(07), 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 637(08), 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 739(13), 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 862(17), 6-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-303. - Administration. 
The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the plumbing official who shall be the building official, or his designee, unless another official is appointed. 
(Code 1999, § 5-303)  
Sec. 5-304. - Dangerous and insanitary construction. 
(a)  Any portion of a plumbing system found by the plumbing official to be insanitary as defined herein is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Whenever brought to the attention of the city that any insanitary conditions exist or that any construction or work regulated by this Code is dangerous, unsafe, insanitary, a nuisance or a menace to life, health or property or otherwise in violation of this Code, city personnel may request an investigation by the plumbing official who, upon determining such information to be fact, shall order any person using or maintaining any such condition or responsible for the use or maintenance thereof to discontinue the use or maintenance thereof or to repair, alter, remove or demolish same as he may consider necessary for the proper protection of life, health or property, and in the case of any gas piping or gas appliance may order any person applying gas to such piping or appliance to discontinue supplying gas thereto until such piping or appliance is made safe to life, health or property. Every such order shall be in writing, addressed to the owner, agent or person responsible for the premises in which such condition exists and shall specify the date or time for compliance with such order. 
(c)  Refusal, failure or neglect to comply with any such notice or order shall be considered a violation of this Code. 
(d)  When any plumbing system is maintained in violation of this Code and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section or where a nuisance exists in any building or on a lot on which a building is situated, the plumbing official shall institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation or nuisance. 
(Code 1999, § 5-304)  
Sec. 5-305. - Backwater valves; when required; specifications. 
There shall be two directional cleanouts with a backwater valve in between the two directional cleanouts near the junction of the building drain and building sewer. The two directional cleanouts and backwater valve shall be outside the building wall, provided that it is brought up to finish grade. Backwater valves shall be subject to the following specifications: 
(1)  The installation of backwater devices shall be in accordance with lawful requirements of the administrative authority; 
(2)  Backwater valves shall be installed in the building drain branch which receives only the discharge from fixtures connected to branches which are located below ground level; 
(3)  Backwater valves shall have all bearing parts of corrosion-resistant material; 
(4)  Backwater valves shall be installed so their working parts will be readily accessible for service and repairs; and 
(5)  Backwater valves shall be constructed so a mechanical seal against backflow will be provided. 
(Code 1999, § 5-305; Ord. No. 868(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-306. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-108 or by revocation of the plumber's license, or by both fine and revocation of the plumber's license. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as herein provided. 
(b)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for or an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorized is lawful. 
(Code 1999, § 5-306)  
ARTICLE B. - PLUMBERS' REGISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— The Plumbing License Law of 1955, 59 O.S. § 1001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-311. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apprentice or plumber's apprentice means any person 16 years of age or over who is engaged in learning and assisting in the installation of plumbing under the direct supervision of a licensed journeyman plumber or plumbing contractor. 
Journeyman plumber means any person who performs the manual work of installing plumbing under the direction of a master plumber or plumbing contractor. This definition may be construed to mean any person who has qualified and is licensed under The Oklahoma State Plumbing Licensing Law of 1955 (59 O.S. § 1001 et seq.) to act as a journeyman plumber according to the requirements of such Law. 
Plumbing contractor means any person skilled in the planning, superintending and practical installation of plumbing and is familiar with the laws, rules and regulations governing the same. This definition may be construed to mean any person who has qualified and is licensed under the Oklahoma State Plumbing Licensing Law, who may operate as an individual, a firm, partnership or corporation to engage in the business of plumbing, or the business of contracting to do, or furnish labor or labor and materials for the installation, repair, maintenance or renovation of plumbing, according to the requirements of the Oklahoma State Plumbing Licensing Law of 1955 (59 O.S. § 1001 et seq.) 
(Code 1999, § 5-311)  
Sec. 5-312. - Contractors to be registered. 
No person shall operate a place of business or engage in the business of contracting to do plumbing or the installation of plumbing fixtures or any sanitary equipment or installation of lawn sprinklers or making connections with a water sewer main until he has complied with the requirements of this article and has been registered and bonded as a plumbing contractor. The certificate of registration shall be issued only to individuals who have furnished satisfactory evidence of compliance with the laws of the state, and satisfactory evidence of responsibility and skill as provided by this article. The registration shall show thereon the individual's business address and his business connections. 
(Code 1999, § 5-312; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 863(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-313. - Contractor's registration not transferable. 
A plumbing contractor's registration shall not be transferred, loaned or assigned. 
(Code 1999, § 5-313; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 5-314. - Amendment of contractor's registration. 
In the event the person holding a certificate of registration, or license, as a plumbing contractor changes his business address or his business connection, association or employment, he shall, within five days thereafter, notify the plumbing inspector of such change and present his certificate of registration to the plumbing inspector for amendment. The plumbing inspector shall thereupon write in the certificate of registration the new address or business connection, or both, together with the date of the change thereof and note the changes in the records of his office. 
(Code 1999, § 5-314; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 5-315. - Employment of contractor. 
No person other than a plumbing contractor shall hire, engage, or employ any person to do any plumbing within the city, or work that connects with a city water or sewer main outside the city, who is not a licensed and registered plumbing contractor under the terms of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 5-315; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 863(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-316. - Contractor's place of business, telephone, sign. 
Every person engaged in the business of, and operating as, a plumbing contractor within the city shall maintain a regular place of business, a telephone listed with the telephone company as a business phone and display a sign bearing the firm's name and registration number. 
(Code 1999, § 5-316; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 5-317. - Display of contractor's sign and registration number. 
It shall be the duty of every plumbing contractor to display his sign and state license on all cars and trucks used in the operation of his business. The signs and state license numbers on all cars and trucks used in the operation of his business shall be printed on both sides of the vehicles with letters and figures of not less than two-inch lettering and numbers. 
(Code 1999, § 5-317; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 863(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-318. - Contractors employing unqualified workmen. 
It is hereby declared unlawful and an offense for any plumbing contractor to employ any person to work at the trade of plumbing unless the person employed is licensed and registered under the ordinances of the city, except such work as may be done by apprentices holding permits to work as such as provided by this article. 
(Code 1999, § 5-318; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 5-319. - Partnerships, firms and corporations in plumbing business. 
A partnership, firm, corporation or business trust may only engage in the plumbing business within the city through one bona fide member of the partnership, firm or business trust, or one officer of the corporation, who carries and holds a license and certificate of registration as a plumbing contractor and who is bonded as such. In the event the person or member holding the license or certificate of registration should leave the employment of, or be discharged by, or sever his connections with, or lose his status as a member or officer of the partnership, firm, corporation or business trust which is operating under his license and certificate of registration and through him, the authority of the firm, corporation or business trust to do business shall immediately cease and they or it must qualify under and comply with the terms of this article before any further business is conducted, except that the partnership, firm, corporation, or business trust may continue to engage in the plumbing business within the city for a period of 60 days from the time the license-carrying and registered member thereof is called for and is actually engaged in military service or training for any branch of the armed services of the United States of America, provided the fees and bonds required by this article are kept in full force and effect. 
(Code 1999, § 5-319; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 863(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-320. - Issuance of contractor's registration, expiration, renewal, fees. 
An applicant for a plumbing contractor's certificate of registration, after complying with the laws of the state and with this article, and after payment of the fee hereinafter specified, shall be registered by the city clerk. The initial registration fee shall be as established by resolution and each annual renewal fee shall be as established by resolution. Plumbing contractors desiring to renew their registration shall furnish the same evidence of compliance with state licensing laws as furnished and required upon initial registration. 
(Code 1999, § 5-320; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 863(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-321. - Failure to renew contractor's registration. 
All plumbing contractor registrations not renewed within 30 days after the date of expiration thereof shall be canceled and a new application for registration must be made and the fee for a new registration paid. 
(Code 1999, § 5-321; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 5-322. - Time for contractor registration, partial year registration expiration date. 
A plumbing contractor's registration may be applied for and secured at any time during the year, but in no event shall the fee paid for the registration be less than for a full year. All registrations shall expire on August 31 of each calendar year. 
(Code 1999, § 5-322; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 5-323. - Contractor's registration revocation, suspension. 
For good and sufficient cause the plumbing inspector and the health officer may revoke the certificate of registration of any plumbing contractor and thereafter he shall not be permitted to do business or work within the city or on premises connected with the city water or sewer system. In the event of such revocation, the holder of such registration may appeal to the plumbing board and the action of the board shall be final. 
(Code 1999, § 5-323; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 5-324. - Journeymen to be licensed, registered. 
No person shall engage in or work at the trade of journeyman plumber in the city without having first been licensed as provided by state law. 
(Code 1999, § 5-324; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 863(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-325. - Supervision of journeymen. 
A journeyman plumber shall at all times while working at his trade be in the employment of a plumbing contractor who is licensed and registered under the terms of this article as a plumbing contractor. 
(Code 1999, § 5-325; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 863(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-326. - Registration of apprentices required; supervision. 
Any person desiring to serve as an apprentice at the trade of plumbing in the city must first be licensed as provided by state law. 
(Code 1999, § 5-329; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 863(17), § 5-326, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-327. - Number of apprentices. 
No journeyman plumber shall at any one time have more than three apprentices working under his supervision. 
(Code 1999, § 5-331; Ord. No. 559(91), 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 159(96), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 179(97), 1-21-1997)  
CHAPTER 4. - ELECTRIC CODE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Electrical License Act, 59 O.S. § 1680 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 5-401. - Adoption of the 2014 National Electrical Code—NFPA 70, as adopted by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23. 
(a)  For the purposes of establishing basic minimum requirements necessary for safety in the use of electricity, and of prescribing rules and regulations governing the installation of electrical wiring and appliances within the city, there is hereby adopted that certain code known as the 2014 National Electrical Code—NFPA 70, as adopted by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such provisions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, referred to herein as the "electrical code"; of which code not less than one copy has been and now is filed in the office of the clerk. The electrical code is hereby incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(b)  The 2014 National Electric Code is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Insert new section 305 to read as follows: 
Aluminum wire may only be used if it is sized at 4/0 or larger, used for service and feeders only and installed as per manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(2)  Insert new section 300.1(D) to read as follows: 
All commercial structures shall be wired in conduit. NM cable shall not be used. 
(3)  Section 210.19(A)(4) is hereby amended by: 
Deleting the number "14" and inserting the number "12." 
(4)  Section 250.118 is hereby deleted and the following language is hereby substituted: 
250.118 Types of Equipment Grounding Conductors. The equipment grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors shall be copper only. This conductor shall be solid or stranded; insulated, covered, or bare; and in the form of a wire of any shape. 
All raceways or cable assemblies shall include a green or bare equipment grounding conductor. Said conductor shall be bonded to all non-current carrying metal parts of the electrical system. 
(5)  Section 680.23(A)(4) is hereby amended by: 
Deleting the number "150" and inserting the number "15." 
(6)  Section 680.23(A)(2) is hereby amended by adding the following language: 
A ground fault circuit interrupter shall be installed in branch circuits that supply low voltage lighting transformers. 
(Code 1999, § 5-401; Ord. No. 424(87), 2-17-1987; Ord. No. 33(92), 9-21-1992; Ord. No. 183(97), 4-7-1997; Ord. No. 375(02), 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 535(06), 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 634(08), 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 740(13), 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 861(17), 6-19-2017) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 5-402. - Provisions declared to be minimum requirements. 
The provisions of the 2014 National Electrical Code, in their interpretation and application shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare. Wherever any of the provisions or requirements of the 2014 National Electrical Code are inconsistent with the provisions of this Code or state statutes presently existing or enacted in the future, the provisions or requirements containing the most restrictive regulation shall apply and govern. 
(Code 1999, § 5-402; Ord. No. 861(17), 6-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-403. - Electrical installation permit required. 
(a)  No person shall begin work on any electrical facilities installation within the corporate limits of the city without first securing the required permit from the electrical inspector 
(b)  Permits shall be issued only to electrical contractors with current unrevoked state licenses and current unrevoked city registration certificates. 
(Code 1999, § 5-403; Ord. No. 861(17), 6-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-404. - Temporary permit; fees. 
Where for good and sufficient cause it is necessary to have electricity on any installation before the final certificate can be issued, the electrical inspector may, if all parts to which currents are applied are in a safe and satisfactory condition, issue a temporary permit. However, before the temporary permit is issued, the party requesting it shall pay to the city the fee as provided in the fee schedule. The permit then received shall be in force for a period of 30 days from its date; and at the end of 30 days, and each succeeding 30 days thereafter, for each term so requested, the fee shall be as provided in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 5-404)  
Sec. 5-405. - Inspection, not to conceal. 
(a)  In making inspection of new work "rough-in," the electrical inspector shall leave a tag in the cabinet plainly stating whether the work has been approved and is ready to conceal, or that work does not meet standards and must not be covered until approved by the electrical inspector. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to conceal or cause to be concealed any electrical conductors used for electric lights, heat or power until such time as he knows the work has been approved by the electrical inspector. A tag in the cabinet properly signed and dated so stating the inspector's approval will be sufficient notice. 
(Code 1999, § 5-405)  
Sec. 5-406. - Denial of permit; certificate of inspection, utility companies. 
(a)  The electrical inspector shall have and is hereby given the authority to refuse to issue a permit for the installation of electrical facilities in or on any building when, in his estimation, the wiring done or proposed to be done is unsafe or not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If after a permit is issued the work installed under such permit for any reason does not comply with the regulations of this chapter, the inspector shall refuse to issue a certificate of inspection. 
(b)  No electric light or power company shall connect to any electrical facilities of any kind whatsoever until furnished with a certificate of inspection or a permit for such connection duly executed by the electrical inspector. All electric light or power companies, whether operating under a regular franchise granted by the city or not, shall, upon written notice from the electrical inspector, disconnect from any circuit or service designated by the notice from the inspector. 
(c)  The electrical inspector shall enforce all the provisions of this chapter. Whenever he shall be notified by any citizen of any violation of this chapter or of the existence of any dangerous or defective electrical facilities, he shall make an investigation thereof without delay. 
(d)  Whenever any electrical facilities are found by the electrical inspector to be unsafe or defective or in an insecure condition, he shall notify the owner or person in control thereof, in writing, to repair or remove the defective facilities, and upon such person's failure to repair or remove same within such time as the inspector may deem necessary, which time shall be stated in such notice, the inspector shall cause the service connected to such facilities to be discontinued. 
(Code 1999, § 5-406)  
Sec. 5-407. - Wiring protection, when inspected. 
(a)  No owner, contractor or worker shall in any manner interfere with any electrical facilities being installed in or on any building. If in the course of the erection of a building the facilities are in such position as to interfere with its erection or completion as called for by the plans, notice shall be immediately given the person installing the facilities, and the needed change shall be made by such person upon approval for such modification by the electrical inspector. Upon inspecting the electrical facilities of any building, the electrical inspector shall leave notice in the form of a tag or label attached to the electrical facilities. The notice shall clearly state whether the electrical facility is approved or is to be kept open for corrections; and no person shall lath, seal or in any way conceal any electrical facility until he is informed and knows that such wiring has been approved. 
(b)  The electrical inspector shall furnish such person or licensed electrical contractor with a certificate, which shall state that such electrical facility is approved only so far as "roughing-in" is concerned, and that it is not the final certificate, and does not entitle the electric light or power company to connect its service to the electrical facilities. A certificate entitling the electric light or power company to connect its service to electrical facilities shall be furnished only after all fixtures are in place and final inspection is made. 
(Code 1999, § 5-407)  
Sec. 5-408. - Defective workmanship and materials. 
Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of electrical contracting for the installation of wiring and apparatus for electric light, heat or power in the city, who fails to correct promptly any defects in any work done by him contrary to this Code, after having been notified by the electrical inspector, shall not be issued any further permits until such defects have been corrected; and in any case in which any person shall continue to or persistently violate this Code in regard to electrical work, or the orders of the electrical inspector in relation to same, the registration and permit of such person shall be suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1999, § 5-408)  
Sec. 5-409. - Relocated buildings. 
When a building or a portion of a building containing electric wiring is moved from its foundation, the owner shall have the electric wiring and equipment in the building inspected and repaired where necessary to provide for adequate service, branch circuits, receptacles and grounding. 
(Code 1999, § 5-409)  
Sec. 5-410. - Inspection no relief from responsibility. 
This Code shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person, partnership or corporation owning or operating or installing electric wires, appliances, apparatus, construction or equipment for the damage to property or persons injured by any defect therein; nor shall the city, or any agent thereof, be deemed to assume such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein or the certificate of inspection issued by the electrical inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 5-92; Code 1999, § 5-410)  
Sec. 5-411. - Electrical board. 
(a)  An electrical board is hereby created and established. The board shall consist of five members, including four appointive members and one ex officio member. The appointive members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The ex officio member shall be the electrical inspector. The appointive members shall be qualified as follows: 
(1)  Two members shall be active as electrical contractors; 
(2)  Two members shall be active as journeymen electricians. 
The appointive members shall hold office for a term of two years and may be removed for cause. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. The appointive members may receive a compensation if so established by the city council. Two members of the board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The concurring vote of not less than two members is necessary to constitute an official action of the board. The ex officio member shall have voting power and shall be counted in determining a quorum. 
(b)  The board shall, with the electrical inspector, hear, pass on and settle any disputes that may arise pertaining to the provisions of this article. The board shall prescribe a procedure and order of business for hearing applications for certificates of registration and hearing appeals from the decisions of the electrical inspector and aggrievement appeals as provided herein. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5-126—5-132, in part; Code 1999, § 5-411)  
ARTICLE B. - ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR'S AND ELECTRICIAN'S REGISTRATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Electrical License Act, 59 O.S. § 1680 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-421. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative authority or electrical inspector means the electrical inspector, or the building official or his designee if no electrical inspector is appointed. 
Electrical apprentice means any person 16 years of age or older whose principal occupation is the learning of and assisting in the installation of electrical work under the direct supervision of a licensed journeyman electrician or electrical contractor. Each apprentice shall be in possession of a valid electrical apprentice license issued by the state. 
Electrical contractor means any person skilled in the planning, superintending and practical installation of electrical facilities who is familiar with the laws, rules and regulations governing such work. The term "electrical contractor" also means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or business performing skills of an electrical contractor, of an electrician or the business of contracting or furnishing labor or labor and materials for the installation, repair, maintenance or renovation of electrical facilities according to the provisions of the Electrical License Act (59 O.S. § 1680 et seq.). Each electrical contractor shall be in possession of a valid electrical contractor license issued by the state. 
Electrical facilities means all wiring, fixtures, apparatus, appurtenances and appliances for and in connection with a supply of electricity within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance on the premises, but not including the connection with a power supply meter or other power supply source. 
Electrician means any person engaged in electrical wiring in the city. 
Journeyman electrician means any person other than an electrical contractor who engages in the actual installation, alteration, repair or renovation of electrical facilities unless specifically exempted by the provisions of the Electrical License Act. Each journeyman electrician shall be in possession of a valid journeyman electrician's license issued by the state. 
(Code 1999, § 5-421)  
Sec. 5-422. - Registration required. 
(a)  No person shall conduct, carry on or engage in the business of electrical installation, maintaining, altering or repairing any wiring, fixtures or equipment for the conducting of electrical current or act in the capacity of an electrical contractor without first having issued to him a valid and unrevoked electrical contractor's license as provided by state law and an electrical contractor's registration certificate issued by the city. 
(b)  No person shall labor at the trade of electrician in the capacity of a journeyman electrician within the city without first having had issued to him a valid and unrevoked journeyman electrician's license issued by the city as provided by state law. 
(c)  No person shall labor at the trade of electrician in the capacity of an electrical apprentice within the city without first having had issued to him a valid and unrevoked apprentice electrician registration certificate as provided by state law. 
(d)  A partnership, firm, corporation or business trust may only engage in the electrical business within the city through one bona fide member of the partnership or firm, or one officer of the corporation or business trust, who has legal authority to act for such partnership, firm, corporation or business trust and who carries and holds a license under state law as an electrical contractor and who has registered such license as required by this article. In the event the person or member holding the license or certification of registration should leave or sever his connection with or lose his status as a member or officer of the partnership, firm, corporation or business trust, or in the event he is called for, and while he is serving in the armed forces of the United States, such firm, partnership, corporation or business trust may continue to engage in the electrical business for a period not to exceed six months from death or call to service. However, all fees required by this article shall be paid and kept in full force, and a duly registered electrical contractor shall assume in writing the supervision of such work. 
(Prior Code, § 5-146, in part; Code 1999, § 5-422; Ord. No. 869(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-423. - Classification of registration certificate. 
There shall be one class of electrical registration certificates, which shall be known as follows: Electrical contractor. 
(Code 1999, § 5-423; Ord. No. 869(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-424. - Registration fee, annual renewal fee. 
(a)  The registration and renewal fees and bond requirements of electrical contractors shall be as provided in the fee and bond schedules. 
(b)  Every person applying for an electrical registration certificate shall, upon acceptance of his qualifications by the city, at the time he makes such application, pay to the city the fees as provided in the fee schedule and post bond as required in this section. 
(c)  Applicants for registration shall pay to the city the required registration fees. The fees shall be paid after all requirements are met. 
(d)  Annual renewal of registration certificates shall be accomplished by payment of the renewal fees as provided herein. A receipt and registration certificate for the appropriate year shall be issued by the city upon payment of annual renewal fees. The registration number shall remain the same each year. 
(e)  A registration certificate shall be issued to the person named on the certificate who shall be known as the holder of the certificate. 
(f)  A registration certificate shall expire annually. All registrations shall expire on August 31 of each calendar year. 
(g)  Renewal applications and fees must be received by the city within 30 days after the expiration of the certificate or else the applicant must proceed in the manner required of a new or initial applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 5-154, in part; Code 1999, § 5-424; Ord. No. 869(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-425. - Journeyman electrician's registration certificate. 
No person shall work as a journeyman electrician unless he holds a valid unrevoked state license as provided for herein. No journeyman electrician shall perform any electrical wiring installation except through a licensed and registered electrical contractor and shall perform all installations, alterations and repairs of electrical wiring, fixtures and equipment in accordance with this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 5-425; Ord. No. 869(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-426. - Electrical apprentice's registration certificate. 
Under no circumstances shall an electrical apprentice perform any duty or phase of electrical installation unless a journeyman electrician or electrical contractor is on the project during such installation and such electrical apprentice is directly supervised by a journeyman electrician or electrical contractor. 
(Code 1999, § 5-426; Ord. No. 869(17), 8-7-2017)  
CHAPTER 5. - MECHANICAL CODE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Mechanical Licensing Act, 59 O.S. § 1850.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 5-501. - Adoption of 2015 International Mechanical Code, as adopted by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23. 
(a)  That certain document, being marked and designated as "2015 International Mechanical Code," as adopted by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the city; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2015 International Mechanical Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, hereinafter adopted. 
(b)  Subsequent revisions, modifications, codifications or editions of the code adopted herein shall become effective in the city as they are available, issued, and adopted by the city. 
(c)  The provisions of the Underwriters Laboratories Inc., as to mechanical equipment and appliances, fuel supply, combustion air, chimneys and vents, duct and piping, kitchen exhaust, ventilation and energy conservation as may hereafter take place will be the standards applicable in the city. 
(Code 1999, § 5-501; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 58(94), 2-22-1994; Ord. No. 276(00), 4-17-2000; Ord. No. 373(02), 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 537(06), 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 636(08), 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 738(13), 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 860(17), 6-19-2017) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 5-502. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
(a)  The code adopted in section 5-501 shall be known and cited as the city's mechanical code. All persons shall comply with the provisions of the code. 
(b)  The following sections are hereby revised as follows: 
(1)  M-101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Moore, Oklahoma, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule: Insert: As provided in the city's fee schedule. 
(3)  Section 108.4 Violation Penalties: Insert: Refer to City Code section 1-108, General and specific penalties; suspension or revocation of license or permit. 
(4)  Section 108.4.1 Unlawful continuance: Insert: Refer to City Code section 1-108, General and specific penalties; suspension or revocation of license or permit. 
(5)  Section 109.2 Membership of board: Amended to read as follows: 
There is hereby created a mechanical board for the city, which shall be composed of the building official of the city, who shall be ex officio chairman of the board; a second board member who shall be a licensed mechanical contractor; a third member who shall be a licensed mechanical contractor; and a fourth member who shall be a licensed mechanical journeyman. The second, third, and fourth members shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two years, and each shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified unless sooner removed for cause. The second and third members shall have been actively engaged in such occupation for a period of not less than five years immediately preceding the date of his appointment. 
(6)  Section 603.8 is amended to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
a.  All ducts installed underslab shall be graded to access plenum or boot. 
(Code 1999, § 5-502; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 58(94), 2-22-1994; Ord. No. 276(00), 4-17-2000; Ord. No. 373(02), 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 537(06), 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 636(08), 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 738(13), 2-4-2013)  
Sec. 5-503. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any work covered by the mechanical code without first securing a permit from the city. 
(b)  The permit fees shall be as set by the city by motion or resolution. 
(Code 1999, § 5-503)  
Sec. 5-504. - Provisions declared to be minimum requirements. 
The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, in their interpretation and application shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare. Wherever any of the provisions or requirements of this code are inconsistent with the provisions of this Code or state statutes presently existing or enacted in the future, the provisions or requirements containing the most restrictive regulation shall apply and govern. 
(Code 1999, § 5-504; Ord. No. 373(02), 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 537(06), 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 636(08), 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 738(13), 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 860(17), 6-19-2017)  
Sec. 5-505. - Mechanical official. 
(a)  The term "administrative authority" or "mechanical official" means the mechanical official, or the building official or his designee if no mechanical official is appointed through the chain of authority that is in effect when applying this code. 
(b)  The administration and enforcement of the mechanical code shall be the responsibility of the mechanical official through the departmental structure that is in effect when applying this code. 
(Code 1999, § 5-505)  
Sec. 5-506. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided by section 1-108 or by revocation of the applicable city license. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(b)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter shall be valid except insofar as the work or use which it authorized is lawful. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans shall not prevent the mechanical official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or from revoking any certificate of approval when issued in error. 
(Code 1999, § 5-506)  
ARTICLE B. - REGISTRATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Mechanical Licensing Act, 59 O.S. § 1850.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-511. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mechanical apprentice or apprentice means any person 16 years of age or older whose principal occupation is learning mechanical work on the job under the direct supervision of a journeyman or contractor. 
Mechanical contractor or contractor means any person engaged in the business of planning, contracting, supervising or furnishing labor or labor and materials for mechanical work. 
Mechanical journeyman or journeyman means any person other than a contractor or apprentice who engages in mechanical work. 
Mechanical work means the installation, maintenance, repair, or renovation, in whole or in part, of any heating system, exhaust system, cooling system, mechanical refrigeration system or ventilation system or any equipment or piping carrying chilled water, air for ventilation purposes, or natural gas, or the installation, maintenance, repair, or renovation of process piping used to carry any liquid, substance, or material, including steam and hot water used for space heating purposes not under the jurisdiction of the department of labor other than minor repairs to such systems. 
(Code 1999, § 5-511)  
Sec. 5-512. - License and registration required. 
(a)  No person shall conduct, carry on or engage in the business of mechanical work or act in the capacity of a mechanical contractor within the city without first having had issued to him a valid and unrevoked mechanical contractor's license as provided by state law and a current mechanical contractor's registration certificate issued by the city. 
(b)  No person shall labor at the trade of mechanical work in the capacity of a mechanical journeyman within the city without first having had issued to him a valid and unrevoked mechanical journeyman's license as provided by state law. 
(c)  No person shall labor at the trade of mechanical work in the capacity of a mechanical apprentice within the city without first having had issued to him a valid and unrevoked mechanical apprentice registration certificate as provided by state law. 
(d)  Any city certificate of registration issued to an applicant shall be issued only in the same category as the state license possessed by the applicant. It shall further be subject to all limitations, conditions or restrictions imposed on the state license possessed by the applicant. The category of the city certificate of registration shall be indicated on the face of the certificate. The categories for certificates of registration shall be the following: 
(1)  Unlimited mechanical air conditioning contractor; 
(2)  Limited mechanical air conditioning contractor; 
(3)  Unlimited heating contractor; 
(4)  Limited heating contractor; 
(5)  Refrigeration contractor; 
(6)  Sheet metal contractor; 
(7)  Natural gas piping contractor. 
These categories shall have the same meanings ascribed to them by state law and regulations. 
(e)  Unless sooner revoked or suspended as provided for by this article, the city certificate of registration shall be for a term of one year from issuance and may be renewed upon expiration in the same manner as originally obtained. All registrations shall expire on August 31 of each calendar year. 
(f)  A certificate of registration issued to a mechanical contractor or journeyman shall authorize the certificate holder to perform mechanical work only as authorized by state law and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. All mechanical work performed by a mechanical contractor or journeyman shall be strictly limited to the categories in which such contractor or journeyman is licensed by the state and registered with the city. 
(g)  All certificates issued hereunder must be renewed within 30 days after the expiration of the certificate or the holder must apply and pay the fees as required for original registration. 
(Code 1999, § 5-512; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 870(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-513. - Registration fee. 
Every person applying for a city mechanical certificate shall, upon acceptance of his qualifications by the city at the time he makes such application, pay to the city the fees as provided in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 5-513)  
Sec. 5-514. - Issuance of registration certificates. 
The city shall issue mechanical certificates of registration pursuant to the following provisions: A mechanical contractor's certificate shall be issued to every person who makes application for such certificate, pays the required fee, and presents a valid, unrevoked license as provided by state law for contractor status. 
(Code 1999, § 5-514; Ord. No. 870(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-515. - Revocation. 
(a)  A certificate of registration issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the following procedures. 
(b)  The city mechanical inspector may suspend or revoke a certificate of registration if he finds that the certificate holder has repeatedly failed to perform his work in accordance with the requirements of the mechanical code and such repeated violations constitute a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare. At least ten days' notice of such proposed suspension or revocation shall be given to the certificate holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, mailed to the last-known address of such person. The notice shall indicate the date, time, and place of the suspension or revocation hearing and the charges against the certificate holder. The certificate holder shall have the right to attend the hearing, be represented by counsel, and confront and cross examine his accusers. Upon making the proper finding at the hearing, the city mechanical inspector may suspend or revoke the certificate as deemed appropriate. The order suspending or revoking any certificate may be appealed to the mechanical code review and appeals commission as provided by this article. 
(Code 1999, § 5-515; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 5-516. - No mechanical work to be performed during suspension or revocation. 
No person whose certificate of registration has been suspended or revoked shall, for the duration of the suspension or revocation, engage in or offer to engage in any mechanical work within the city. 
(Code 1999, § 5-516; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 5-517. - Reinstatement of certificate of registration. 
Unless otherwise ordered by the mechanical code review and appeals commission, no certificate of registration which has been revoked under the provisions of this article shall be reinstated for a period of six months after such revocation. 
(Code 1999, § 5-517; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 5-518. - Engaging in business without a certificate of registration. 
No person, other than a mechanical contractor with a valid state license and a city certificate of registration as required by this article, shall maintain a place of business, display a sign, advertise or hold himself out as a mechanical contractor or make any attempt to install, alter or repair any mechanical system or otherwise engage in the business of a mechanical contractor. 
(Code 1999, § 5-518; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 5-519. - Maintenance of place of business; unlicensed place of business. 
Every person operating under a certificate of registration as a mechanical contractor shall maintain a place of business as such. No mechanical contractor shall maintain a place of business without having a valid state license and a valid city certificate of registration as required by this article. Such place of business shall maintain a telephone in the Oklahoma City telephone exchange or a toll free number. 
(Code 1999, § 5-519; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 5-520. - Identification display on vehicles required. 
Every mechanical contractor shall display the firm name under which he does business and state license number on all vehicles used in the operation of the business. The name shall be displayed on both sides or in other conspicuous places on the vehicle in letters of not less than two inches in height. The state license number shall be permanently affixed on both sides or in other conspicuous places on the vehicle in numerals of not less than two inches in height. 
(Code 1999, § 5-520; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 870(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-521. - Mechanical contractor to employ only licensed and registered journeymen. 
A mechanical contractor shall not employ or hire anyone to perform mechanical work except a mechanical journeyman with a valid state license as required by this article. Any journeyman employed by a mechanical contractor shall perform mechanical work only in the categories for which he has a valid state license. 
(Code 1999, § 5-521; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 870(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-522. - Failure to correct defects. 
Any person engaged in the business of mechanical contractor who shall fail to promptly correct any defects in any mechanical work done by him or by any of his employees or subcontractors contrary to or in violation of this code after having been notified of such defective work by the chief mechanical inspector shall not be issued any further permits until the defect has been corrected. 
(Code 1999, § 5-522; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 5-523. - Transfer, assignment, or loan of certificate of registration prohibited. 
No certificate of registration issued pursuant to this article shall be transferred, loaned, or assigned by the holder thereof to any other person. No permits shall be issued pursuant to a certificate of registration except to the lawful holder of such certificate. 
(Code 1999, § 5-523; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989)  
Sec. 5-524. - Mechanical journeyman regulations. 
A mechanical journeyman shall, at all times while doing mechanical work, be in possession of a valid state license and be in the employment of a licensed and registered mechanical contractor. No mechanical journeyman shall contract to furnish labor or labor and materials for mechanical work. 
(Code 1999, § 5-524; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 870(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-525. - Mechanical apprentice regulations. 
A mechanical apprentice shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  A mechanical apprentice shall work only under the direct supervision of a mechanical contractor or journeyman. The term "direct supervision" shall be construed as presence "on the job" with the supervisor who must be a licensed and registered mechanical contractor or a licensed mechanical journeyman; 
(2)  A maximum of three mechanical apprentices may work under the supervision of a person licensed and registered as a mechanical contractor or as a mechanical journeyman; and 
(3)  The apprentice must be working in the same category as the licensed and registered mechanical contractor or mechanical journeyman on the job. 
(Code 1999, § 5-525; Ord. No. 493(89), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 870(17), 8-7-2017)  
CHAPTER 6. - GAS CODE AND PIPELINES 
 
Sec. 5-601. - Adoption of pipeline standards. 
(a)  All pipelines, connections and fixtures thereof, installed or used for the purpose of the transportation of natural gas, shall be equivalent to the specifications of the natural gas safety code, adopted and approved by the United States Department of Commerce and now in force as to thickness, weight, size, strength and general character of material workmanship and manner of installation. 
(b)  All pipelines used in connection with the drilling of wells, other than gas lines and the lines used for the transportation of petroleum or any of its products, shall be new lapweld or seamless pipe and shall be equivalent to the specifications therefor as now adopted by the American Petroleum Institute for lapweld of Grade "A" seamless pipeline and requires 100 percent x-ray of all welds. All such lines shall be at all times operated and maintained in a safe manner so as to prevent all leakage or escape of any of the contents of such lines. If any such lines shall become unsafe or shall not be maintained as provided herein, or any of the contents thereof shall escape therefrom, it shall be the duty of the person in charge or in control thereof to immediately discontinue the use thereof, until such line shall be repaired. 
(c)  Pressure in any such lines shall not exceed those permitted by the rules, regulations or orders of the corporation commission of the state now in force. All such lines shall, on city streets and alleys, be buried to a minimum depth of 30 inches below the normal surface of the ground, such depth to be measured from the top of the pipe and to be approved by the city engineer. 
(d)  In the event it shall become necessary to change or remove any of such pipelines, such change or removal shall be made at the entire expense of the owners thereof, upon the approval of the city engineer or an inspector of the city. Such removal or change shall be made within five days after notice is served by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-235; Code 1999, § 5-601) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 5-602. - Planning commission duties, notice. 
The planning commission, from time to time on its own motion or on the motion of any landowner or citizen of the city, may order the course of any pipeline to be changed, altered or changed in size by giving the licensee notice of a hearing before the planning commission at a regular meeting of such commission, such notice to be served upon the licensee advising such licensee that a hearing will be had at a time and placed fixed in such notice to determine whether, for the safety of the residents of the city, the course of such pipeline should be changed or any other changes should be made. Five days' notice of the time of the hearing shall be given. The entire expense of the changing or alteration of the size or course of such pipeline shall be borne by the owner thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 6-236; Code 1999, § 5-602)  
Sec. 5-603. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pipeline means any subterranean pipeline through which shall be transported petroleum or any of its products, crude oil, natural gas or any other deleterious substances, but shall not include pipelines located at a retail or wholesale service station engaged in selling finished petroleum products. 
(Prior Code, § 6-231; Code 1999, § 5-603)  
Sec. 5-604. - Permit required for construction. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, either as principal or agent, to operate any pipeline, make any excavation with the intent to install, lay, maintain or enlarge any pipeline or to install any pipeline to or from any oil or gas well or any of its equipment or to add to, enlarge or extend any pipeline now in existence without obtaining a permit from the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-232; Code 1999, § 5-604)  
Sec. 5-605. - Suspension. 
The city manager is hereby granted the authority to suspend the permit of any person to install or operate any pipeline where any of the provisions of this chapter, or any amendments thereto, are violated, which suspension shall be effective until such time as such person shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. Before suspending any such permit, the city manager shall cause written notice to be served upon the licensee advising such licensee that a hearing will be had at a time and place fixed in such notice to determine whether the license held by such licensee shall be suspended. Five days' notice of the time of the hearing shall be given. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate any pipeline during any period in which the permit covering the operation of such pipeline is so suspended. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit or interfere with the enforcement of the penalties for the violation of ordinances generally, but shall be cumulative and in addition to such penalties. 
(Prior Code, § 6-234; Code 1999, § 5-605)  
CHAPTER 7. - FAIR HOUSING[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Fair housing, 25 O.S. § 1451 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-701. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city. 
(Code 1999, § 5-701; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-702. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Moore or any person, employee, agent, board, or single or plural authority whom the city manager may designate to sit as his designee to perform the duties and functions provided in this chapter. 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 5-704 through 5-706. 
Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
Family includes a single individual. 
Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries. 
To rent means to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1999, § 5-702; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-703. - Unlawful practice. 
Subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of this section and section 5-707, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in this chapter shall apply to: 
(1)  All dwellings except as exempted by subsection (2) of this section; 
(2)  Nothing in section 5-704 shall apply to: 
a.  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such private individual does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be exempted from the application of this chapter only if such house is sold or rented: 
1.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
2.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 5-704(3), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
b.  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence; 
(3)  For the purposes of subsection (2) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
a.  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
b.  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as an agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
c.  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(Code 1999, § 5-703; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-704. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of city's housing. 
As made applicable by section 5-703 and except as exempted by sections 5-703(2) and 5-707, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status; 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status; 
(3)  To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination; 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; or 
(5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(Code 1999, § 5-704; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-705. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance for the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given, provided that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in section 5-703(2). 
(Code 1999, § 5-705; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-706. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, rental or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(Code 1999, § 5-706; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-707. - Exemption. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, sex, color, national origin, handicap or familial status; nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Code 1999, § 5-707; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-708. - Administration. 
(a)  The authority and responsibility for administering the city's fair housing code shall be in the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  The city manager may delegate any of these functions, duties, and powers to employees of the city or to boards of such employees, including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this chapter. The city manager shall by rule prescribe such rights of appeal from the decisions of his hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to other officers in the city, to boards of officers or to himself, as shall be appropriate and in accordance with law. 
(c)  All administrative departments, agencies, boards or commissions shall administer their programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with the city manager to further such purposes. 
(Code 1999, § 5-708; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-709. - Education and conciliation. 
Immediately after the enactment of the city's fair housing code, the city manager shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the purposes of this chapter. He shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the provisions of this chapter and his suggested means of implementing it, and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement. 
(Code 1999, § 5-709; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-710. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the city manager and the city clerk. Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the city manager requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the city manager shall furnish a copy of the same to the persons who allegedly committed or was about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after receiving a complaint, or within 30 days after the expiration of any period of reference under subsection (c) of this section, the city manager shall investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he intends to resolve it. If the city manager decides to resolve the complaints, he shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this chapter without the written consent of the persons concerned. Any employee or agent of the city manager or city who shall make public any information in violation of this provision shall be, upon conviction, punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(b)  A complaint under subsection (a) of this section shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and with the leave of the city manager, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified. 
(c)  If, within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the city manager and city clerk, the city manager has been unable to obtain a voluntary compliance with this chapter, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days thereafter, file a complaint with the secretary of the department of housing and urban development. The city manager will assist in this filing. 
(d)  If the city manager has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance within 30 days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days thereafter, commence a civil action in any appropriate court, against the respondent named in the complaint to enforce the rights granted or protected by this chapter, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be appropriate. 
(e)  In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of proof shall be on the complainant. 
(f)  Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the city manager shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary compliance. 
(Code 1999, § 5-710; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-711. - Investigations; subpoenas; giving of evidence. 
(a)  In conducting an investigation the city manager shall have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record, and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation; provided, however, that the city manager first complies with the provisions of the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The city manager may issue subpoenas to compel his access to or the production of such materials, or the appearance of such persons, and may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the United States District Court for the district in which the investigation is taking place. The city manager may administer oaths. 
(b)  Upon written application to the city manager, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the city manager to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the city manager himself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at his request. 
(c)  Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the city manager shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in United States District Courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him. 
(d)  Within five days after services of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the city manager to revoke or modify the subpoena. The city manager shall grant the petition if he finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason. 
(e)  In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the city manager or other person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the municipal or county district court for the district in which the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts business. 
(f)  Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or other evidence, if in his power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order of the city manager shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. Any person who, with intent thereby to mislead the city manager, shall make or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record, or other document submitted to the city manager pursuant to his subpoena or other order, or shall willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full, true and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or other documents, or shall willfully mutilate, alter, or by any other means falsify any documentary evidence, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(g)  The city attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the city manager participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 5-711; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-712. - Enforcement by private persons. 
(a)  The rights granted by sections 5-703 through 5-706 may be enforced by civil actions in state courts of competent jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided, however, that the court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section or section 5-710(d) from time to time before bringing it to trial if the court believes that the conciliation efforts of the city manager are likely to result in satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing practice complained of in the complaint made to the city manager and which practice forms the basis for the action in court; and provided further, that any sale, encumbrance, or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any court order issued under the authority of this chapter, and involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant without actual notice of the existence of the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this chapter shall not be affected. 
(b)  The court may consider and grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, and may award to the plaintiff actual damages and punitive damages as allowed under the laws of the state or under applicable federal law, together with court costs and reasonable attorney's fees in the case of a prevailing plaintiff, provided that the plaintiff, in the opinion of the court, is not financially able to assume the attorney's fees. 
(Code 1999, § 5-712; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-713. - Interference, coercion, or intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by section 5-703, 5-704, 5-705, or 5-706. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action. 
(Code 1999, § 5-713; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
Sec. 5-714. - Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases. 
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to injure, intimidate or interfere with: 
(1)  Any person because of his race, color, religion, national origin, handicap or familial status and because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; 
(2)  Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from: 
a.  Participating without discrimination on account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (1) of this section; 
b.  Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate; or 
(3)  Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (1) of this section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate; 
shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 5-714; Ord. No. 69(94), 1-3-1994)  
CHAPTER 8. - OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES 
 
Sec. 5-801. - Light trespass prohibited. 
(a)  Requirements for luminaire heights, shielding, placement and aiming to minimize light trespass and direct glare emitted by a lighting system for any lot that is adjacent to a residentially zoned property or residential land use shall be as follows: 
(1)  Spill light on adjacent residential or unlighted properties shall be minimized by complying with the following: 
a.  The lighting system shall be designed to minimize the impact on spill light to adjacent properties. 
b.  Wall-mounted luminaries shall not be mounted higher above the ground than their distance to the property line unless they are mounted/shielded so as to direct the light away from the adjacent property (i.e., on a wall on the property line but directed inward). Maximum mounting height for wall-mounted luminaries shall be 15 feet, or as approved by the community development director. 
(2)  Direct glare shall be minimized by compliance with the following requirements: 
a.  The lighting system shall be designed to minimize the impact on glare to adjacent properties. 
b.  The direct glare from the luminaire shall not be visible from six feet above grade at the property line. Exception: field sports lighting. 
c.  Where the adjacent property is residential and the luminaire is a decorative style, the lot line side of the luminaire is to be blocked/shielded out to eliminate spill and glare. 
(b)  Violations and enforcement. It shall be unlawful to install or operate an outdoor light fixture in violation of this Code. Final determination as to compliance with this section shall be based on point-by-point analysis by the community development director or designee. Any person violating any provision of this Code shall be subject to a fine and court costs as provided by law. Each and every day, which the illegal erection, maintenance, and use continues, is a separate offense. 
(c)  Exemptions: nonconforming fixtures. All outdoor light fixtures, existing and fully installed, or for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Code, may remain nonconforming; provided, however, that no change in use, replacement, structural alteration, or restoration of outdoor light fixtures shall be made unless it thereafter conforms to the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 5-801; Ord. No. 520(05), 10-3-2005)  
CHAPTER 9. - FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 5-901. - International Fuel Gas Code 2015 adopted. 
Pursuant to section 2-15 of the Charter, the council may by ordinance adopt, by reference, codes which shall be considered to have the same effect as if set out in full in the City Code. Pursuant to this authority, the council hereby ordains that a certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the "2015 International Fuel Gas Code," as adopted by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the city; for addressing the design and installation of fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International Fuel Gas Code as hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code, with the additions, insertions, and changes, if any, as prescribed and set out herein. 
(Code 1999, § 5-901; Ord. No. 541(06), 10-16-2006; Ord. No. 638(08), 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 859(17), 6-19-2017) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 5-902. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
The following sections of the "International Fuel Gas Code 2015" are hereby revised, deleted, or amended as set out below. Items in [ ] are phrases that shall be deemed inserted into the appropriate section of the International Code: 
(1)  Section 108.4 Insert: [Violation] 
[200.00]. 
Delete: or by imprisonment not exceeding [number of days], or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  Section 101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Moore, Oklahoma, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(Code 1999, § 5-902; Ord. No. 541(06), 10-16-2006; Ord. No. 638(08), 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 859(17), 6-19-2017)  
CHAPTER 10. - ROOFING CONTRACTORS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Roofing Contractor Registration Act, 59 O.S. § 1151.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-1001. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nonresident contractor means any contractor who has not established and maintained a place of business as a roofing contractor in the state within the preceding year, or who claims residency in another state, or who has not submitted an income tax return as a resident of the state within the preceding year. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, or other group or combination thereof acting as a unit, unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed clearly by this chapter. 
Public contract means a contract with the state, its political subdivisions, or any board, commission, or department thereof, or with any board of county commissioners, or with any city council, school board, or with any state or municipal agency, or with any other public board, body, commission, or agency authorized to award contracts for the construction or reconstruction of public work and includes subcontracts undertaken to perform works covered by the original contract or any part thereof. 
Registrar means the city or any person designated by the city to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
Roofing contractor means any person, including a subcontractor and nonresident contractor, engaged in the business of commercial or residential roofing contractor work, or who himself, or through another, attempts to or advertises, holds himself out as having, or purports to have, the capacity to undertake roofing contractor work, or offers to engage in or solicits roofing installation-related services, including construction, installation, renovation, remodeling, reroofing, repair, maintenance, alteration, and waterproofing, unless specifically exempted in the Roofing Contractor Registration Act. The term "roofing contractor" shall not mean: 
(1)  A person engaged in the demolition of a structure or the cleanup of construction waste and debris that contains roofing material; 
(2)  A person working under the direct supervision of the roofing contractor who is hired either as an employee, day laborer, or contract laborer whose payment, received in any form, from the roofing contractor is subject to self-employment tax; 
(3)  A person working on his own property or that of an immediate relative and such person is not receiving any compensation; or 
(4)  A person acting as a handyman who is receiving compensation from the property owner and who is performing the roofing repair in conjunction with other repairs to the property and who does not perform more than two roofing jobs per year. 
Roofing contractor work means the installation, fabrication or assembly of equipment or systems included in roofing systems as defined in the International Building Code and the International Residential Code, as adopted by the state uniform building code commission, and which codes are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. Roofing construction work includes, but is not limited to, installation, renovation, remodeling, reroofing, reconstructing, repair, maintenance, improvement, alteration, and waterproofing, unless specifically exempted in the Roofing Contractor Registration Act (59 O.S. § 1151.1 et seq.). 
(Code 1999, § 5-1001; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 59 O.S. § 1151.2.  
Sec. 5-1002. - Registration; fine. 
(a)  A person may not engage in the business nor act in the capacity of a roofing contractor within the city nor may that person bring or maintain any claim, action, suit, or proceeding in any court of the state related to the person's business or capacity as a roofing contractor without a valid registration as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  A person who fails to obtain a valid registration prior to acting as a roofing contractor as defined in this chapter, a person who acts as a roofing contractor while his registration is suspended or revoked, or a person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, upon conviction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1002; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 5-1003. - Powers. 
The city is authorized to employ personnel and procure such supplies and equipment as may be necessary to carry out and implement the provisions of this chapter, subject to budgetary limitations and funding. The city may promulgate forms to implement the provisions of this chapter. The city may administer any provision of this chapter through use of the Internet or other technology as deemed necessary or appropriate. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1003; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 5-1004. - Obtaining a roofing contractor registration; refusal of registration. 
(a)  To obtain a roofing contractor registration under this chapter, an applicant who is 18 years of age or older shall submit, on forms the city prescribes, an application attaching a valid approved state registration. A copy of the roofing contractor's certificate of liability insurance shall be filed with the application and shall be not less than $500,000.00. Any insurance company issuing a liability policy to a roofing contractor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be required to notify the city in the event such liability policy is cancelled for any reason or lapses for nonpayment of premiums. In addition, the roofing contractor shall submit proof that the contractor has secured workers' compensation coverage satisfactory under the Administrative Workers' Compensation Act (85A O.S. § 1 et seq.), or an affidavit of exemption or self-insurance as authorized pursuant to the Workers' Compensation Act. If the city deems it appropriate or necessary, the city may also require other information to be included on the application form to assist the city in registering the person as a contractor. The application shall contain statements that the applicant desires the issuance of a roofing contractor registration certificate; that the applicant will comply with the provisions of this chapter; that the applicant will comply with state laws and local ordinances relating to standards and permits; that the applicant has or has not been registered or licensed as a roofing contractor in another state and whether any disciplinary action was taken against such registration or license or whether it is still in good standing; and that the nonresident applicant appoints the secretary of state as legal service agent for all lawful process to be served upon the applicant for work performed in the state or as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall refuse to register any person if the city determines: 
(1)  The application contains false, misleading, or incomplete information; 
(2)  The applicant fails or refuses to provide any information requested by the city; 
(3)  The applicant fails or refuses to pay the required fees; 
(4)  The applicant is ineligible for registration due to a suspended or revoked registration in the state; 
(5)  The nonresident applicant has a revoked or suspended registration or license required by law for roofing contractors in another state; or 
(6)  The applicant has failed or refuses to submit any taxes due in the state. 
(c)  The city shall notify the applicant in writing if the city denies a registration or renewal certificate, and shall provide the applicant an opportunity to respond to or cure any defect in the written application or renewal for a period of ten days from the date of the written notification. An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the city denying a registration or renewal may appeal the decision to the city manager as provided in the Administrative Procedures Act (75 O.S. § 250 et seq.), or the applicant may reapply after a 90-day waiting period, if otherwise eligible in the provisions of this chapter. The application and renewal fees shall not be refundable. 
(d)  The city shall classify as not in good standing the registration of any roofing contractor who fails to: 
(1)  Maintain liability insurance coverage; 
(2)  Maintain workers' compensation coverage satisfactory under the Workers' Compensation Act, or provide an affidavit of exemption or self-insurance as authorized pursuant to the Administrative Workers' Compensation Act (85A O.S. § 1 et seq.); 
(3)  File, renew, or properly amend any fictitious name certificate; 
(4)  Maintain an active status of a corporation or registration as a foreign corporation, a limited liability company or registration as a foreign limited liability company, a limited liability partnership registration or foreign limited liability partnership registration, or a limited partnership certificate or limited partnership or foreign limited partnership certificate of authority, with the office of the secretary of state; 
(5)  File or renew a trade name registration; 
(6)  Maintain or renew a roofing contractor registration as provided in this chapter; 
(7)  Notify the city of a change in name, address, legal business entity, legal service agent, or adjudication by a court of competent jurisdiction for any act or omission specified in 59 O.S. § 1151.14(A) or a violation of this chapter; 
(8)  Maintain a registration as required by law in another state while registered in this state as a nonresident roofing contractor; or 
(9)  File and pay all taxes when due in the state. 
(e)  The city shall send a written notice to the person when his registration is not in good standing. Any roofing contractor who has been notified by the city that his registration is not in good standing shall cease soliciting or entering new roofing services and projects as of the date of such notification; however, the roofing contractor shall be allowed to complete roofing projects where actual physical work has begun prior to the date of issuance of the notice that his registration is not in good standing. If the roofing contractor fails to correct the deficiency specified in the notice by evidence satisfactory to the registrar within 30 days of the date of the notice, or if the roofing contractor solicits or enters into new roofing services contracts or projects while the roofing contractor's registration is not in good standing, or while such registration is suspended or revoked, the roofing contractor shall be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any registration that remains not in good standing for a 60-day period shall be suspended on the 60th day from the date of issuance of the notice to the roofing contractor that his registration is not in good standing. Any registration that remains not in good standing, and is suspended for such cause, shall be revoked on the 90th day from the date of issuance of the notice to the roofing contractor that his registration is not in good standing. The city shall notify the roofing contractor upon suspension or revocation of his registration for failure to comply in bringing such registration into good standing as required by law. The roofing contractor may reinstate his registration to good standing by paying the required fees provided in section 5-1007 and complying with all other requirements for issuance of a registration in good standing. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city to suspend or revoke a registration pursuant to this section may appeal such decision to the city manager's office. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1004; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 5-1005. - Criminal history records search or background check. 
(a)  When deemed appropriate, the city may conduct a criminal history records search or background check on any applicant or registered roofing contractor and may investigate the information submitted on a roofing contractor application or renewal form, provided no adverse action may be taken against the person until the person has been notified and given an opportunity to respond in writing. 
(b)  The city, its agents, employees and assigns shall not be liable and are granted immunity for the acts or omissions of any registered roofing contractor or its employees, or for any person's failure or omission to properly disclose any information on an application or renewal form, including, but not limited to, pending criminal charges, arrests or prior criminal history records, disclosure of his roofing contractor registration status, or his qualifications to perform or act as a roofing contractor. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1005; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 5-1006. - Roofing contractor registration certificate, business limitations. 
The holder of a roofing contractor registration certificate is entitled to engage in the roofing business within the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  A roofing contractor's registration certificate number shall be valid and in good standing at the time of soliciting a project and during subsequent job performance; 
(2)  A roofing contractor's registration certificate number shall be submitted when applying for any permit issued by the state, or any of its political subdivisions, for commercial or residential roofing services or projects, if a permit is required by such authority, and shall be written upon each permit issued; 
(3)  A roofing contractor's registration certificate cannot be shared or used by any other individual or business entity; provided, however, a business, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, or other group or combination thereof acting as a unit may be granted a single roofing registration certificate number for use by designated roofing contractors acting as agents for the business entity when the application for registration contained sufficient information on each member, partner, officer and agent and the state issued a single certificate number to such persons as a business unit; 
(4)  Upon any change to the name, address, business entity, or legal service agent of a roofing contractor or upon adjudication by a court of competent jurisdiction for a violation of this chapter or an act or omission specified in 59 O.S. § 1151.14(A), the city shall be notified in writing; 
(5)  A roofing contractor shall comply with state laws and local ordinances relating to standards and permits for roofing services and projects; and 
(6)  A roofing contractor must pay taxes due in the state. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1006; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 5-1007. - Registration fee. 
(a)  At the time of making application for a roofing contractor registration certificate pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the city a fee to be set by resolution for the annual registration certificate. 
(b)  All monies collected by the city for roofing contractor registration applications, renewals and other fee assessments shall be deposited by the city into the general fund. 
(c)  The fee to be submitted with an application for a roofing contractor registration may be prorated as set by the city. Unless prorated at the time of initial registration, fees shall be paid in the amount stated in subsection (a) of this section and such registration certificates shall expire June 30 each year. 
(d)  A renewal fee for a roofing contractor registration shall be set by resolution for the annual renewal registration certificate. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1007; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 5-1008. - Applicability of roofing contractor registration. 
(a)  The Roofing Contractor Registration Act does not apply to: 
(1)  An actual owner of residential or farm property who physically performs, or has employees who perform, roofing services including construction, installation, renovation, repair, maintenance, alteration, waterproofing, or removal of materials or structures on his own dwelling or another structure located on the residential or farm property owned by such person without the assistance of any registered roofing contractor as such term is defined by this chapter; 
(2)  Any authorized employee, representative or representatives of the United States Government, the state, or any county, municipality, or other political subdivision of the state; and 
(3)  Any person who furnishes any fabricated or finished product, material, or article of merchandise which is not incorporated into or attached to real property by such person so as to become affixed thereto. 
(b)  Any administrative or governing body with authority to enter into public contracts shall require individual roofing contractor registration for purposes of such persons submitting or entering into any bid or contract. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1008; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 5-1009. - Issuance or denial of registration. 
Within 25 calendar days from the date of application, the city shall either issue or deny the roofing contractor registration. No registration shall be issued to an applicant until the city receives all documentation and fees necessary to obtain a registration certificate in good standing. The registration certificate issued on an original application entitles the person to act as a roofing contractor within the city subject to the limitations of this chapter, until the expiration of the then current fiscal year ending June 30, except that an initial registration issued in May or June is valid until June 30 of the subsequent year. On the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, a prorated registration certificate issued between January 1, 2011, and April 30, 2011, shall be valid until June 30, 2011. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1009; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 5-1010. - Change in roofing contractor's name, address, legal service agent, or cease of business, notification. 
No later than ten days after the date of a change in a roofing contractor's name, address, or legal service agent, or upon a registered roofing contractor ceasing business as a roofing contractor, the person shall notify the city of the change on a form provided by the city. A name, address, or legal service agent change shall be accompanied by a fee to be set by resolution. A person may not change his name under an active registration certificate if the change is associated with a change in the legal status of the business entity other than a change in marital status. Doing business under a new business name or change in legal status of a business requires issuance of a new registration certificate. When a registered roofing contractor ceases to be active as a roofing contractor, the city shall suspend the registration certificate of such contractor. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1010; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 5-1011. - Certificate of renewal. 
(a)  Any roofing contractor registration certificate issued under this chapter may be renewed for each successive fiscal year by obtaining from the city a certificate of renewal. To obtain a certificate of renewal, the person shall file with the city a renewal application by June 30 and pay the renewal fee. The application for renewal shall require statements under oath that the applicant has properly submitted income and employment taxes due in the state; whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony offense, and the nature of such offense, since issuance of the prior registration; and whether or not the applicant has been adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction for any violation of this chapter or any act or omission specified in 59 O.S. § 1151.14(A). The city may forward a copy of any information in an application for renewal to the state tax commission and any other state agency. The applicant shall include with the renewal application a copy of certificate of liability insurance, unless the registrar has a current valid certificate of liability insurance on file, proof of workers' compensation coverage, unless exempt under the Administrative Workers' Compensation Act (85A O.S. § 1 et seq.), and, if applicable, a copy of the current registration certificate required by law for roofing contractors. The renewal application need not be notarized. 
(b)  The city shall refuse to renew a roofing contractor's registration certificate for any reason stated in 59 O.S. § 1151.5(B) or section 5-1004 of this chapter. The city shall notify the applicant in writing if the city denies the renewal. 
(c)  If any roofing contractor fails to file a renewal application by the June 30 deadline that contractor's registration shall be not in good standing. A roofing contractor has a 30-day grace period after June 30 to renew the registration certificate without a late fee. The late fee shall be set by the city and such fee shall not exceed $25.00. A roofing contractor registration certificate not renewed by August 30 shall be suspended for failure to renew, and on January 1, if a roofing contractor's registration certificate still has not been renewed, it shall be revoked for failure to renew. 
(d)  (1)  A roofing contractor desiring to renew a registration certificate that has been suspended for any cause provided in this chapter shall be assessed a fee equal to twice the amount of the fee established as a renewal amount. 
(2)  The city shall assess a reinstatement fee to be set by resolution plus the fee established by section 5-1007 for any registration that has been revoked for any cause provided in this chapter. 
(3)  A roofing contractor submitting an application for registration after suspension or revocation of that contractor's registration certificate must be otherwise eligible for registration under this chapter. 
(e)  The city shall include a registration status notation in a roofing contractor's record if the status of registration changes from an active and valid registration to not in good standing, denied, suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1011; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 5-1012. - Contractor's agent for service of process. 
Every applicant for a roofing contractor's registration who is a nonresident contractor as defined by this chapter, by signing and filing the application, appoints the secretary of state as the applicant's true and lawful agent upon whom may be served all lawful process in any action or proceeding against such nonresident contractor for construction projects performed in the state. Such appointment in writing is evidence of the roofing contractor's consent that any such process against the contractor which is served upon the secretary of state shall be of the same legal force and effect as if served upon the contractor personally within the state. Registered foreign corporations, registered foreign limited liability companies, foreign limited liability partnerships and foreign limited partnerships entitled to do business in the state having a current registered agent and registered address on file in the office of the secretary of state need not appoint the secretary of state as agent for service of process under this section. Within ten days after service of the summons upon the secretary of state, notice of such service with the summons and complaint in the action shall be sent to the defendant roofing contractor at the defendant contractor's last-known address by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested and proof of such mailing shall be attached to the summons. The secretary of state shall keep a record of all process served upon the secretary of state under this section, showing the day and hour of service. Whenever service of process was made under this section, the court, before entering a default judgment, or at any stage of the proceeding, may order such continuance as may be necessary to afford the defendant contractor reasonable opportunity to defend any action pending against the defendant contractor. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1012; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 5-1013. - Application for building permits; disclosure of registration certificate number. 
(a)  When applying for any permit required by the state or any of its political subdivisions for roofing services or jobs, a roofing contractor shall supply the permit-issuing official that roofing contractor's registration certificate number issued pursuant to this chapter. That official shall enter a roofing contractor's registration number on the permit. 
(b)  A person performing as a roofing contractor on his own property, although exempt from the registration requirements of this chapter, shall, when applying for a permit required for the project, supply the permit-issuing official any roofing contractor registration number, as soon as available, of each roofing subcontractor engaged in roofing services and doing work covered by the permit, if any. That official shall enter each roofing contractor registration number so supplied before inspection of the job. 
(c)  A roofing contractor shall display his state roofing contractor registration number issued pursuant to this chapter on each commercial vehicle used for roofing services and upon every business sign, card, correspondence, and contract used to solicit and conduct roofing services in the state. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1013; Ord. No. 689(10), 12-6-2010)  
CHAPTER 11. - STORM SHELTERS 
 
Sec. 5-1101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Storm shelter means any under-ground structure designed to current FEMA standards to protect its occupants from the effects of wind and debris resulting from a tornado or severe weather event. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1101; Ord. No. 707(11), 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 5-1102. - Permits required. 
(a)  No storm shelter shall be constructed within the city unless a building permit has been issued by the building inspection department. 
(b)  All storm shelter construction shall comply with the standards contained in FEMA Publication 320, FEMA Publication 361 or ICC 500, or the applicable succeeding publication. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1102; Ord. No. 707(11), 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 864(17), 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5-1103. - Standards and specifications. 
(a)  No preshaped shelter, such as metal, plastic, wood, plexiglass, etc., shall be approved unless the design is sufficient to prevent flotation when the shelter is empty. Flotation force is considered to be 100 percent. Weight of earthen fill will not be considered in reducing this flotation factor. 
(b)  All shelters constructed in front yards or, in the case of a corner lot, in side yards that abut a street or public access and are not fenced, shall not have any projection to include backfill, cover, hatches, stairs, or vent pipes exceeding 18 inches above grade in height, with measuring the point to be 12 inches from any side or radius of the constructed shelter. 
(c)  All underground storm shelters constructed in front, side or rear yards that are not enclosed by a fence shall be provided with a locking device. 
(d)  No underground storm shelter shall be used for any type of occupancy other than as a storm shelter. 
(e)  All concrete used in shelter construction shall have a compressive strength of not less than 3,500 pounds per square inch. 
(f)  All shelters shall be adequately waterproofed to prevent seepage. 
(Code 1999, § 5-1103; Ord. No. 707(11), 10-17-2011)  
Part 6 - COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, 11 O.S. § 27-101 et seq. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - COURT PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 6-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police means the peace officer in charge of the police force of the city. 
Clerk means the court clerk as appointed by the city manager, including any deputy or member of the office staff of the clerk while performing duties of the clerk's office. 
Court means the municipal criminal court of the city. 
Judge means the judge of the municipal criminal court, including any acting judge or alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of the state and this chapter. 
This judicial district means the district court judicial district of the state wherein the government of the city is situated. 
(Prior Code, § 15-2; Code 1999, § 6-101)  
Sec. 6-102. - Purpose. 
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal criminal court of the city, as put into operation by resolution duly passed on January 6, 1969, and filed in accordance with law, as authorized by state statutes. To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other ordinance of the city, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Prior Code, § 15-1; Code 1999, § 6-102)  
Sec. 6-103. - Jurisdiction. 
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of the city is charged. 
(Prior Code, § 15-1; Code 1999, § 6-103) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-103.  
Sec. 6-104. - Change of venue; disqualification of judge. 
(a)  No change of venue shall be allowed from any municipal court, but the judge of the municipal court may be disqualified under the same terms and conditions as are now provided by law for courts of record. 
(b)  In the event of an ethical disqualification by a municipal judge, the senior municipal judge may appoint, on a case-by-case basis, a sitting municipal judge in another municipality within the same county or an adjacent county to act as a special judge for the purposes of hearing the case. 
(Prior Code, § 15-15; Code 1999, § 6-104) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-105.  
Sec. 6-105. - Chief of police as principal officer of court. 
All writs or processes of the court shall be directed, in his official title, to the chief of police, who shall be the principal officer of the court. 
(Prior Code, § 15-19; Code 1999, § 6-105) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-110.  
Sec. 6-106. - Clerk of court; duties. 
(a)  The clerk or a deputy designated by him shall be the clerk of the court. 
(b)  The clerk shall: 
(1)  Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in preparing writs, processes and other papers; 
(2)  Administer oaths required in proceedings before the court; 
(3)  Enter all pleadings, processes and proceedings in the dockets of the courts; 
(4)  Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of the court as the judge shall direct; and 
(5)  Receive any receipt for forfeitures, fees, deposits and sums of money payable to the court and as may be established by the court or the city council. 
(c)  The clerk shall pay to the clerk of the city all money so received by him, except such special deposits or fees as shall be received to be disbursed by him for special purposes. All money paid to the clerk shall be placed in the general fund of the city, or in such other fund as the council may direct. 
(Prior Code, § 15-16; Code 1999, § 6-106) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-109.  
Sec. 6-107. - City attorney, powers and duties. 
The city attorney or his duly designated assistant may be the prosecuting officer of the court. He may prosecute, in his discretion, all alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be authorized, in his discretion, to prosecute and resist appeals, proceedings in error and review from this court to any other courts of the state, and to represent the city in all proceedings arising out of matters in this court. 
(Prior Code, § 15-18; Code 1999, § 6-107) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-108.  
Sec. 6-108. - Bond. 
The clerk of the court shall give bond in such sum as set by the council, in the form provided by state law. When executed, the bond shall be submitted to the council for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the clerk and retained in the municipal archives. 
(Prior Code, § 15-17; Code 1999, § 6-108) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-111.  
Sec. 6-109. - Authority of judge to prescribe rules. 
The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with the ordinances of the city, for the proper conduct of the business of the court. 
(Code 1999, § 6-109) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-114.  
Sec. 6-110. - Traffic violations bureau created; payment of fines, fines in lieu of appearance. 
(a)  A traffic violations bureau is established as a division of the office of the clerk of the court, to be administered by the clerk or by subordinates designated for that purpose. Persons who are cited for violation of one of the following traffic ordinances of the city, other than: 
(1)  Driving while intoxicated or driving while impaired; 
(2)  Leaving the scene of an accident; 
(3)  Reckless driving; 
(4)  Violation of financial responsibility requirements; 
(5)  Driver's license offenses (e.g., suspended, revoked, etc.); or 
(6)  Failure to obey citation; 
may elect to pay a fine in the traffic violations bureau according to a schedule of fines prescribed from time to time by the council. The payment shall constitute a final determination of the cause against the defendant. 
(b)  The court may adopt rules to carry into effect this section. If a defendant who has elected to pay a fine under this section fails so to do, prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 6-110)  
Sec. 6-111. - Designation of fines, traffic violations bureau. 
The city council shall designate by motion or resolution the specified offenses for which payment of fines may be accepted by the traffic violations bureau and shall specify by suitable schedules the amount of such fines for first, second and subsequent offenses, and shall further specify what number of such offenses shall require appearance before the judge. A copy of the fine schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the court clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 6-111)  
Sec. 6-112. - Prosecutions; filing of complaint; fees, defects raised prior to trial. 
(a)  All prosecutions for violation of ordinances of this city shall be styled "The City of Moore, Oklahoma vs. (naming defendant or defendants)." Except as provided hereinafter, prosecutions shall be initiated by the filing of a written complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making the complaint, and setting forth concisely the offense charged. 
(b)  Any person, except a police officer or other employee of the city, filing a criminal offense complaint in the municipal court shall deposit with the clerk of the court, unless waived by order of the court, the court cost fee as provided in this chapter. The court costs so deposited by such a complainant shall be refunded to the complainant or person depositing same upon conviction or acquittal of the defendant; the court costs shall not be refunded if the charges are dismissed at the request of the complainant who made the deposit or because the complainant fails or refuses to appear in court to testify or aid in the prosecution of the charge filed by such complainant. 
(c)  All defects in the form or substance apparent on the face of a complaint charging a violation of an ordinance of the city, and being grounds for motion or demur, may only be raised by an accused in writing and prior to trial. 
(d)  A complaint may be amended in matter of substance or form at any time before the defendant pleads, without leave, and may be amended after plea or order of the court where the same can be done without material prejudice to the rights of the defendant. No amendment shall cause any delay of the trial, unless good cause is shown by affidavit. 
(Prior Code, §§ 15-20, 15-21; Code 1999, § 6-112) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-115.  
Sec. 6-113. - Ordinance violations; procedures for issuing citation; custody, arrest. 
(a)  If a resident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer for the violation of any traffic ordinance for which other provisions of this chapter do not apply, or is arrested for the violation of a nontraffic ordinance, the officer shall immediately release the person if the person acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it. However, the arresting officer need not release the person if it reasonably appears to the officer that the person may cause injury to himself or others or damage to property if released, that the person will not appear in response to the citation, or the person is arrested for an offense against a person or property. If the person fails to appear in response to the citation, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest and his appearance shall be compelled. 
(b)  If the arrested resident is not released by being permitted to sign a citation as provided in this section, he shall be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment, or shall be released on personal recognizance. 
(c)  If a nonresident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer for a violation of any ordinance for which section 6-114 does not apply, the defendant shall be eligible to be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment. 
(d)  If the alleged offense is a violation of an ordinance restricting or regulating the parking of vehicles, including any regulations issued under such an ordinance, and the operator is not present, the police officer shall place on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to come to the notice of the operator, a citation conforming substantially to that prescribed in this section, with such variation as the circumstances require, the operator of this vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the citation as if it had been issued to him personally under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1999, § 6-113) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-117.  
Sec. 6-114. - Traffic Bail Bond Act. 
If a resident or nonresident of a municipality having a municipal court is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a traffic ordinance, other than an ordinance pertaining to a parking or standing traffic violation, and the arrested person is eligible to sign a written promise to appear and be released upon personal recognizance as provided for in 22 O.S. § 1115, then the procedures provided for in the State and Municipal Traffic Bail Bond Procedure Act (22 O.S. § 1115 et seq.) as applied to municipalities, shall govern. A municipality, by ordinance, may prescribe a bail bond schedule for this purpose and may provide for bail to be used as payment of the fine and costs upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, as provided for in 22 O.S. § 1115.1. Absent such ordinance, the municipal court may prescribe a bail bond schedule for traffic offenses. The amount of bail shall not exceed the maximum fine and costs provided by ordinance for each offense, unless the defendant has a previous history of failing to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, in which case the amount of bail shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(Code 1999, § 6-114) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-117.1.  
Sec. 6-115. - Issuance of summons; failure to appear. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of an ordinance, the judge, unless he determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the person charged, specifying his address or place of residence, if known, stating the offense with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in the court on a day certain, containing a provision for the official return of the summons, and including such other pertinent information as may be necessary. 
(b)  The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant personally or by certified mail. If he fails to appear and to answer the summons within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as provided by this chapter. 
(c)  Any person who has been duly served with a summons or traffic citation and who has signed a written promise to appear in court as directed in the summons or the citation or as subsequently directed by the court, and who fails to appear pursuant to his written promise or as directed by the court, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, which shall be punishable as provided in section 1-108. 
(Prior Code, § 15-22; Code 1999, § 6-115)  
Sec. 6-116. - Failure to appear according to terms of bond, bond forfeiture, bench warrant. 
(a)  If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the terms or conditions of his bond, either for hearing, arraignment, trial or judgment, or upon any other occasion when his presence in court or before the judge may be lawfully required or ordered, the judge may direct that fact to be entered upon the court minutes, thereby declaring the bond to be forfeited. The judge may also order a bench warrant to be issued for the defendant as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The judge, without advancing court costs, may also cause the forfeiture to be certified to the district court of the county, where it shall be entered upon the judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of a district court judgment. At such time as the forfeiture is entered upon the district court judgment docket, the district court clerk shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of 59 O.S. §§ 1330, 1332, 1333 and 1335, and a surety shall have all remedies available under the provisions of 22 O.S. § 1108 and 59 O.S. §§ 1301 through 1340. 
(c)  Court costs shall be collectible from the proceeds of the bond. 
(Code 1999, § 6-116) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-118.  
Sec. 6-117. - Complainant, witnesses, failure to appear. 
No person, having signed a complaint in the municipal court of the city alleging the violation of an ordinance or any other person in response to an order of the court, shall fail, refuse or neglect to appear for the purpose of testifying as a witness at the trial of the case, after having been notified of the time, date and place at which the case is set for trial. 
(Code 1999, § 6-117)  
Sec. 6-118. - Arrests, release by signing citation; bail; amount and conditions, temporary cash bond. 
(a)  If a resident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer for the violation of any traffic ordinance for which 11 O.S. § 27-117.1 does not apply, or is arrested for the violation of a nontraffic ordinance, the officer shall immediately release said person if the person acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it; provided, however, the arresting officer need not release said person if it reasonably appears to the officer that the person may cause injury to himself or others or damage to property if released, that the person will not appear in response to the citation, or the person is arrested for an offense against a person or property. If said person fails to appear in response to the citation, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest and his appearance shall be compelled. If the arrested resident is not released by being permitted to sign a citation as provided for in this subsection, he shall be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment, or shall be released on personal recognizance. A municipality may prescribe a fine for up to the maximum amount authorized by courts not of record for failure of a person to have a valid driver's license when charged with a traffic violation. 
(b)  If a nonresident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer for a violation of any ordinance for which 11 O.S. § 27-117.1 does not apply, the defendant shall be eligible to be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment. 
(c)  The amount and conditions of bail granted pursuant to the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be determined by the judge who shall prescribe rules for the receipt of bail and for the release on personal recognizance. The amount of bail for each offense shall not exceed the maximum fine plus court costs, unless the defendant has a previous history of failing to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, in which case the amount of bail shall not exceed $1,000.00. In the event of arrests at night, emergencies, or when the judge is not available, a court official, the chief of police or his designated representative may be authorized by the judge, subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge, to accept a temporary cash bond in a sufficient amount to secure the appearance of the accused. The cash bond shall not exceed the maximum fine provided for by ordinance for each offense charged, unless the defendant has a previous history of failing to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, in which case the amount of the cash bond shall not exceed $1,000.00. The court official, chief of police or his designated representative is authorized, subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge, to release a resident of the city on personal recognizance. 
(Prior Code, § 15-23; Code 1999, § 6-118) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-117.  
Sec. 6-119. - Procedures for bail or bond schedule. 
(a)  Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation or summons, or at any time before trial, before or after arraignment, the defendant may be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the judge, who shall prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail and release of the defendant. In case of arrests made at night or under other conditions of emergency or when the judge is not available, the rules shall authorize the chief of police, or his designated representative, to accept a temporary bond, in the form of cash, money order, credit card, or surety bond by a licensed bondsman, of not less than $10.00 nor more than the maximum monetary penalty provided by ordinance for the offense charged. The judge or police chief is authorized, subject to conditions as may be prescribed by the judge, to release a resident of the city on personal recognizance. 
(b)  The city's bail bond schedule setting forth specific offenses and bail bond amounts and procedures therefor, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Prior Code, § 15-24; Code 1999, § 6-119; Ord. No. 408(03), 5-5-2003; Ord. No. 513(05), 8-15-2005)  
Sec. 6-120. - Arraignment. 
Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant shall be arraigned. The judge, or the city attorney, shall read the complaint to the defendant, inform him of his legal rights, including the right of trial by jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is not for jury trial, the court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for hearing at a later date. 
(Prior Code, § 15-25; Code 1999, § 6-120)  
Sec. 6-121. - Postponement of trial. 
Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof. If the continuance of any matter is by motion or request of the defendant, a fee as established by the fee schedule shall be added, unless waived by the court, to the court costs authorized by section 6-127. 
(Prior Code, § 15-26; Code 1999, § 6-121; Ord. No. 794(15), 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 6-122. - Defendant's presence required at trial. 
The defendant must be present in person at the trial of his case in court. 
(Prior Code, § 15-27; Code 1999, § 6-122)  
Sec. 6-123. - Procedure for trials not within scope of chapter. 
Except as otherwise provided for by law, the code of procedure in the municipal court shall be the same as is provided for by law for the trial of misdemeanors. The court shall take judicial notice of state statutes and the ordinances of the city in which it is located. Writs and processes of the court may be issued by the judge or clerk thereof to any proper officer. All writs and processes of the municipal court in which a violation of a municipal ordinance is charged shall be directed to the chief of police, a county sheriff, or to some other appropriate peace officer. A law enforcement officer of the city or county sheriff may serve an arrest warrant issued by the municipal court any place within the state. If the warrant is served by a county sheriff, the city shall pay the sheriff's service fee account a fee of $20.00. 
(Prior Code, § 15-28; Code 1999, § 6-123) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-113.  
Sec. 6-124. - Judgment. 
At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered without undue delay by the judge, who shall cause it to be entered in his docket. 
(1)  If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be detained for any other legal cause, he must be discharged at once; 
(2)  If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after trial, the court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly; and 
(3)  A judgment that the defendant pay a fine may direct also that he be imprisoned until the fine is satisfied, as provided in section 6-128. 
(Prior Code, §§ 15-30—15-33; Code 1999, § 6-124)  
Sec. 6-125. - Judgment of imprisonment. 
If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy thereof, certified by the clerk, shall be delivered to the chief of police, the sheriff of the county, or other appropriate officer. Such copy shall be sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence. 
(Prior Code, § 15-34; Code 1999, § 6-125)  
Sec. 6-126. - Suspension or deferment of judgment, powers. 
(a)  The judge of the court in imposing a judgment and sentence, at his discretion, is empowered to modify, reduce or suspend or defer the imposition of such sentence or any part thereof and to authorize the person to be released upon his own recognizance for a period not to exceed six months from the date of the sentence, under such terms or conditions as the judge may specify. The judge may, with the consent of the defendant, defer further proceedings, after a verdict, finding or plea of guilty, but before passing a judgment of guilt and imposing a fine, and place the defendant on probation for a period not to exceed six months, under such terms and conditions as prescribed by the court, which may include, but not be limited to, work on the streets, parks or other city-owned or maintained projects, with proper supervision. 
(b)  A defendant is not entitled to a deferred sentence if the defendant has been previously convicted of a felony. 
(c)  Upon a finding of the court that the conditions of release have been violated, the municipal judge may enter a judgment of guilty and may cause a warrant to be issued for the defendant. 
(d)  Upon the issuance of the warrant or judgment of guilty being entered, the person shall be delivered forthwith to the place of confinement to which he is sentenced and shall serve out the full term or pay the full fine for which he was originally sentenced as may be directed by the judge. 
(e)  The judge may continue or delay imposing a judgment and sentence for a period of time not to exceed six months from the date of the sentence. At the expiration of such period, the judge may allow the city attorney to amend the charge to a lesser offense. 
(f)  If a deferred sentence is imposed, an administrative fee or fee in lieu of a fine of up to $200.00 for traffic offenses involving speeding or parking violations, up to $500.00 for all other violations, and up to $800.00 for drug and alcohol violations, may be imposed as costs in the case. The court may make payment of the fee a condition of granting or continuing the imposition of a sentence, if the defendant is able to pay. 
(g)  The court may also require restitution and in the event there was damage done to public or private property during the commission of the offense, the court may require the defendant to repair or replace such damaged property as a condition to a deferred sentence as may be directed by the court. 
(Prior Code, §§ 15-35, 15-36; Code 1999, § 6-126; Ord. No. 459, 8-1-1988; Ord. No. 481(04), 10-18-2004; Ord. No. 553(06), 9-5-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-123.  
Sec. 6-127. - Payment of costs by defendant. 
(a)  If judgement of conviction is entered, after the conclusion of a trial or by plea of guilty or nolo contendere in open court before the municipal judge, the clerk of the court shall tax the costs to the defendant in the maximum sum permitted by state law, plus the fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses, plus a technology fee, plus a fee for the filing of an expungement order, continuance fees, all of which the defendant shall pay, in addition to any fine may which be imposed. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the municipal attorney may ask the court to require a person confined in a city or county jail, for any offense, to pay the jail facility the costs of incarceration, both before and after conviction, upon conviction or receiving a deferred sentence. The costs of incarceration shall be collected by the clerk of the court. Costs of incarceration shall include booking, receiving and processing out, housing, food, clothing, medical care, dental care, and psychiatric services. The costs of incarceration shall be an amount equal to the actual cost of the services and shall be determined by the chief of police for city jails, or by contract amount, if applicable. The cost of incarceration shall be paid to the municipality, county or other public entity responsible for the operation of all jail facilities where the person is held before and after conviction. The costs shall not be assessed if the defendant is a mentally ill person as defined by 43A O.S. § 1-103. Ten percent of any amount collected shall be paid to the municipal attorney's office, the remaining amount shall be paid to the municipality, the sheriff's service fee account, if the sheriff does not operate the jail facility, the remaining amount shall be deposited with the public entity responsible for the operation of the jail facility where the person is held. 
(c)  Any offender injured during the commission of a felony or misdemeanor offense shall be required to reimburse the sheriff, municipality or other public entity responsible for the operation of the jail, the full amount paid by the sheriff, municipality or other public entity responsible for the operation of the jail for any medical care or treatment administered to such offender during any period of incarceration or preceding incarceration in that jail facility. The sheriff, municipality or other public entity responsible for the operation of the jail may deduct the costs of medical care and treatment resulting from the commission of a felony or misdemeanor offense from any money collected from such inmate's jail account as authorized by 19 O.S. § 531. If the funds collected from the inmate's jail account are insufficient to satisfy the actual medical costs paid as a result of the commission of a felony or misdemeanor offense, the court shall order the remaining balance of the medical care treatment to be paid. 
(Prior Code, § 15-37; Code 1999, § 6-127; Ord. No. 467, 10-17-1988; Ord. No. 274(00), 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 409(03), 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 564(06), 10-16-2006; Ord. No. 795(15), 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 6-128. - Witness fees. 
(a)  Witnesses in any proceeding in the court, other than police or peace officers who shall be employed by the city, shall be entitled to a witness fee as established by the city council by motion or resolution per each day of attendance, plus mileage per mile actually and necessarily traveled in going to and returning from the place of attendance, if the residence is more than ten miles distant from the place of trial. No witness, however, shall receive fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or for the same travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with the court clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of attendance for each witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting forth: 
(1)  The names of no more witnesses than the municipal judge for the city shall determine to be just, necessary and reasonable for the proper defense of such indigent's case; 
(2)  That the defendant by reason of his poverty is unable to provide the fees and mileage allowed by law; 
(3)  That the testimony of such witness is material; and 
(4)  That the attendance at the trial is necessary to his proper defense. 
(b)  In any case where an indigent defendant has properly filled out and filed with the city an affidavit setting forth the above-mentioned information, the fees for such witnesses shall be paid for by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 15-29; Code 1999, § 6-128)  
Sec. 6-129. - Enforcement of fines and costs, imprisonment, work and community service. 
(a)  If a defendant who is financially able refuses or neglects to pay a fine or costs, or both, payment may be enforced: 
(1)  By imprisonment until the same shall be satisfied at the rate of $25.00 per day; 
(2)  The amount established by state law; or 
(3)  In the same manner as is prescribed in subsection (b) of this section for a defendant who is without means to make such payment. 
(b)  If the defendant is without means to pay the fine or costs, the municipal judge may direct the total amount due to be entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the district court in the county where the situs of the municipal government is located, where it shall be entered upon the district court judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of a district court judgment. The same remedies shall be available for the enforcement of the judgment as are available to any other judgment creditor. 
(c)  All defendants, upon conviction or on plea of guilty, may work on community projects, the public streets, avenues or ways, public buildings or other public premises or property as may be ordered by the judge. For such work, the defendant shall be credited toward any fine or costs or witness or juror fees or mileage until the same are satisfied. 
(d)  The city shall direct where the work shall be performed. The appropriate officer shall oversee the work. If a guard is necessary, the chief of police shall make provision therefor. 
(Code 1999, § 6-129) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-122.  
Sec. 6-130. - Same offense punishable by different sections of Code. 
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different sections of this Code, the city attorney may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense. 
(Code 1999, § 6-130)  
Sec. 6-131. - Contempt of court. 
Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the court may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt committed as to him while holding court, or committed against process issued by him, in the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of the state. 
(Prior Code, § 15-38; Code 1999, § 6-131)  
Sec. 6-132. - Juvenile traffic offenses. 
(a)  The municipal court of the city shall have the power to try minors for violation of all ordinances pertaining to traffic matters and as otherwise set forth by state law. 
(b)  When the person charged with a municipal traffic violation is a minor, the citing police officer shall ascertain from the minor the name and address of his parent or legal guardian, and that officer shall cause a copy of the violation or a letter containing the same information to be mailed to the address of the parent or legal guardian, within three days after the date of the violation. 
(c)  All actions against minors for violation of municipal traffic offenses shall be heard and determined in the manner provided by law for the trial of all other municipal traffic offenses and shall carry the same penalty upon conviction, except no minor may be detained in any jail, adult lockup, or other adult detention facility. 
(d)  For purposes of enforcing this section relation to traffic offenses committed by minors, a minor shall be defined as a person between the ages of 18 and 14 years of age, inclusive. 
(Prior Code, § 15-4, in part; Code 1999, § 6-132) 
State Law reference— Juvenile jurisdiction, 10A O.S. § 2-2-103.  
Sec. 6-133. - Penalty assessments. 
(a)  Any person: 
(1)  Convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of $10.00 or more or by imprisonment, excluding parking and standing violations; or 
(2)  Forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense under subsection (a) (1) of this section; 
shall pay a sum as set by state law as a separate penalty assessment for law enforcement training, and as a separate fingerprinting fee, which shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any and all fines and penalties and costs otherwise provided for such offense. The court shall provide for separate bail for the assessments; however, a defendant admitted to bail on an undertaking by a surety may include the amount of the assessment in the undertaking. 
(b)  Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the court shall collect the assessment and deposit the monies for payment as required by state law. 
(c)  At the end of every quarter the city shall deposit with the state treasury the funds deposited in the law enforcement training funds and the A.F.I.S. (automated fingerprint identification system) fund as required by law. The court clerk shall also furnish to the state treasury reports required on the funds collected and penalty assessments imposed each quarter. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, the term "conviction" means any final adjudication of guilt, whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or otherwise, and any deferred or suspended sentence or judgment. 
(Prior Code, § 15-37.1; Code 1999, § 6-133; Ord. No. 349, 12-19-1983)  
Sec. 6-134. - Fines recoverable by civil action; failure to pay separate offense, imprisonment. 
(a)  All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law. 
(b)  The failure to pay a fine levied pursuant to this Code shall constitute a separate offense against the city, subject to a fine as provided in section 1-108. 
(c)  If a fine is not paid by the defendant, the fine may be collected by working in accordance with other provisions of this Code or state law. 
(Code 1999, § 6-134)  
CHAPTER 2. - JUDGE 
 
Sec. 6-201. - Created; qualifications. 
There shall be one judge of the court. The judge shall be duly licensed to practice law in the state. He need not reside within the city. He may engage in the practice of law while serving as municipal judge. He may serve as judge of other municipal courts if such service may be accomplished consistently with his duties as judge of this court, with the consent of the council. 
(Prior Code, § 15-5; Code 1999, § 6-201) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-104.  
Sec. 6-202. - Term of office. 
The official term of the judge shall be indefinite. 
(Prior Code, § 15-7; Code 1999, § 6-202) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-104.  
Sec. 6-203. - Acting judge. 
If at any time there is no judge duly appointed and qualified available to sit as judge, a person possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the judge shall be appointed by the city manager as acting judge. The acting judge shall preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of pending matters until such time as a judge or alternate judge shall be available. 
(Prior Code, § 15-11; Code 1999, § 6-203)  
Sec. 6-204. - Appointment of judge, alternate judge. 
(a)  Judges shall be appointed as provided in the city Charter. 
(b)  There may be appointed for each judge of the court an alternate judge possessed of the same qualifications as the judge. His appointment shall be for the same term and made in the same manner as the judge. He shall sit as judge of the court in any case if the judge is absent from court, unable to act as judge, or disqualified from acting as judge in the case. 
(Prior Code, §§ 15-6, 15-11; Code 1999, § 6-204)  
Sec. 6-205. - Compensation. 
A judge shall receive such salary as may be established and shall be paid in the same manner as the salaries of other officials of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 6-205)  
Sec. 6-206. - Removal of judge from office. 
(a)  Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the council for the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of the state for the removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the filing of a verified written petition, setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by the mayor, or 25 or more qualified electors of the city. In the latter event, verification may be executed by one or more of the petitioners. 
(b)  The council shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served personally upon the judge at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing, the judge shall be entitled to representation by counsel, to present testimony and to cross examine the witnesses against him, and to have all evidence against him presented in open hearing. 
(c)  So far as can be made applicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma Administrative Procedure Act (75 O.S. § 250 et seq.) governing individual proceedings shall govern removal proceedings hereunder. 
(d)  Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority of all members of the council, in favor of such removal. 
(Prior Code, § 15-13; Code 1999, § 6-206) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-104.  
Sec. 6-207. - Vacancy. 
(a)  A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent: 
(1)  Dies; 
(2)  Resigns; 
(3)  Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or 
(4)  Is removed, and the removal proceeding has been affirmed finally in judicial proceedings or is no longer subject to judicial review. 
(b)  Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge, the city manager shall appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term, upon the same procedure as an original appointment is made. 
(Prior Code, § 15-14; Code 1999, § 6-207)  
Sec. 6-208. - Additional duties of judge, advice to boards and commissions. 
(a)  The judge is hereby given additional duties and responsibilities to appear and advise all boards and commission on all procedural and other legal matters that may come before the boards and commissions while the boards and commissions are hearing contested appeals and conducting adversary proceedings. Such boards shall include, but not be limited to, the personnel board, board of adjustment, planning and zoning commission, pre-determination employment hearings, grievance hearings conducted by the personnel board or by boards established in labor contracts with the city, and any other contested hearings or adversary proceeding hearing for which the judge is directed by the city council or the city manager to appear and advise. 
(b)  The judge shall be paid extra compensation for the additional services require by the terms of this section. The judge shall submit a claim at the conclusion of each hearing for his fee for the time devoted to such individual hearing. 
(Code 1999, § 6-208; Ord. No. 415, 10-20-1986)  
CHAPTER 3. - JURY TRIALS 
 
Sec. 6-301. - Right to trial by jury, waiver. 
(a)  In all prosecutions for violations of ordinances punishable by fine of more than $200.00, or by imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment, trial shall be by jury unless waived by the defendant. If trial by jury is waived, trial shall be by the court. 
(b)  At arraignment, the defendant shall be asked whether he demands or waives trial by jury. His election shall be recorded in the minutes of the arraignment and entered on the docket of the court respecting proceedings in the case. 
(c)  An election waiving jury trial, made at arraignment, may be changed by the defendant at any time prior to the day for which trial by the court is set. An election demanding jury trial may be changed at any time prior to the commencement of proceedings to impanel the jury for the trial; but if that change occurs after the case has been set for jury trial, it may not thereafter be rechanged so as again to demand trial by jury. 
(Prior Code, §§ 15-51—15-53; Code 1999, § 6-301; Ord. No. 135(95), 11-6-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 27 O.S. § 27-119.  
Sec. 6-302. - Selection of jurors. 
Jurors in the municipal court shall be selected pursuant to this section under the same terms and conditions as are provided for by law for the district courts, or in the alternative, pursuant to 38 O.S. § 18.1. Upon written request of the judge of the municipal court for a stated number of jurors to the chief judge of the appropriate district court, it shall be the duty of the clerk of the district court to draw from the jury wheel a requested number of jurors in the same manner as is provided by law for the district court until the number requested, who from their addresses appear to reside within the corporate limits of the city, is drawn, and to prepare a list of names drawn and certify such list to the judge of the municipal court. On completion of the draw, the clerk shall immediately return to the jury wheel all names drawn which are not placed on the certified list. The judge of the municipal court shall make written request to the chief judge of the district court for a stated number of additional jurors if, after allowance of claimed statutory exemptions, the listed number is found to be insufficient. Summons of the prospective jurors shall be issued as set out by ordinance, and may be served in person by the chief of police or any member of the police force of the city, or may be served by the clerk of the municipal court by mail. 
(Prior Code, § 15-54; Code 1999, § 6-302) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 27 O.S. § 27-120.  
Sec. 6-303. - Summons of jurors; form; service. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the jury list, the clerk of the court shall cause a summons substantially in the following form to be issued and served upon each person on the list: 
State of Oklahoma 	) 	
	) 	ss. 
County of Cleveland 	) 	
 
To (name of juror) Greetings: You hereby are summoned to appear in the Municipal Court for the City of Moore, Oklahoma, to be held at (specify the address, room number, etc.) on the ___ day of ________, ___, at the hour of (specify hour) to serve as a juror in the Court, and to continue in such service until discharged by the Court. 
Hereof fail not, under penalty of law. 
Issued under the authority of the Court, this ___ day of ________, 2___. 
___________ 
Clerk of the Municipal 
Court of Moore, Oklahoma 
Seal of the Court 
(b)  Service shall be made, as the judge may prescribe by rule or direct by order, either in person upon the juror by the marshal of the court or by any member of the police force of the city, or the clerk of the court, through certified mail, directed to the juror at his address as given in the jury list, with request for a personally signed return receipt. In any proceeding wherein service of summons by mail is in issue, evidence of the due mailing of the summons by the clerk or a member of his staff and the presentation of an official postal return receipt purportedly signed by the addressee shall be prima facie evidence that the summons was duly received by the addressee and, therefore, that he was properly served therewith. 
(Prior Code, § 15-55; Code 1999, § 6-303)  
Sec. 6-304. - Composition of jury; duty of jurors. 
(a)  A jury in the court shall consist of six jurors, good and lawful men or women, citizens of the county possessing the qualifications of jurors in district court. 
(b)  After the jurors are sworn, they must sit together and hear the proofs and oral arguments of the parties, which must be delivered in public and in the presence of the defendant. 
(c)  A verdict of the jury may be rendered by the vote of five jurors. 
(Prior Code, §§ 15-56, 15-57, 15-60; Code 1999, § 6-304) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 27 O.S. § 27-119.  
Sec. 6-305. - Determination of questions of law. 
In all actions tried before a jury, the judge shall determine all questions of law, including questions as to the introduction of evidence, arising during the trial. He also shall instruct the jury as to the law. 
(Prior Code, § 15-58; Code 1999, § 6-305)  
Sec. 6-306. - Verdict. 
(a)  The verdict of the jury, in all cases, must be general. When the jury has arrived at its verdict, it must deliver the verdict in the docket or cause it to be so entered. 
(b)  The jury must not be discharged after the cause is submitted to it until a verdict is rendered unless the judge, for good cause, discharges it sooner, in which event the court may proceed again to trial until a verdict is rendered. 
(Prior Code,§§ 15-59, 15-61; Code 1999, § 6-306)  
Sec. 6-307. - Juror's fees. 
Jurors shall receive for their services the sum as set by the council per day, plus mileage at a rate per mile for each mile necessarily traveled by the most direct route in going to and from the court one time each day from their respective places of residence. The claims for such compensation shall show the location of the juror's residence and the route and miles traveled, and must be verified as other claims against the city are verified. 
(Prior Code, § 15-64; Code 1999, § 6-307)  
Sec. 6-308. - Cost bond for jury trial. 
When an accused requests a jury trial in the municipal court, the court may fix a reasonable sum as a cost bond and require the accused to deposit the same prior to trial. 
(Code 1999, § 6-308)  
Sec. 6-309. - Misconduct of jurors generally. 
(a)  No juror or person drawn or summoned as a juror in the municipal court shall either make any promise or agreement to give a verdict for or against the city, permit any communication to be made to him, or receive any book, paper, instruments or information relative to any cause pending before him, except in the regular course of proceedings and the trial of the case. 
(b)  No juror summoned by the court shall ask, receive or agree to receive, any bribe upon any understanding concerning his vote or decision upon any case in which he may be selected as a juror in the court. 
(c)  No person shall attempt to influence a juror summoned to appear in the court, or any person summoned as a juror, in respect to his verdict, either by means of communication, oral or written, had by him, except in the regular course of proceedings; by means of any books, paper or instruments, exhibited otherwise than in the regular course of proceedings, by any means of threat or intimidation; by means of any assurance, promise of any pecuniary or other advantage, by publishing any statement, argument, or observation relating to the case; or by talking with such juror concerning the case in any way. 
(Prior Code, § 15-62; Code 1999, § 6-309)  
Sec. 6-310. - Responsibility of officer in charge of jury. 
No officer to whose charge any jury is committed by the municipal court shall neglect or willfully permit such juror or any of them, either to receive any communication from any person; to make any communication to any person; to obtain or to receive any book, paper, or refreshment; or to leave the jury room without leave of the court being first obtained. 
(Prior Code, § 15-63; Code 1999, § 6-310)  
CHAPTER 4. - PROCEEDING AGAINST CORPORATIONS 
 
Sec. 6-401. - Summons; issuance to corporations. 
Upon complaint against a corporation being filed with the municipal court, the judge shall issue a summons signed by him with his title of office, requiring a duly authorized officer of the corporation to appear before him at a specific time and place to answer the complaint. The time for such appearance shall not be less than five days after issuance of summons. 
(Code 1999, § 6-401)  
Sec. 6-402. - Form of corporation summons. 
The summons authorized by section 6-401 must be in substantially the following form: 
In the name of the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
To ___________. 
You are hereby summoned to appear before me at _____ (place) on _____ (date and hour) to answer the complaint made against you upon the complaint of _____ for the offense of _____ (designating offense generally). 
Dated at the City of Moore, Oklahoma, this _____. 
___________ 
Municipal Judge 
(Code 1999, § 6-402)  
Sec. 6-403. - Service of summons. 
The summons authorized by section 6-401 must be served by certified mail, personally delivering a copy to, or other means authorized by state law on the registered agent of the corporation at least ten days before the day of appearance fixed therein, and may also be served by certified mail or other means to the president or head of the corporation, or to the secretary, cashier or managing agent thereof. 
(Code 1999, § 6-403)  
Sec. 6-404. - Trial. 
At the time appointed in the summons authorized by section 6-401, the municipal judge shall try the complaint in the same manner as in the case of a natural person brought before him. 
(Code 1999, § 6-404)  
Sec. 6-405. - Collection of fines. 
When a fine is imposed upon a corporation, upon conviction, it may be collected by the municipal judge making a transcript of his proceedings thereof, together with the judgment of the court duly certified and filed with the clerk of the district court of the county. Execution shall be issued thereon and served by the sheriff of the county as in cases of execution generally. 
(Code 1999, § 6-405)  
Part 7 - FINANCE AND TAXATION  
CHAPTER 1. - FINANCES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-101. - Appropriation of monies. 
All monies, however derived, belonging to the city shall only be appropriated for such objects, and defraying such expenses as accrue or necessarily arise in the exercise of powers granted by law, the Charter and ordinances of the city. No appropriation shall be made without an order to that effect entered upon a proper book to be kept for that purpose by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2-196; Code 1999, § 7-101)  
Sec. 7-102. - Investments. 
The city treasurer or any other person authorized to invest public monies shall invest the same in those investments authorized by the city council or authorized by state law in a manner authorized by either or both such council and statutes. 
(Prior Code, § 2-198; Code 1999, § 7-102)  
Sec. 7-103. - Depositories designated, deposit of funds. 
All banks and financial institutions as are designated by the city council shall be designated as depositories for the funds of the city. The city treasurer shall deposit daily all public funds received by him in these banks. Funds may be transferred from one depository to another upon direction of the treasurer. 
(Prior Code, § 2-211; Code 1999, § 7-103)  
Sec. 7-104. - Capital improvement fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created a capital improvement fund and monies for capital improvement shall be deposited therein. Money in the fund may be accumulated from year to year. Such fund shall be placed in an insured interest bearing account. Such fund shall be nonfiscal and shall not be considered in computing any levy when the city makes an estimate for needed appropriations. Money in the capital improvement fund may be expended for any capital improvement. 
(b)  No funds shall be appropriated or expended from the capital improvement fund in the absence of a recorded vote of the city council and until claims duly verified by affidavit are presented and approved by the city council. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "capital improvement" means all items and articles, either new or replacements, not consumed with use but only diminished in value with prolonged use, including, but not limited to, roads and streets, drainage improvements, water and sewage improvements, machinery, equipment, furniture and fixtures, all real property, all construction or reconstruction of buildings, appurtenances and improvements to real property, the cost and expenses related thereto of rights-of-way or other real property, engineering, architectural or legal fees, and payment for improvements for which subsequent reimbursement is made to the capital improvement fund. 
(Prior Code, § 2-246; Code 1999, § 7-105)  
Sec. 7-105. - Authorized signature on checks and warrants. 
All checks or warrants issued by the city shall be signed by either the mayor or the city treasurer, the vice-mayor or the assistant city treasurer, using either original or facsimile signatures. The facsimile signatures shall be filed with the secretary of state. 
(Code 1999, § 7-106; Ord. No. 84(94), 6-6-1994) 
State Law reference— Uniform Facsimile Signature of Public Officials Act, 62 O.S. § 601 et seq.  
CHAPTER 2. - PURCHASES BY CITY 
 
Sec. 7-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Contractual services means services performed for the city by persons not in the employment of the city, and may include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in connection with such services under express or implied contract. Contractual services includes travel; freight; express; parcel post; postage; telephone; telegraph; utilities; rents; repairs, alterations, and maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets, and bridges, and other physical facilities of the city; and other services performed for the city by persons not in the employment of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2-226; Code 1999, § 7-201; Ord. No. 95(94), 9-19-1994; Ord. No. 127(95), 6-19-1995; Ord. No. 142(96), 1-16-1996)  
Sec. 7-202. - By whom made. 
(a)  All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services for the offices, departments and agencies of the city government shall be made by the city manager or by other city personnel in accordance with purchase authorizations issued by the city manager, and section 7-203. 
(b)  The city council does hereby authorize the city manager or designee, as authorized by 62 O.S. § 310.1(C), to approve payment of any claims or invoices in an amount of $15,000.00 or less for supplies, materials, services or equipment submitted to the city for payment. The city manager shall establish an internal control structure adequate to provide reasonable assurance against the unauthorized or illegal payment of invoices. Such system of internal control should include the following control procedures: 
(1)  Proper authorization of transaction and activities; 
(2)  Adequate segregation of duties; 
(3)  Adequate documents and records; 
(4)  Adequate safeguards over access to and use of assets and records; and 
(5)  Independent checks on performance. 
(c)  Elements of the internal control structures, which are the control environment and the accounting system, must be included. The control environment shall consist of the overall attitude, awareness and actions of the governing body and management, including a foresighted management policy toward financial reporting. The methods and records of an effective accounting system shall result in: 
(1)  Identification and recording of all valid transactions; 
(2)  Description on a timely basis of the type of transaction in sufficient detail to permit proper classification of the transaction for financial reporting; 
(3)  Measurements of the transactions value in a manner that permits recording of its monetary value in the financial statements; 
(4)  Determination of the time period in which the transaction occurred to permit recording of the transaction in the proper accounting period; 
(5)  Proper presentation of the transaction and related disclosures in financial statements. 
(d)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The city manager shall not receive, consider, analyze, process, settle or litigate claims against the city and the authority arising out of any of the areas or risks covered by or included in the program whether or not they are or may be payable from the general operating account created under section 6 of Moore Public Works Authority Resolution 166(97). The city risk management board approval shall be required to settle all non-health related claims in the amount of $5,000.00 or less and to settle all health related claims regardless of an amount; provided, however, all health related claims in the amount of $10,000.00 or more shall be considered as a separate item at any regular or special meeting of the city risk management board. The general manager of the authority may approve the settlement of any non-health related claims over $5,000.00 but less than $10,000.00. The authority shall approve the settlement of all non-health related claims in the amount of $10,000.00 or more as stated in Moore Public Works Authority Resolution 166(97). 
(2)  The city council does hereby authorize the city manager or designee to approve payment of any claim or invoices for supplies, materials, services or equipment submitted to the city for payment of monthly utility billing, payments on prior council-approved contractual agreements, and general obligation bond projects pursuant to their contract. Examples of this include the following vendors: 
a.  Oklahoma Natural Gas. 
b.  Oklahoma Gas and Electric. 
c.  Oklahoma Electric Cooperative. 
d.  City of Oklahoma City. 
e.  All American Waste. 
f.  Veolia Water/US Filter/Professional Services Group. 
g.  Silverstar Construction. 
h.  Construction or engineering companies related to G.O. Bond projects. 
i.  Software vendors. 
(Prior Code, § 2-227; Code 1999, § 7-202; Ord. No. 95(94), 9-19-1994; Ord. No. 127(95), 6-19-1995; Ord. No. 142(96), 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 213(97), 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 478(04), 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 545(06), 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 571(07), 1-2-2007)  
Sec. 7-203. - Prior approval required; splitting contracts prohibited. 
(a)  Except as limited herein, every contract for, or purchase of, supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for more than $15,000.00 shall require prior approval of the city council. The following contracts or purchases must have council approval regardless of the dollar amount involved, or whether or not they are required to be competitively bid: 
(1)  Contracts for professional services or employment contracts for nonclassified personnel, in excess of $7,500.00 whether on a full- or part-time basis, or whether for a term certain or at will; 
(2)  All lease purchase agreements or contract which terms will extend beyond the fiscal year or wherein at the time of termination the city shall be or may be obligated for additional expenditures above the lease purchase price. 
Under no circumstances may such contracts or purchases be made without first obtaining approval of the council. 
(b)  No contracts involving sums in excess of $25,000.00 shall be split into partial contracts involving sums of below $25,000.00, nor shall any contracts be made in two or more iterations or sequential executions with the intent to evade the competitive bidding requirements of this Code or state law or with the intent to evade the monetary spending limits imposed by this section. All such partial contracts involving less than $25,000.00 shall be void. 
(Prior Code, § 2-228; Code 1999, § 7-203; Res. No. 262, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 542, 1-22-1991; Ord. No. 63(93), 10-18-1993; Ord. No. 95(94), 9-19-1994; Ord. No. 127(95), 6-19-1995; Ord. No. 142(96), 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 467(04), 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 572(07), 1-2-2007)  
Sec. 7-204. - Bidding generally. 
Before any purchase of, or contract for, supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services is made, except as otherwise provided in section 7-203, the city purchasing authority shall submit to at least three persons dealing in and able to supply the same, a request for quotation (or invitation to bid) and specifications, to give them opportunity to bid; or publish notice of the proposed purchase in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. He shall favor a person in the city when this can be done without additional cost to the city; but he shall submit requests for quotation to those outside the city when this may be necessary to secure bids or to create competitive conditions, or when he thinks that by so doing he can make a saving for the city; and shall purchase from them when he can make a saving for the city. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated time and place. He may repeatedly reject all bids, and again may submit to the same or other persons the request for quotation (or invitation to bid), or again publish notice of the proposed purchase. He may purchase only from the bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the city, considering price, quality, date of delivery, and so on. In the case of a tie, he may purchase from one of those tying, or may divide the purchase among those tying, always accepting the bids most advantageous to the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2-229; Code 1999, § 7-204; Ord. No. 95(94), 9-19-1994; Ord. No. 127(95), 6-19-1995; Ord. No. 142(96), 1-16-1996) 
State Law reference— Public competitive bidding, 61 O.S. § 101 et seq.  
Sec. 7-205. - When bidding not required. 
The following may be purchased without giving an opportunity for competitive bidding: 
(1)  Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services where cost does not exceed $50,000.00 in a single transaction; 
(2)  Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can be furnished only by a single dealer, or which have a uniform price wherever bought; 
(3)  Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased from another unit of government at a price deemed below that obtainable from private dealers, including war surplus, or purchased at auction at a price deemed below that obtainable elsewhere; 
(4)  Equipment to replace existing equipment which has become inoperable when the council declares the purchase an emergency; 
(5)  Contractual services (gas, electricity, telephone service, and the like) purchased from a public utility at a price or rate determined by the state corporation commission or other government authority; 
(6)  Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when purchased at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the state purchasing agency, the Federal Purchasing Agency known as the United States General Services Administration (GSA), or any other state or federal agency authorized to regulate prices for things purchased by the state or United States (whether such price is determined by a contract negotiated with a vendor or otherwise); Department of Corrections (DOC) products; 
(7)  Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering, architectural, medical and legal services; 
(8)  Supplies, materials or equipment purchased from a vendor or another state governmental entity, at a price not exceeding a price established under the competitive bidding process undertaken by the governmental entity, such as a county or city government, provided that the competitive bid was a valid competitive bid, was submitted to more than three vendors, and no more than six months have passed since the receipt of the bids or proposals by the governmental entity. Proof of the above shall be presented to council with any request for an exception under this section; 
(9)  Public construction contracts not exceeding the amount established by state law, awarded by the city for the purpose of making any public improvements or constructing any public building or making repairs to or performing maintenance on the same. Public improvement as used in the previous sentence shall mean any beneficial or valuable change or addition, betterment, enhancement or amelioration of or upon any real property, or interest therein, belonging to a public agency, intended to enhance its value, beauty or utility or to adapt it to new or further purposes. The term "public improvement" does not include the direct purchase of materials, equipment or supplies by a public agency or any personal property as defined in 62 O.S. § 430.1(B); or 
(10)  Material or equipment needing repair when covered by a policy of insurance where the repair does not exceed $15,000.00. 
(Prior Code, § 2-230; Code 1999, § 7-205; Ord. No. 8(91), 12-16-1991; Ord. No. 95(94), 9-19-1994; Ord. No. 127(95), 6-19-1995; Ord. No. 142(96), 1-16-1996; Ord. No. 343(02), 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 614(08), 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 766(14), 2-18-2014)  
Sec. 7-206. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  An emergency condition is a situation which creates a threat to public health, welfare or safety, such as may arise by reason of floods, epidemics, riots, equipment failures, or such other reason as may be proclaimed by the city manager. The existence of such condition creates an immediate and serious need for supplies, services or construction that cannot be met through normal procurement methods and the lack of which would seriously threaten: 
(1)  The function of the city government; 
(2)  The preservation or protection of property; or 
(3)  The health or safety of any persons. 
(b)  The city manager may make emergency procurements in accordance with the purchasing policies when an emergency condition arises and the need cannot be met through normal procurement methods. 
(Code 1999, § 7-206; Ord. No. 95(94), 9-19-1994; Ord. No. 127(95), 6-19-1995; Ord. No. 142(96), 1-16-1996)  
Sec. 7-207. - Disposition of surplus or obsolete materials, bidding. 
Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment of a value of more than $500.00 may not be sold until the council shall have declared them surplus or obsolete. Before the city manager sells any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, he shall advertise them for sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or give notice in such other manner as he deems necessary adequately to reach prospective buyers to give them opportunity to make bids. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated time and place, except when the sale is by auction. The city manager may repeatedly reject all bids and advertise or give notice again. He may sell such supplies, materials or equipment only to the highest responsible bidder for cash. In case of a tie, he may sell to either of the bidders tying, or may divide the sale among two or more tying, always selling to the highest responsible bidders for cash. 
(Prior Code, § 2-231; Code 1999, § 7-207; Ord. No. 63(93), 10-18-1993)  
Sec. 7-208. - When competitive bidding not required. 
The city manager may dispose of the following without giving an opportunity for competitively bidding: 
(1)  Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment whose total value does not exceed $500.00 in a single transaction; 
(2)  Supplies, materials or equipment when sold at a price at least as great as that paid by the city for the same; or 
(3)  When any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment has a value in excess of $500.00 and the city council in its discretion and upon such terms, conditions and for such consideration as it deems advisable may lease, loan, sell or donate said surplus material or equipment which it has declared obsolete to any not-for-profit corporation as defined in 18 O.S., other governmental agencies, political subdivisions, charitable groups or organizations, boards of education for any vocational and technical schools or area school district, and any legitimate organization as determined by the council to be in need of said surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment. 
(Prior Code, § 2-232; Code 1999, § 7-208; Ord. No. 353(02), 4-1-2002)  
Sec. 7-209. - Sale of property. 
(a)  The real property described as Lots 2 and 3, Oldtowne Industrial Addition, being a part of the NE/4, Section 14, T10N, R3W, I.M., Moore, Cleveland County, Oklahoma, also known as 1000 and 1004 Messenger Lane owned by the City of Moore free and clear of all liens and encumbrances shall be sold to the best and most responsible bidder as determined by the city council through advertising and receipt of sealed bids. The city council reserves the right to reject all bids and rebid the sale at a later date. 
(b)  This chapter shall be referred to a vote of the electors of the city if a legal and sufficient referendum petition is properly filed within 30 days after its passage; otherwise it shall go into effect 30 days after its passage and publication. 
(Code 1999, § 7-211; Ord. No. 783(14), § 7-211, 11-3-2014)  
CHAPTER 3. - SALES TAX[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State sales tax, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.; municipal sales taxes, 68 O.S. § 2701 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 7-301. - Citation of chapter. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City Sales Tax Ordinance." 
(Prior Code, § 21-16; Code 1999, § 7-301)  
Sec. 7-302. - Definitions. 
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in 68 O.S. § 1352 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. In addition thereto, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tax collector means the department of the city or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax herein levied. 
(Prior Code, § 21-18, in part; Code 1999, § 7-302)  
Sec. 7-303. - Classification of taxpayers. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the state sales tax code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 21-28; Code 1999, § 7-303)  
Sec. 7-304. - Subsisting state permits. 
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the state tax commission pursuant to the state sales tax code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.) are, for the purpose of this chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 21-19; Code 1999, § 7-304)  
Sec. 7-305. - Purpose of revenues; disposition of proceeds. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the purpose of the revenues generated by the first and second cent sales taxes levied herein to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the purpose of the revenues levied by the one cent sales tax levied by Ordinance No. 331 to provide revenues for the making of capital improvements to physical properties of the city; paying the costs and expenses of general and special purposes of the municipal government of the city; improving the sanitary sewer system throughout the city; and the payment of the principal of, and interest on, indebtedness incurred by the city or any duly constituted authority thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 21-20; Code 1999, § 7-305)  
Sec. 7-306. - Tax rate; sales subject to tax. 
There is hereby levied an excise tax of three percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the state sales tax code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 21-21; Code 1999, § 7-306; Ord. No. 595(07), 7-16-2007; Ord. No. 677(10), 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 725(12), 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 7-307. - Exemptions, sales subject to other tax. 
There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the state sales tax code. 
(Prior Code, § 21-22, in part; Code 1999, § 7-307)  
Sec. 7-308. - Tax due and payable. 
The tax levied under this chapter shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the sales tax law of the state. 
(Prior Code, § 21-25; Code 1999, § 7-313)  
Sec. 7-309. - Payment of tax; brackets. 
(a)  The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time in form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax under the sales tax law of the state. 
(b)  The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax collector shall be as the same is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the city and the tax collector, in the collection of both the city sales tax and the state sales tax. 
(Prior Code, § 21-26; Code 1999, § 7-314)  
Sec. 7-310. - Tax constitutes prior claim. 
Taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Prior Code, § 21-27; Code 1999, § 7-315)  
Sec. 7-311. - Vendor's duty to collect tax. 
(a)  The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor; and each and every vendor shall collect from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent thereof. 
(b)  Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sales price or charge; and, when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(c)  No vendor shall willfully or intentionally fail, neglect or refuse to collect the full amount of the tax levied; or willfully or intentionally fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter; or remit or rebate to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied; or make in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner whatsoever. 
(Prior Code, § 21-28; Code 1999, § 7-316) 
State Law reference— Vendor's duty to collect tax, 68 O.S. § 1310.  
Sec. 7-312. - Returns and remittances; discounts. 
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the state sales tax code; and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the code for collection of state sales taxes. 
(Prior Code, § 21-30; Code 1999, § 7-317)  
Sec. 7-313. - Interest and penalties; delinquency; discount forfeiture. 
(a)  68 O.S. § 217 is adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(b)  Interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts specified in the state statute cited in subsection (a) of this section are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter. 
(c)  The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. 
(d)  If such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 21-31; Code 1999, § 7-318)  
Sec. 7-314. - Waiver of interest and penalties. 
(a)  The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220. 
(b)  To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 220 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 21-32; Code 1999, § 7-319)  
Sec. 7-315. - Erroneous payments; claim for refund. 
(a)  Refund or erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227. 
(b)  To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 21-33; Code 1999, § 7-320)  
Sec. 7-316. - Failure to file, fraudulent returns; penalties. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Intentionally fail or refuse to make tax reports and remittances as required under this chapter; or 
(2)  Intentionally make false and fraudulent tax reports for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof due under this chapter. 
(b)  Any person required to collect and remit sales tax pursuant to the state sales tax code or this Code, and engaging in any of the callings, trades, avocations, professions, businesses or occupations for which a license is required by the city, and applying for such license, must submit proof as a condition precedent to issuing such license of a valid sales tax permit number issued by the state. 
(c)  Any license issued by the city to any person engaging in any of the callings, trades, avocations, businesses, professions or occupations for which a license is required by this Code may be suspended or revoked for failure to maintain a lawful sales tax license or collect and remit sales tax if and as required by the state sales tax code or this Code. 
(d)  In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, any violation of this section shall subject the offending taxpayer to the penalty set forth in section 1-108. Each day of such violation shall be considered a separate offense and charged separately. 
(Prior Code, § 21-34; Code 1999, § 7-321; Ord. No. 416, 11-3-1986)  
Sec. 7-317. - Tax records confidential. 
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared; and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, and all subsections thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as if here set forth in full. 
(Prior Code, § 21-35; Code 1999, § 7-322)  
Sec. 7-318. - Provisions cumulative. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 21-37; Code 1999, § 7-323)  
Sec. 7-319. - Amendments to chapter. 
The council, by ordinance duly enacted, is authorized to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 21-36; Code 1999, § 7-324)  
Sec. 7-320. - Additional 0.50 percent sales tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in the state sales tax code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.), as amended from time to time (hereinafter referred to as the "state sales tax code") are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. 
(b)  Effective date and date of termination. Subject to approval of a majority of the registered voters of the City of Moore, Oklahoma, voting on same as prescribed by law, to be held on November 6, 2018, the ordinance shall commence and be effective April 1, 2019, provided, that such extension of the existing sales tax shall be limited to a duration of four years and shall terminate March 31, 2023. 
(c)  Purpose of revenues. The City of Moore, Oklahoma sales tax ordinance, the same being Ordinance No. 60, as amended by Ordinance No. 331 (83), as amended by Ordinance No. 470 (88), as amended by Ordinance No. 551 (06), as amended by Ordinance No. 677 (10), as amended by Ordinance No. 780 (14) (collectively referred to as the "sales tax ordinance"), is hereby amended by adding the following language to said sales tax ordinance, for the following purpose: 
(1)  Purpose of extension of existing 0.50 percent sales tax. It is hereby declared that the extension of the existing 0.50 percent sales tax levied by this section shall be in addition to the other sales tax levied by said sales tax ordinance as may be hereafter amended from time to time, and the proceeds of such sales tax, or proceeds of borrowings by the city or a public trust of which the city is beneficiary payable from the sales tax, shall be expended on capital improvements, as determined by the city council, including, to the extent legal and practical, the following projects: 
a.  Residential street and residential collector street repair. Seventy percent of the proceeds of such sales tax shall be used for residential street and residential collector street repair, including, but not limited to construction, repair and/or maintenance of streets, and the construction and/or repair of sidewalks, curbs, drainage and utility lines pertaining to same; 
b.  Public safety machinery and/or equipment. Twenty percent of the proceeds of such sales tax shall be used for expenditures for public safety involving fire, police and emergency management, including, but not limited to the purchase of public safety machinery and/or equipment; and 
c.  Public Safety Operations. Ten percent of the proceeds of such sales tax shall be used for expenditures for Public Safety Operations involving Fire, Police and Emergency Management including, but not limited to training, new positions and salary increases for existing personnel. 
(d)  Levy of Tax-This Tax In addition; Administration Procedures; Exemptions. There is hereby levied an excise tax of 0.50 percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the state sales tax code, as set out therein. There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this section the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the state sales tax code, as set out therein. 
(e)  Total effective excise tax. The rate of tax set forth in the sales tax ordinance of the City of Moore, Oklahoma, is hereby maintained at 3.75 percent. 
(f)  Amendments. The people of the city, by their approval of this section at the election hereinabove provided, hereby authorize the city council by ordinance duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this section as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate and limitation of time for collection of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the registered voters of the city as provided by law. 
(g)  Provisions severable. The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this section is for any reason held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause hereof. 
(h)  Provisions cumulative. The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the sales tax ordinance. 
(i)  Incorporation of section. The provisions of this section shall be included and incorporated in the sales tax ordinance of the city, as an addition or amendment thereto, and shall be appropriately renumbered to conform to the uniform numbering system of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 780(14), §§ 1—6, 8, 9, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 888(18) , 8-6-2018)  
Sec. 7-321. - Additional 0.25 percent sales tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in the state sales tax code (68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.), as amended from time to time (hereinafter referred to as the "state sales tax code"), are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. 
(b)  Effective date and date of termination. Subject to approval of a majority of the registered voters of the city, voting on same as prescribed by law, to be held on November 8, 2016, this section shall commence and be effective April 1, 2017, provided that such additional sales tax shall be limited to a duration of four years and shall terminate March 31, 2021. 
(c)  Purpose of revenues. It is hereby declared that the extension of the existing 0.25 percent sales tax levied by this section shall be in addition to the other sales tax levied by said sales tax ordinance as may be hereafter amended from time to time, and the proceeds of such sales tax, or proceeds of borrowings by the city or a public trust of which the city is beneficiary payable from the sales tax, shall be expended on capital improvements, as determined by the city council, including, to the extent legal and practical, the following projects: 
(1)  Parks and recreational facilities. Fifty percent of the proceeds of such sales tax shall be used for expenditures for parks and recreation, including, but not limited to, the acquisition, construction, equipping and/or remodeling of existing parks and recreation facilities; and 
(2)  Fire Station No. 2 and training center. Fifty percent of the proceeds of such sales tax shall be used for the acquisition, construction and equipping of a new Fire Station No. 2 and to the extent proceeds of such sales tax are available, a new fire department training center. 
(d)  Levy of tax; this tax in addition; administration procedures; exemptions. There is hereby levied an excise tax of 0.25 percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the state sales tax code, as set out therein. There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this section the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the state sales tax code, as set out therein. 
(e)  Total effective excise tax. The rate of tax set forth in the sales tax ordinance of the city is hereby maintained at 3.75 percent. 
(f)  Amendments. The people of the city, by their approval of this section at the election hereinabove provided, hereby authorize the city council by ordinance duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this section as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate and limitation of time for collection of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the registered voters of the City as provided by law. 
(g)  Provisions cumulative. The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the sales tax ordinance. 
(h)  Incorporation of section. The provisions of this section shall be included and incorporated in the sales tax ordinance of the city, as an addition or amendment thereto, and shall be appropriately renumbered to conform to the uniform numbering system of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 829(16), §§ 1—6, 8, 9, 8-1-2016)  
CHAPTER 4. - USE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State use tax, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-401. - Citation and codification. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Moore Use Tax." 
(Code 1999, § 7-401; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-402. - Definitions. 
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in 68 O.S. § 1401 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. In addition thereto, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tax collector means the department of the city government or the official agency of the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of the tax herein levied. 
Transaction means sale. 
(Code 1999, § 7-402; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-403. - Use tax on storage, use or other consumption of intangible, personal property levied. 
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming within the city tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the city, an excise tax on the storage, use or other consuming within the city of such property at the rate of three percent of the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the city, tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the city. The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property within the city and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside the state, provided that the tax levied herein shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended solely for use outside the city, but which is stored in the city pending shipment outside the city or which is temporarily retained in the city for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable for payment of the tax authorized herein, may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or services, provided that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by the city had been levied on the sale of such goods or services. 
(Code 1999, § 7-403; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-404. - Purpose of revenues. 
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the governing body of the city for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized. 
(Code 1999, § 7-404; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-405. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply: 
(1)  In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property brought into the city by a nonresident individual visiting in the city for his personal use or enjoyment while within the city; 
(2)  In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for resale before being used; 
(3)  In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property on which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the state use tax code (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.) and the city use tax, has been paid by the person using such tangible, personal property in the city, whether such tax was levied under the laws of the state or some other state or municipality of the United States. If any article of tangible, personal property has already been subjected to a tax by the state or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the state use tax code (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.) and city use tax, the provision of this chapter shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the state use tax code (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.) and the city use tax, and the rate by which the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed, provided that no credit shall be given for taxes paid in another state or municipality, if that state or municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in the state and the city; 
(4)  In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the city, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons to the operation of manufacturing plants already established in the city. Provided, this exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under the sales tax code of the city. The term "manufacturing plants" means those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such; 
(5)  In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now specifically exempted from taxation under the sales tax code of the city; 
(6)  In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property brought into the city by an individual with intent to become a resident of the city where such personal property is for such individual's personal use or enjoyment; 
(7)  In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property used or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads; or 
(8)  In respect to livestock purchased outside the state and brought into the city for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold. 
(Code 1999, § 7-405; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-406. - Time when due, returns, payment. 
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the state use tax code (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.). 
(Code 1999, § 7-406; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-407. - Tax constitutes debt. 
Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Code 1999, § 7-407; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-408. - Bracket system. 
The bracket system guidelines established by the state tax commission for the collection of sales taxes, including any amendment of same, are hereby adopted for convenience in collecting both the state use tax and the city use tax. The use of the bracket system guidelines does not relieve the retailer or vendor from the duty and liability to remit to the tax collector an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the purchase price of such property as required by state law and these revised ordinances. 
(Code 1999, § 7-408; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-409. - Collection of tax by retailer or vendor. 
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state, and making sales of tangible, personal property from a place of business outside the state for use in the city shall at the time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this chapter from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the tax commission, if the tax commission shall, by regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the tax commission the name and address of all his agents operating in the city and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of business in the city. 
(Code 1999, § 7-409; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-410. - Collection of tax by retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within state or both within and without state, permits. 
The tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within the state but who makes sales of tangible, personal property for use in the city and by the out-of-state place of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state and making sales of tangible, personal property such out-of-state place of business for use in the city. Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes by the tax commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his knowledge for use within the city. Such authority and permit may be canceled when at any time the tax commission considers that such tax can more effectively be collected from the person using such property in the city; provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the purchaser within the city by the retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable city sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under the taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly. 
(Code 1999, § 7-410; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-411. - Revoking permits. 
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in the state, or both within and without the state, and authorized to collect the tax herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, the state use tax code or any orders, rules or regulations of the tax commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in 68 O.S. § 1408, by order revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized to do business in the state may, after notice and hearing above provided, cancel the corporation's license to do business in the state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the obligations under this chapter, the state use tax code, or any orders, rules or regulations of the tax commission. 
(Code 1999, § 7-411; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-412. - Remunerative deductions allowed vendors or retailers of other states. 
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to the tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the state use tax code; and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the code for the collection of state use taxes. 
(Code 1999, § 7-412; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-413. - Interest and penalties, delinquency. 
68 O.S. § 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as herein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter, provided that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 7-413; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-414. - Waiver of interest and penalties. 
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220 and to accomplish the purposes of this section the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 7-414; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-415. - Erroneous payments, claim for refund. 
Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state use tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 7-415; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-416. - Fraudulent returns. 
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter, shall be an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, the offending taxpayer shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. Each day of noncompliance with this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1999, § 7-416; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-417. - Records confidential. 
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of the city use tax as is herein set forth in full. 
(Code 1999, § 7-417; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-418. - Classification of taxpayers. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the state use tax code (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.). 
(Code 1999, § 7-418; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-419. - Subsisting state permits. 
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the state tax commission pursuant to the state use tax code (68 O.S. § 1401 et seq.) are for the purpose of this chapter hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Code 1999, § 7-419; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 7-420. - Provisions cumulative. 
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the city ordinances. 
(Code 1999, § 7-420; Ord. No. 21(92), 4-20-1992)  
CHAPTER 5. - HOTEL TAX 
 
Sec. 7-501. - Citation. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City Hotel Tax." 
(Prior Code, § 21-46; Code 1999, § 7-501)  
Sec. 7-502. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hotel means any buildings, structures, trailers, or other facilities in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in which five or more rooms are used for the accommodation of such guests whether such rooms are in one or several structures. The term "hotel" shall include hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodginghouses, inns, roominghouses, trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory space, where bed space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by permanent residents, and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. The term "hotel" shall not include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means a person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to the use of possession of any room in a hotel under the lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deductions therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Room means any room of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel which is available for or let out for use or possessed for any purpose other than a place of assembly. As used herein, the term "place of assembly" means a room or space which is capable of being occupied by 75 or more persons and which is used for educational, recreational or amusement purposes and shall include: 
(1)  Dance halls; 
(2)  Cabarets; 
(3)  Night clubs; 
(4)  Restaurants; 
(5)  Any room or space for public or private banquets, feasts, socials, card parties or weddings; 
(6)  Lodge and meeting halls or rooms; 
(7)  Skating rinks; 
(8)  Gymnasiums; 
(9)  Swimming pools; 
(10)  Billiard, bowling and table tennis rooms; 
(11)  Halls or rooms used for public or private catering purposes; 
(12)  Funeral parlors; 
(13)  Markets; 
(14)  Recreational rooms; 
(15)  Concert halls; 
(16)  Broadcasting studios; and 
(17)  All other places of similar type of occupancy. 
Tax means the tax levied pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 21-47; Code 1999, § 7-502)  
Sec. 7-503. - Tax rate. 
There is hereby levied an excise tax of five percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all rent received for every occupancy of a room in a hotel or motel in the city, except that the tax shall not be imposed where the rent is less than the rate of $3.00 per day. 
(Prior Code, § 21-48; Code 1999, § 7-503; Ord. No. 378(02)-B, § 2, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 7-504. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempt from the tax levied in this chapter: 
(1)  Permanent residents; 
(2)  The United States Government or any agency or division thereof; 
(3)  The state or any political subdivision thereof; and 
(4)  Any organization, corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, philanthropic or educational purposes, provided that its primary purpose is not carrying on a trade or business for profit. 
(Prior Code, § 21-49; Code 1999, § 7-504)  
Sec. 7-505. - Certificate of exemption required. 
Anyone claiming to be exempt from the tax must obtain a certificate from the city clerk that the organization, association or corporation with which he is affiliated is exempt from the tax. Prior to issuing such a certificate, the city clerk shall require a certificate from the organization, association or corporation that the occupant is its agent, representative or employee and that his occupancy of the room is required in connection with the affairs of the organization, association or corporation. 
(Prior Code, § 21-49; Code 1999, § 7-505)  
Sec. 7-506. - Operator responsible for collection; tax designated on separate bills. 
(a)  The operator shall be responsible for the collection of the tax from the occupant and shall be liable to the city for the tax. 
(b)  The operator shall separately designate, charge and show the tax on all bills, statements, receipts or any other evidence of charges or payment of rent for occupancy issued or delivered by the operator. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-506)  
Sec. 7-507. - Records to be kept. 
Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy and of all rent paid, charged, or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon in such form as the city clerk may by regulation require. Such records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the city clerk, or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city, and shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the city clerk may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-507)  
Sec. 7-508. - Returns. 
(a)  Every operator shall file with the city clerk a return of occupancy and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon on a monthly basis. The return shall be filed no later than the tenth calendar day of the following month for the occupancy, rents and taxes payable for the preceding month. 
(b)  The city clerk may permit or require returns to be made by shorter or longer periods and upon such dates as he may specify. The form of return shall be prescribed by the city clerk and shall contain such information as he may deem necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. The city clerk may require amended returns to be filed within 20 days after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-508; Ord. No. 50(93), 3-1-1993)  
Sec. 7-509. - Payment of tax. 
At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall pay to the city clerk the taxes imposed by this chapter upon the rents included in such return, as well as all other monies collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this chapter. All the taxes for the period for which a return is required to be filed shall be due from the operator and payable to the city clerk on or before the date fixed for the filing of the return for such period without regard to whether a return is filed or whether the return which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents and the taxes due thereon. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-509)  
Sec. 7-510. - Delinquent taxes. 
The tax levied by this chapter shall be due and payable at the time filing of the returns provided for in this chapter is required. All taxes not paid within five days from the time they become due shall be delinquent. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-510)  
Sec. 7-511. - Interest on delinquent taxes. 
(a)  If any tax levied by this chapter becomes delinquent, the person responsible and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid tax at the rate of one percent per month on the unpaid balance from the date of delinquency. 
(b)  In addition to the interest, if a return is not filed or the total amount of taxes due remitted within 30 days of the due date as defined in this chapter, a penalty of ten percent of the total amount of taxes due shall be assessed. If a return is not filed or the total amount of taxes due is not paid after 30 days from such due date, the penalty shall increase to 25 percent of the total amount of taxes due. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-511; Ord. No. 489, 7-3-1989)  
Sec. 7-512. - Bond required. 
Where the city clerk believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave the state, or remove or dissipate assets, or for any other similar reason he deems it necessary to protect the revenues under this chapter, he may require such operator to file with the city a bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state in such amount as the city clerk may fix to secure the payment of any tax or penalties and interest due, or which may become due from such operator. In the event that the city clerk determines that an operator is to file such bond, he shall give notice to such operator specifying the amount of bond required. The operator shall file such bond within five days after the giving of such notice unless within such five days the operator shall request in writing a hearing before the city council, at which hearing the necessary propriety and amount of the bond shall be determined by the city council. Such determination shall be final and shall be compiled within 15 days thereafter. In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the city clerk, or cash in such amount as he may prescribe, may be deposited with the city clerk who may, at any time after five days' notice to the depositor, apply them to any tax or any penalties due and for that purpose the securities may be sold at private or public sale. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-512)  
Sec. 7-513. - Assessment and determination of tax. 
(a)  If a return required by this chapter is not filed, or if a return when filed is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the city clerk from such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such as: 
(1)  Number of rooms; 
(2)  Location; 
(3)  Scale of rents; 
(4)  Comparable rents; 
(5)  Types of accommodations and services; 
(6)  Number of employees; or 
(7)  Other factors. 
(b)  Such assessment shall not be performed in an arbitrary or capricious manner and in no event shall exceed the amount of tax that was due and payable. Written notice of such assessments shall be given to the person liable for the collection and payment of the tax. Such assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine the tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed, within 90 days after the giving of notice of such assessment, shall apply in writing to the city council for a hearing, or unless the city clerk on his own motion shall reassess the same. After such hearing, the city council shall give written notice of its determination to the person against whom the tax is assessed and such determination shall be final. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-513)  
Sec. 7-514. - Refunds. 
(a)  The city clerk shall refund or credit any tax erroneously or illegally collected if written application to the city clerk for such refund shall be made within two years from the date of payment thereof. For like causes, and in the same period, a refund may be so made upon the initiative and the order of the city clerk. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing. Such application may be made by the person upon whom such tax was imposed and who has actually paid the tax. Such application may also be made by the person who has collected and paid such tax to the city clerk providing that the application is made within two years of the payment by the occupant to the operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator until he has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for the refund is made. The city clerk, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow credit therefor on payments due from the applicant. 
(b)  Upon application for a refund, the city clerk may receive evidence with respect thereof and make such investigation as he deems necessary. After making a determination as to the refund, the city clerk shall give notice thereof to the applicant. Such determination shall be final unless the applicant, within 90 days after such notice, shall apply in writing to the city council for a hearing. After such hearing the city council shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-514)  
Sec. 7-515. - Notices. 
Notices provided for under this chapter shall be deemed to have been given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or deposited in the United States mail to the last-known address of the operator. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-515)  
Sec. 7-516. - Remedies exclusive. 
The remedies provided in this chapter shall be exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability imposed by this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-516)  
Sec. 7-517. - General powers of the city clerk. 
(a)  In addition to all other powers granted to the city clerk, the city clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to: 
(1)  Make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the carrying out of this chapter for the purposes thereof; 
(2)  Extend for cause shown the time for filing any return for a period not exceeding 60 days; and, for cause shown, to waive, remit or reduce penalties or interest; 
(3)  Delegate his functions hereunder to an assistant or other employee of the city; 
(4)  Assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed by this chapter, but not the tax rate; and 
(5)  Prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents. 
(b)  The city clerk, or his designated representative, shall have the power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of their powers and duties under this chapter. The city clerk shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the performance of his duties hereunder and of the enforcement of this chapter and to examine them in relation thereto. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-517)  
Sec. 7-518. - Collection permits. 
Every operator shall apply with the city clerk for a collection permit in a form prescribed by the city clerk within ten days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or in the case of the operator's commencing business or opening new hotels after such effective date, within three days after such commencement or opening. The city clerk shall, within five days after such application, issue, without charge, to each operator, a collection permit empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant and duplicates thereof for each additional hotel. Each collection permit or duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is applicable. Such collection permit shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such collection permits shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the city clerk upon the cessation of business at the hotel named or upon its sale, lease, assignment or transfer. 
(Prior Code, § 21-50; Code 1999, § 7-518)  
Sec. 7-519. - Use of funds. 
All taxes collected pursuant to provisions of this chapter shall be used solely for acquisition and development of parks and recreational facilities of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-51; Code 1999, § 7-519)  
Sec. 7-520. - Records confidential. 
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the hotel tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, and subsections thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of the hotel tax as if herein set forth. 
(Prior Code, § 21-52; Code 1999, § 7-520)  
Sec. 7-521. - Fraudulent returns. 
The willful failure or refusal of any operator to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false or fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter, shall be an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, the offending operator shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-108. 
(Prior Code, § 21-53; Code 1999, § 7-521; Ord. No. 416, 11-3-1986)  
Sec. 7-522. - Collection by suit. 
The taxes and interest or penalty due under this chapter shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claim of unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt. Any taxes which are delinquent, according to the terms of this chapter, on or subsequent to July 5, 1989, shall be subject to these enforcement provisions. 
(Code 1999, § 7-522; Ord. No. 489, 7-3-1989)  
Sec. 7-523. - Amendments. 
The people, by their approval of this chapter at the election herein provided, hereby authorize the city council, by ordinance or resolution duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 21-54; Code 1999, § 7-523)  
Sec. 7-524. - Provisions cumulative. 
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Code 1999, § 7-524)  
Sec. 7-525. - Penalty. 
Violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 7-525)  
CHAPTER 6. - TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE 
 
Sec. 7-601. - Inspection fee and service charge. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each and every person operating a telephone exchange in the city to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulation and police control of the construction of lines and equipment of the telephone company in the city. 
(b)  The amount of the inspection fee and service charge shall be an amount equal to two percent of the gross revenues for each current year for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the city. 
(c)  The inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the city on or before May 1 of each year and shall be paid into and appropriated and expended from the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-371; Code 1999, § 7-601)  
Sec. 7-602. - Charge in lieu of other license tax. 
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this chapter by the owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied by this chapter shall be and continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license, privilege, and permit fees or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes. This section is not intended to extinguish or abrogate any existing arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use the underground conduit, duct space or pole contracts of the company for the fire alarm and police call systems of the city, or either of them. 
(Prior Code, § 6-372; Code 1999, § 7-602)  
CHAPTER 7. - UTILITY TAX  
ARTICLE A. - GAS UTILITY TAX 
 
Sec. 7-701. - Gas utility tax levied. 
From and after September 2, 1980, there is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of two percent upon the gross receipts from residential and commercial sales of gas in the city, which tax shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax levied by the city, all as provided by 68 O.S. § 2601 et seq. 
(Code 1999, § 7-701; Ord. No. 250, 9-2-1980)  
Sec. 7-702. - Tax to be in-lieu of franchise. 
The tax levied under this chapter shall, when levied, apply to all persons, firms, associations or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing gas within the corporate limits of the city, except it shall not apply to any person, firm, association or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city. 
(Code 1999, § 7-702; Ord. No. 250, 9-2-1980)  
Sec. 7-703. - Payable monthly. 
The tax levied under this chapter shall be levied for a term of not less than one year and shall be payable monthly and placed in the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 7-703; Ord. No. 250, 9-2-1980)  
Sec. 7-704. - Tax constitutes lien. 
The tax so imposed in this chapter shall constitute a first a prior lien on all the assets located within the city of any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling gas within the city limits. 
(Code 1999, § 7-704; Ord. No. 250, 9-2-1980)  
Sec. 7-705. - Ouster for failure to pay. 
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the city. In addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm or corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting same, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Code 1999, § 7-705; Ord. No. 250, 9-2-1980)  
ARTICLE B. - ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX 
 
Sec. 7-711. - Electric utility tax levied. 
From and after September, 2009, there is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of the greater amount of any voter-approved franchise fee, currently three percent, or the annual tax on gross receipts levied as a result of a municipal ordinance enacted pursuant to 68 O.S. § 2601 upon the gross receipts from residential and commercial sales of electricity in the city, which tax shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax levied by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 7-706; Ord. No. 655(09), 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 7-712. - Tax to be in-lieu of franchise. 
The tax levied under this chapter shall, when levied, apply to all persons, firms, associations or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing electricity within the corporate limits of the city, except it shall not apply to any person, firm, association or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city. 
(Code 1999, § 7-707; Ord. No. 655(09), 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 7-713. - Payable monthly. 
The tax levied under this chapter shall be levied for a term of not less than one year and shall be payable monthly and placed in the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 7-708; Ord. No. 655(09), 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 7-714. - Tax constitutes lien. 
The tax so imposed in this chapter shall constitute a first a prior lien on all assets located within the city of any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling electricity within the city limits. 
(Code 1999, § 7-709; Ord. No. 655(09), 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 7-715. - Ouster for failure to pay. 
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the city. In addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm or corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting same, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Code 1999, § 7-710; Ord. No. 655(09), 12-8-2009)  
CHAPTER 8. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Disposition of personal property by police chief, procedures, application to destroy, 11 O.S. § 34-104; Uniform Unclaimed Property Act, 60 O.S. § 650 et seq.; finders of lost goods, 15 O.S. § 511 et seq.; disposal of stolen or embezzled property coming into hands of police officers, 22 O.S. § 1321 et seq.; disposal of liquor and gambling equipment seized by police officers, 22 O.S. § 1261 et seq.; illegal alcoholic beverages seized, 37 O.S. § 539. 
 
Sec. 7-801. - Delivery required; records. 
(a)  All personal property which comes into the possession of any police officer, which has been found or stolen or taken off the person or out of the possession of any prisoner or person suspected of or charged with being a criminal, and which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto, shall be, by the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge of the police chief. The chief shall, in a permanent record book kept for that purpose, make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and circumstances of the receipt thereof and the name of the person from whom it was taken and the place where it was found. The record shall also disclose the subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the purchaser, and the amount for which it was sold. 
(b)  For the purpose of this chapter, the term "police chief" means the police chief or his designee. 
(Prior Code, § 18-46, in part; Code 1999, § 7-801)  
Sec. 7-802. - Disposition of personal property, general procedures. 
(a)  The police chief is authorized to sell personal property, other than animals, money or legal tender of the United States, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, which has come into his possession in any manner if: 
(1)  The owner of the personal property is unknown or has not claimed the property; 
(2)  The property has been in the custody of the police chief for at least 90 days; or 
(3)  The property or any part thereof is no longer needed to be held as evidence or for any other purpose in connection with any litigation. Any owner, to recover or claim property, must be able to satisfactorily prove ownership to the police chief. 
(b)  Any property found by a person other than public official which shall be delivered to any police officer for identification and registration, if not claimed or identified within 30 days, shall, within ten additional days thereafter, if requested by the finder, be returned to him, and a record of such disposal made thereof. However, in all other cases, only property in which the finder relinquishes any future claim to its ownership will be stored in the city police property room. 
(c)  The police chief shall file an application in the district court of the county requesting the authority of the court to conduct a sale of such personal property or money or legal tender which has a fair market value of more than its face value. The police chief shall attach to his application a list describing such property or money or legal tender, including any identifying numbers and marks, the date the property or money or legal tender came into his possession, and the name of the owner and his address, if known. The court shall set the application for hearing not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after filing of the application. 
(d)  In any instance where the property has an actual or apparent value of more than $250.00, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be sent by first class mail to each owner at his address as listed in the application. If the owner of any property with an actual or apparent value exceeding $500.00 is unable to be served notice by certified mail, notice shall be provided by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The notice shall contain a brief description of the property or money or legal tender of the owner and the place and date of the hearing. The notice shall be posted at the assigned place for the posting of city notices, and at two other public places in the city. 
(e)  If no owner appears and establishes ownership to the property at the hearing, the court shall enter an order authorizing the chief of police to dispose of the property as follows: 
(1)  Donate the property having value of less than $500.00 to a not-for-profit corporation as defined in 18 O.S. for use by needy families; 
(2)  Sell the personal property for cash to the highest bidder, after at least five days' notice of the sale has been published; 
(3)  Transfer the property to a third-party agent under contract with the governing body or the chief of police for sale by Internet or other electronic means, regardless of whether the sale structure or distribution site is within the state; or 
(4)  By any other means as determined appropriate by the court, including, but not limited to, destruction. 
Regardless of the means of disposition, the chief of police shall make a return of the donation or sale and the order of the court confirming the donation or sale shall vest title to the property in the recipient or purchaser. After payment of court costs and other expenses, the remainder of money received from the sale of the personal property shall be deposited in the city general fund. 
(f)  All money or legal tender of the United States, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, which has come into the possession of the police chief pursuant to the circumstances provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be transferred by the police chief to the city clerk for deposit in the general fund. Prior to any such transfer, the police chief shall file an application in the district court requesting the court to enter an order authorizing him to transfer the money for deposit in the general fund. The application shall describe the money or legal tender, any serial numbers, the date the same came into his possession, and the name of the owner and his address, if known. Upon filing the application which may be joined with an application as described in subsection (c) of this section, a hearing shall be set not less than ten days nor more than 20 days from the filing of the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided for in subsection (d) of this section. The notice shall state that upon failure of anyone to appear to prove ownership to the money or legal tender, the court shall order the same to be deposited in the general fund. The notice may be combined with a notice to sell personal property as provided for in subsection (b) of this section. If no one appears to claim and prove ownership to the money or legal tender at the hearing, the court shall order the same to be transferred to the general fund as provided in this subsection. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dangerous or deadly weapons, narcotic or poisonous drugs, explosives, or any property of any kind or character, which the possession of is prohibited by law, nor to any property for which a specific procedure is otherwise established by law, ordinance or proper order. By order of the trial court, any such property filed as an exhibit or held by the city shall be destroyed or sold or disposed of, pursuant to the conditions prescribed in such order. 
(h)  Property authorized to be destroyed herein or by state or other law, or which cannot be sold or used by the city, shall be destroyed on order of the police chief. The destruction of personal property must be witnessed by at least three members of the police department who must sign a certificate of destruction listing all property destroyed, a general description of same, and the date, time, place and manner of such destruction. 
(Prior Code, § 18-47, in part; Code 1999, § 7-802; Ord. No. 435(03), 12-1-2003) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 34-104.  
Sec. 7-803. - Seized illegal alcohol and gambling paraphernalia. 
The disposition of seized illegal alcohol and gambling paraphernalia shall be as provided in 22 O.S. §§ 1261—1264.  
Sec. 7-804. - Property of deceased persons. 
The personal property of a deceased person shall be delivered only to the next of kin of such person or to the legally appointed representative of his estate. If the personal property is claimed by the legally appointed representative of the estate of the deceased, a certified copy of the order of the district court appointing such person shall be deemed sufficient authority to support the claim. If the personal property is claimed by the next of kin, the claimant shall furnish an affidavit to the effect that he is the person entitled to possession of the property; the affidavit shall be deemed sufficient authority to support the claim. If personal property of a deceased person remains unclaimed for a period of 90 days, it shall be disposed of in the appropriate manner provided in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 18-47, in part; Code 1999, § 7-805)  
Sec. 7-805. - Exchange of unclaimed or confiscated weapons. 
(a)  Unclaimed or confiscated weapons which have been in the possession of the police department for 120 days or more may be traded by the police chief or his designee, for new weapons for use by the police department. The unclaimed or confiscated weapons may only be traded to such gun dealers who have complied with applicable state and federal regulations concerning firearms and, in the opinion of the police chief or his designee, are reputable. 
(b)  In trading such unclaimed or confiscated weapons, the police chief or his designee shall advertise for bids for such trade. Such advertisement for bids shall be done in accordance with prevailing and established bid procedure as formulated by the purchasing entity of the city. 
(c)  The value of such unclaimed and confiscated weapons as hereinabove discussed shall in all cases be determined by their fair market value of the new weapons received in such trade. 
(Code 1999, § 7-806)  
Sec. 7-806. - Recovery by owner. 
If any property is sold as herein provided, and the owner thereof takes and recovers possession of same from the purchaser, the amount paid therefor shall be returned to the purchaser, upon verified claim being submitted and approved by the police chief. 
(Prior Code, § 18-47, in part; Code 1999, § 7-807)  
Part 8 - HEALTH AND NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, 50 O.S. § 1 et seq.; power of city to summarily abate, 50 O.S. § 16. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - NUISANCES AND HEALTH GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, 50 O.S. § 1 et seq.; power of city to summarily abate, 50 O.S. § 16. 
 
Sec. 8-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or is any thing or condition which either: 
(1)  Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 
(2)  Offends decency; 
(3)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or render dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property; or 
(4)  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of property. 
Private nuisance means every nuisance not included the definition of the term "public nuisance" as provided in this section. 
Public nuisance means a nuisance which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or three or more properties under separate ownership in the vicinity of such nuisance, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal. 
(Prior Code, §§ 12-121, 12-122; Code 1999, § 8-101) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 50 O.S. § 1.  
Sec. 8-102. - Agricultural exemption. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agricultural activities includes, but is not limited to, the growing or raising of horticultural and viticultural crops, berries, poultry, livestock, aquaculture, grain, mint, hay, dairy products and forestry activities. The term "agricultural activities" also includes improvements or expansion to the activities provided for in this definition, including, but not limited to, new technology, pens, barns, fences, and other improvements designed for the sheltering, restriction, or feeding of animal or aquatic life, for storage of produce or feed, or for storage or maintenance of implements. If the expansion is part of the same operating facility, the expansion need not be contiguous. 
Farmland includes, but is not limited to, land devoted primarily to production of livestock or agricultural commodities. 
Forestry activity means any activity associated with the reforesting, growing, managing, protecting and harvesting of timber, wood and forest products, including, but not limited to, forestry buildings and structures. 
(b)  Agricultural activities conducted on farm or ranch land, if consistent with good agricultural practices and established prior to nearby nonagricultural activities, are presumed to be reasonable and do not constitute a nuisance unless the activity has a substantial adverse effect on the public health and safety. If that agricultural activity is undertaken in conformity with federal, state and local laws and regulations, it is presumed to be good agricultural practice and not adversely affecting the public health and safety. 
(c)  No action for nuisance shall be brought against agricultural activities on farm or ranch land which has lawfully been in operation for two years or more prior to the date of bringing the action. The established date of operation is the date on which an agricultural activity on farm or ranch land commenced. The established date of operation for each change is not a separately and independently established date of operation and commencement of the expanded activity does not divest the farm or ranch of a previously established date of operation if: 
(1)  The physical facilities of the farm or ranch are subsequently expanded or new technology adopted; 
(2)  The farming or ranching is interrupted for no more than three years; or 
(3)  The farm or ranch participates in a government-sponsored agricultural program. 
(d)  In any action for nuisance in which agricultural activities are alleged to be a nuisance, and which action is found to be frivolous or malicious by the court, the defendant shall recover the aggregate amount of costs and expenses determined by the court to have been reasonably incurred in connection with defending the action, together with a reasonable attorney fee. 
(e)  This section does not relieve agricultural activities of the duty to abide by state and federal laws, including, but not limited to, the Oklahoma Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations Act (2 O.S. § 20-40 et seq.) and the Oklahoma Registered Poultry Feeding Operations Act (2 O.S. § 10-9.1 et seq.).  
Sec. 8-103. - Certain public nuisances defined. 
(a)  In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of this Code or law, the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  The sale or offering of unwholesome food or drink; or the keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made; 
(2)  The sale, offering for sale or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale, or furnished in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city; 
(3)  The exposure, display, sale or distribution of obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents, or objects; or the keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed; 
(4)  The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot machines, punchboards or otherwise; 
(5)  The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual intercourse or other immoral acts are practiced; 
(6)  The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law or ordinance are practiced or carried on; 
(7)  The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease as defined by applicable health laws and regulations; 
(8)  The continued making of loud or unusual noises, music or sounds, or strong vibrations which annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises; 
(9)  The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which materially and unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others; 
(10)  Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or ordinances; 
(11)  Permitting water or other liquid to flow, fall or accumulate, or ice or snow to fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk where mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety; 
(12)  All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety; 
(13)  Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse or other things which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin or disease germs, and the premises on which such exist; 
(14)  Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health or safety because of damage, decay or other condition; 
(15)  Any pit, hole or other thing which is so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety; 
(16)  Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety; 
(17)  Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare; 
(18)  Permitting bagworms to be upon any trees or other plants within the city; 
(19)  Permitting foul, noxious or offensive odors to escape from premises; or unusual quantities of dust or other deleterious substances to escape or emanate across the property line upon which the same originates; 
(20)  Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become obnoxious or annoying to any resident of the city, by reason of any noise made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation; 
(21)  The keeping in violation of section 4-101 et seq., of any dog kennels within the city for the breeding and raising of dogs that shall become offensive or annoying to the public by reason of the barking and noise made by the animals therein contained; 
(22)  Any vault, cesspool or sink used to receive human excrement, slops, garbage, refuse or other filthy substance; 
(23)  Any pond, slop, trash, refuse, cobs, manure, decayed or decaying vegetable matter, left, kept or maintained in such condition as to endanger the public health; 
(24)  The keeping of any hog pen within the limits of the city in violation of this Code; 
(25)  Every privy or water closet which shall be in an overflowing, leaking or filthy condition, or in a condition dangerous, injurious or annoying to the comfort, health and welfare of any resident of the city; 
(26)  Any green or unsalted hides of any animal kept in any exposed or open place within the limits of the city; 
(27)  Any unclean, foul, leaking or broken or defective ditch, drain, gutter, slop, garbage or manure barrel, box, grease barrel or other receptacle in the city; 
(28)  Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and dangerous from fire, decay or other cause, or shall become hazardous from fire, by reason of age, decay or construction, location or other cause, or shall be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants from any cause; 
(29)  Allowing the exterior of buildings and structures to be maintained in such a manner that their appearance constitutes a blighting influence for adjoining property. As used in this subsection, the term "blighting influence" shall mean the maintaining of the exterior of a building or structure in a condition that, if not corrected, would or could cause surrounding buildings and structures to become likewise maintained leading to an overall deterioration of the surrounding area; 
(30)  Failing to remove, allowing to remain or permitting any unsightly condition commonly referred to as graffiti, which is defined and prohibited in section 8-1001 et seq. 
(31)  Any tree kept, maintained or not removed in which a limb, branch, stem, stump or part thereof may cause injury to the property owner/occupant or any passerby, or may cause damage to any fence, structure, vehicle or any other property or utilities. 
(b)  The enumeration in subsection (a) of this section of certain public nuisances shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions of law or ordinances defining public or private nuisances either in more general or more specific terms. 
(Prior Code, § 12-123, in part; Code 1999, § 8-102; Ord. No. 73(94), 1-3-1994; Ord. No. 316(01), 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 621(08), 6-2-2008)  
Sec. 8-104. - Nuisance prohibited. 
No person shall create or maintain a nuisance within the city or permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his control within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 12-124; Code 1999, § 8-103)  
Sec. 8-105. - Person responsible for continuing nuisance. 
Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is liable therefor in the same manner as the person who first created it. 
(Prior Code, § 12-124; Code 1999, § 8-104) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 50 O.S. § 5.  
Sec. 8-106. - Time does not legalize nuisance. 
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual obstruction of public right. 
(Code 1999, § 8-105) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 50 O.S. § 7.  
Sec. 8-107. - Remedies against public nuisances. 
The remedies against a public nuisance are: 
(1)  Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court; 
(2)  Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate court; 
(3)  Civil action; or 
(4)  Abatement: 
a.  By the person injured as provided in 50 O.S. § 12; 
b.  By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. 
(Code 1999, § 8-106) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 50 O.S. § 5.  
Sec. 8-108. - Remedies against private nuisances. 
The remedies against a private nuisance are: 
(1)  Civil action; or 
(2)  Abatement: 
a.  By the person injured as provided in 50 O.S. §§ 14 and 15; or 
b.  By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. 
(Code 1999, § 8-107) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 50 O.S. § 13.  
Sec. 8-109. - City has power to define and summarily abate nuisance. 
As provided in 50 O.S. § 16, the city is empowered to determine what is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and, for the protection of the public health, the public parks and the public water supply, outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the city has the power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner and an opportunity for him to be heard, if this can be done. 
(Code 1999, § 8-108)  
Sec. 8-110. - Summary abatement of nuisances. 
(a)  Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of one or more persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to require, the city manager or other appropriate officer or agency of the city government to take immediate and proper action summarily to abate such nuisances or to reduce or suspend the danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement. 
(b)  An officer subordinate to the city manager may submit to the city manager a statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by the ordinances of the city or law, and a request or recommendation that it be abated. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall determine if a nuisance exists as defined by the ordinances of the city or law. If he finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, he shall direct the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance by: 
(1)  Certified mail; 
(2)  Publication if the owner cannot be so served or found; 
to abate the nuisance within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the persons or public adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If such peace, health, safety, morals or welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate it within the specified time, or if the persons responsible authorize the city to abate the nuisance, the manager shall direct the appropriate officer to abate the nuisance or have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as authorized by 50 O.S. § 16. The city shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just under the circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to the city collectible as other debts may be collected. 
(d)  The determination of the existence of a nuisance and order to abate it, as made by the city manager, may be appealed by the occupant or owner or person causing the nuisance by filing a request for hearing in writing with the city clerk within the period of time specified in the notice for abatement of the nuisance. The clerk shall cause the matter to be placed on the agenda of the city council for final determination with appropriate notice of the hearing provided to the person requesting the appeal. 
(Prior Code, § 12-125, in part; Code 1999, § 8-109)  
Sec. 8-111. - Health nuisances; abatement. 
(a)  Pursuant to authority granted by 63 O.S. § 1-1011, the city shall have the authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in the city to remove from such premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health, within 24 hours, or within such other time as may be reasonable. Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the city or by a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant or agent is unknown or is outside the state, the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the city. 
(b)  If the order is not complied with, the city may cause the order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be charged to the owner or occupant, enforceable as a lien or any other method allowed by law or ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 12-151; Code 1999, § 8-110)  
Sec. 8-112. - City actions not to jeopardize private action. 
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to abridge the rights of citizens of the city to bring and maintain actions in the proper courts for the abatement of private nuisances or those specially injurious to them. 
(Prior Code, § 12-6; Code 1999, § 8-111)  
Sec. 8-113. - Escape of water prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall permit or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding, or impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or create a hazardous condition to such traffic, or cause damage to the public streets of the city. 
(b)  Water from private pools shall be drained or disposed of in such manner as to not run on adjacent property, and if not directly connected to the sanitary sewer system, private pools shall be drained into a sanitary sewer cleanout. If a sanitary sewer cleanout is not available, the private pool shall be pumped into a container truck and disposed of properly. In no way shall chlorinated or unclean pool water, including water with algae, chemicals, or dirt or sediment, be allowed to drain into the storm sewer system, creeks, or drainage channels. 
(Code 1999, § 8-112; Ord. No. 590(07), 6-18-2007)  
Sec. 8-114. - Open burning prohibited. 
It is unlawful to burn any fire outside of any enclosed building in the city for the purpose of burning grass, trash, leaves, weeds, papers, refuse, garbage or any other substance, except in an approved incinerator and except as may be allowed by the city fire code and any applicable state or city regulations. 
(Code 1999, § 8-113)  
Sec. 8-115. - Abatement by suit in district court. 
In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the city may bring suit in the district court. 
(Prior Code, § 12-6, in part; Code 1999, § 8-114)  
Sec. 8-116. - Procedure cumulative. 
The procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative one to the other. The city may elect to follow any such procedure which is applicable in abating any particular nuisance. 
(Prior Code, § 12-5; Code 1999, § 8-115)  
Sec. 8-117. - Toilet facilities required. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Human excrement means the bowel and kidney discharge of human beings. 
Sanitary pit privy means a waterless privy which is built, rebuilt or constructed so as to conform with the specifications approved by the state health department. 
Sanitary water closet means the flush type toilet which is connected with a sanitary sewer line of such capacity and construction as to carry away the contents at all times. 
(b)  Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans reside, are employed or congregate within the city shall install, equip and maintain adequate sanitary facilities for the disposal of human excrement by use of a sanitary water closet or a sanitary pit privy. The closets and toilets hereby required shall be of the sanitary water closet type when located within 200 feet of a sanitary sewer and accessible thereto and of the sanitary water closet type (notwithstanding a greater distance from a sanitary sewer) or the water closet type emptying into a septic tank system or the pit privy type. A septic tank system or a pit privy may be used in such cases only if it meets the standards of and is approved by the state health department. 
(c)  All human excrement disposed of within the city shall be disposed of by depositing it in closets and privies of the type provided for in this section. It is unlawful for any owner of property within the city to permit the disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner, or for any person to dispose of human excrement within the city in any other manner. 
(d)  All privies shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and the covers of the seats of privies shall be kept closed at all times when the privies are not being used. No wash water, kitchen slop or anything other than human excrement and toilet paper shall be emptied into a privy. No excrement from any person suffering from typhoid fever, dysentery or other serious bowel disease shall be deposited in any sanitary pit privy or sanitary water closet until it is disinfected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the health officer. 
(e)  All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner different from that required by this section and all privies and closets so constructed, situated or maintained as to endanger the public health are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and may be dealt with and abated as such. Any person maintaining any such nuisance is guilty of an offense and each day upon which any such nuisance continues is a separate offense. 
(Code 1999, § 8-116)  
Sec. 8-118. - Hypodermic syringes, purchase regulated. 
(a)  No person may sell a hypodermic syringe of any type to any person, company, hospital, medical facility or other organization or pharmacist not licensed for the medical treatment of people, animals or fowl or licensed to sell drugs or medical supplies at retail without first requiring identification of the purchaser and production by the purchaser of a certificate of need or a prescription for the purchase of the hypodermic syringe from a licensed physician, surgeon, or official of a state, county, or city-county health department, and if the need is for use of the hypodermic syringe with animals or fowl the certificate or prescription may be from a doctor of veterinary medicine. 
(b)  The seller shall maintain a record of such sales, including the person to whom the hypodermic syringe was sold, the address of the buyer, the date of sale and the number of hypodermic syringes sold. 
(c)  The records required by this section shall be kept open at all times to the inspection of the chief of police or his deputy, to any officer of the police department, or to any other person so authorized in writing by the chief of police or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Any person who uses a disposable syringe shall, immediately after use of such syringe, destroy it or render it inoperable so that such used syringe cannot be used again by any other person. 
(e)  Any person who uses a permanent type needle or syringe shall, immediately after final use of such needle or syringe, destroy the needle or syringe rendering it inoperable so that such needle or syringe cannot be used again by any other person. 
(f)  Every article sold and every day a sale is conducted in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 12-3; Code 1999, § 8-117)  
Sec. 8-119. - Obstructing health or enforcement officer. 
It is unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or interfere with any health officer or other code enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of the health or nuisance laws of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 12-4; Code 1999, § 8-118)  
Sec. 8-120. - Outside storage of appliances. 
(a)  It is unlawful and an offense for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling any range, stove, oven, ice box, refrigerator, washer, dryer, plumbing fixture, such as, but not limited to, bathtubs, sinks, and toilets, or other container of any kind of a capacity of 1½ cubic feet or more. 
(b)  The use of said aforementioned items for a purpose different than its original use shall not operate to change the use from its originally intended purpose. 
(Code 1999, § 8-119; Ord. No. 465, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 514(05), 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 587(07), 5-21-2007) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1208.  
Sec. 8-121. - Waste stabilization lagoons. 
(a)  Definition. A waste stabilization lagoon is a structure specifically designed to treat liquid organic wastes by biological, chemical and physical processes commonly referred to as natural self-purification. It is normally a relatively shallow, diked structure and may receive either raw or pretreated wastes. The satisfactory operation of the process depends upon the growth of algae and like organisms for the production of oxygen through photosynthesis; therefore, conditions must be maintained which are conducive to the growth of algae, such as proper water depth, sufficient dissolved oxygen, and maximum penetration of sunlight. 
(b)  Construction. 
(1)  No waste stabilization lagoons shall be installed or constructed within the limits of the city until and unless the city council has approved the proposal for such construction and installation. The review herein contemplated to be made by the council shall consist of, but not necessarily limited to, the following matters: 
a.  The location of the lagoon site; 
b.  Its proximity to residential areas; 
c.  A consideration of the effect on the surrounding area if the lagoon breaks or its proper operation is interrupted for any cause; 
d.  The effect of such lagoon on surrounding property values; 
e.  If the lagoon is not a full retention lagoon, the direction of flow and ultimate disposition of the effluent from overflow. 
(2)  If city council approves a proposed waste stabilization lagoon, construction and installation shall comply with the state department of environmental quality regulations. 
(Code 1999, § 8-120; Ord. No. 267(99), 11-15-1999)  
CHAPTER 2. - WEEDS, GRASS AND TRASH[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Cleaning and mowing of property, 11 O.S. § 22-111. 
 
Sec. 8-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative officer means the community development director or his designee. 
Owner means the owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county treasurer. 
Trash means any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials, rubbish, offal, waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for, discarded or abandoned. 
Weed. 
(1)  The term "weed" includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which: 
a.  Exceeds 12 inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or produce for human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden, unless such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the mowing of the weeds; 
b.  Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or accumulation of refuse or trash; 
c.  Harbors rodents or vermin; 
d.  Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors; 
e.  Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or 
f.  Is dead or diseased. 
(2)  The term "weed" does not include tended crops on land zoned for agricultural use which are planted more than 150 feet from a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use. 
(Code 1999, § 8-201; Ord. No. 453, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-202. - Accumulation of trash or weeds—Unlawful, nuisance. 
(a)  It is unlawful and a nuisance for any owner or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land situated wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the city to allow trash or weeds to grow, stand or accumulate upon such premises, or along the sidewalk, street or improved alleys adjacent to such premises. It is the duty of such owner or occupant to cut, remove or destroy any such weeds and remove any such trash. 
(b)  No owner or occupant of land or lots shall: 
(1)  Knowingly permit the throwing or dumping upon his premises of any refuse, rubbish or trash; or 
(2)  Permit such materials to remain on his premises for more than ten days after being notified to remove them by the city or the county health department whether or not the owner or occupant knew of or permitted such throwing or depositing. 
(c)  In addition to a penalty for violation of this section or section 8-203, the city may abate as a public nuisance any condition prohibited herein pursuant to this chapter, any other law or ordinance, all of which shall be cumulative. 
(Code 1999, § 8-202; Ord. No. 537, 9-4-1990)  
Sec. 8-203. - Same—Duty of owner, occupant to maintain private property. 
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any private property or premises shall maintain or keep any refuse, rubbish, trash or similar material except dirt thereon; nor shall such person allow the accumulation of any such material; nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which the premises are located. No prosecution may be undertaken under this section until such person shall have been given ten days' notice by the city of the condition and an order to fully abate the alleged deficiency. 
(Code 1999, § 8-203; Ord. No. 537, 9-4-1990)  
Sec. 8-204. - Same—Reports of accumulation on property. 
Any officer or employee of the city who discovers an accumulation of trash or the growth of grass and weeds, or both these conditions, upon any premises within the limits of the city, shall report the condition to the administrative officer if, as a result of the accumulation or growth, the premises appear to be: 
(1)  Detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community; 
(2)  A hazard to traffic; 
(3)  A fire hazard to property; or 
(4)  Any two or more of these conditions. 
(Code 1999, § 8-204; Ord. No. 453, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-205. - Same—Receipt of report, hearing and notice. 
(a)  Upon determination that a nuisance or violation section 8-202 exists, the administrative officer shall give written notice of the finding and direct the owner or occupant to abate the condition within ten days. However, the administrative officer may grant additional time as deemed to be reasonable for the cutting, removal or destruction of weeds or trash. 
(b)  The written notice in subsection (a) of this section shall be sent by mail to the occupant or owner of the property at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the treasurer of the county in which the property is located. If the property owner cannot be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication as provided in 11 O.S. § 1-102 one time not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action by the city. At the time of mailing of notice to the owner or occupant, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. 
(c)  If the city anticipates summary abatement as provided in section 8-207, the notice shall contain further language as required by state law as to possible future summary abatement action which may be taken by the city. 
(d)  The owner or occupant may give written consent, authorizing the city to abate the nuisance. Such consent shall waive the right of the owner or occupant to a hearing under subsections (e) through (g) of this section. 
(e)  At any time within ten days after the date of mailing, posting or publication of the notice required in this section, the owner or occupant may request, in writing addressed to the administrative officer, a hearing for the purpose of contesting the determination that a nuisance exists on the property. The administrative officer shall conduct a hearing as soon as practicable but not earlier than ten days after receipt of the owner's request for such hearing, and not later than 15 days after such receipt. At such hearing such owner shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony, other evidence and arguments, and to cross examine witnesses. All testimony shall be taken under oath. If the director, after such hearing, shall determine that any weeds or trash constitute a nuisance which is immediately detrimental to the health or a fire or traffic hazard on such property, and shall determine that the persons requesting such hearing are owners of the property upon which such nuisance is located, he shall file in writing his findings of fact and his order that such nuisance be abated within ten days, and shall cause such findings and order to be served upon such owner at the conclusion of the hearing. If the nuisance has not been abated following fifth day, a citation will be issued to the owner or occupant pursuant to section 8-202. 
(f)  An appeal from a final order of the director made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be had by any person aggrieved thereby by filing with the court clerk within five days from the date of the director's final order a written notice of appeal. The court clerk shall thereupon set the matter for a hearing before the municipal judge, and shall notify the appellant by registered mail of the time and date when the matter will be heard. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the director shall forthwith transmit to the court clerk all records and orders pertaining thereto. 
(g)  The municipal judge, after hearing the matter in a summary manner, may sustain, reverse, or modify the order of the director. The court's review shall be limited to a review of the finding of facts and order of the administrative officer to determine if the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. 
(Code 1999, § 8-205; Ord. No. 453, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-206. - Same—Abatement by city, selection of contractors. 
(a)  In the event that: 
(1)  No hearing shall have been requested as provided for in this chapter; 
(2)  The administrative officer or municipal judge, after such hearing, shall have ordered such nuisance to be abated; and 
(3)  Such nuisance shall not have been abated within the respective period specified; 
the administrative officer may cause such nuisance to be abated forthwith by directing the city's successful contract bidder to cut, mow, or clear the property or abate, remove or destroy the nuisance, in as many instances as may be necessary for continual abatement of the nuisance, and shall cause a citation to be issued and a complaint to be filed through the city attorney against such owner in municipal court for the violation of this Code. 
(b)  The administrative officer shall prepare appropriate specifications and advertise for bids, in the manner prescribed by law, and, with city council approval, shall award a contract for one year to the lowest and best bidder to cut, mow or clean property. The cost of abating such nuisance, in each and every instance where it is abated, shall be borne by the property owner, and shall be assessed as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 8-206; Ord. No. 453, 7-18-1988; Ord. No. 198(97), 7-21-1997)  
Sec. 8-207. - Same—Summary abatement of subsequent accumulations. 
If the city causes property within the corporate limits to be cleaned of trash and weeds in accordance with the procedures provided for in this chapter, any subsequent accumulations of trash or weeds on the property within a six-month period may be declared a nuisance and may be summarily abated without prior notice to the property owner. At the time of such summary abatement the city clerk shall notify the property owner of the abatement and of the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may request a hearing within ten days from the date of mailing the notice. The notice and hearing shall be as provided in section 8-205. Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected as hereinafter provided. This section shall not apply if the records of the county clerk show that the property was transferred after notice was given pursuant to section 8-205. 
(Code 1999, § 8-207)  
Sec. 8-208. - Same—Determination and assessment of costs. 
Upon the completion of the work ordered to be performed under section 8-205, the administrative officer shall certify the actual and necessary cost required to be expended in the abatement of the nuisance, together with such administrative expense for mailing of notices and other allowable costs, with a demand for payment of the total cost, and forward it by mail to: 
(1)  The occupant or owner of the property at the address shown by the current tax rolls in the office of the treasurer of the country in which the property lies; or 
(2)  To the address given by the person giving his written consent or requesting the appeal as provided in section 8-205(b). 
(Code 1999, § 8-208; Ord. No. 453, 7-18-1988; Ord. No. 376(02), 7-15-2002)  
Sec. 8-209. - Same—Lien on the property, civil remedy. 
If the costs of the work performed under this chapter are not paid within 30 days from the date of mailing the notice prescribed by section 8-208, the clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the costs to the county treasurer of the county in which the property upon which the work was done is located, in order that the amount be levied upon the property and be collected by the county treasurer in the manner prescribed by the law of the state. Until fully paid, the cost and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property owner and a lien against the property as provided by law. The lien on the property is coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall continue until the cost is fully paid. At any time prior to collection as provided in this section the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon, including an action in personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. Upon receiving payment, in full, the clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the lien. 
(Code 1999, § 8-209; Ord. No. 453, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-210. - Dead or diseased trees—Allowing to remain on any lot within the city. 
It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land situated wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the city to allow a dead or diseased tree to stand upon such premises, or along the sidewalk, street or improved alleys adjacent to such premises. It is the duty of such owner or occupant to remove said dead or diseased tree which shall be cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 812(16), § 8-210, 5-2-2016)  
Sec. 8-211. - Same—Duty of owner, occupant to maintain private property. 
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any private property or premises shall maintain or allow any dead or diseased tree thereon in the neighborhood in which the premises are located. No prosecution may be undertaken under this section until such person shall have been given 45 days' notice by the city of the condition and an order to fully abate the alleged deficiency by removal of the dead or diseased tree. 
(Ord. No. 812(16), § 8-211, 5-2-2016)  
Sec. 8-212. - Same—Reports. 
Any officer or employee of the city who discovers a dead or diseased tree upon any premises within the limits of the city shall report the condition to the community development director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 812(16), § 8-212, 5-2-2016)  
Sec. 8-213. - Same—Receipt of report, hearing and notice. 
(a)  Upon determination that a violation of section 8-210 exists, the administrative officer shall give written notice of the finding and direct the owner or occupant to abate the condition by removing the dead or diseased tree within 45 days. The administrative officer may grant additional time as deemed to be reasonable for the cutting, removal or destruction of the dead or diseased tree. 
(b)  The written notice in subsection (a) of this section shall be sent by certified mail to the occupant or owner of the property at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the treasurer of the county in which the property is located. If the property owner cannot be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication as provided in 11 O.S. § 1-102, one time not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action by the city. At the time of mailing of notice to the owner or occupant, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicated the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailer. 
(c)  The owner or occupant may give written consent, authorizing the city to abate the dead or diseased tree. Such consent shall waive the right of the owner or occupant to a hearing under subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  At any time within ten days after the date of mailing, posting or publication of the notice required in this section, the owner or occupant may request, in writing addressed to the community development director or his designee, a hearing for the purpose of contesting the determination that a dead or diseased tree exists on the property. The community development director or designee shall conduct a hearing as soon as practicable but not earlier than five days after receipt of the owner's request for such hearing, and not later than 15 days after such receipt. At such hearing said owner shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony, offer evidence and arguments, and to cross examine witnesses. If the community development director, or designee, after such hearing shall determine that any dead or diseased tree exists on the property, and that the persons requesting such hearing are owners of the property upon which said dead or diseased tree is located, the community development director, or designee, shall file in writing their findings of fact and order that such dead or diseased tree be removed within 45 days, and shall cause such findings and order to be served upon such owner within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 812(16), § 8-213, 5-2-2016)  
Sec. 8-214. - Same—Abatement by city. 
In the event that no hearing shall have been requested as provided for in this chapter, or such dead or diseased tree shall not have been abated within the respective period specified, the community development director or designee may cause such dead or diseased tree to be abated. 
(Ord. No. 812(16), § 8-214, 5-2-2016)  
Sec. 8-215. - Same—Determination and assessment of costs. 
Upon the completion of the work ordered to be performed under section 8-213, the community development director or designee shall certify the actual and necessary cost required to be expended in the abatement of the dead or diseased tree, together with such administrative expense for mailing of notices and other allowable costs, with a demand for payment of the total cost, and forward it by mail to: 
(1)  The occupant or owner of the property at the address shown by the current tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer; or 
(2)  To the address given by the person giving his written consent or requesting the appeal as provided in 8-213. 
(Ord. No. 812(16), § 8-215, 5-2-2016)  
Sec. 8-216. - Same—Lien on the property, civil remedy. 
If the costs of the work performed under this chapter are not paid within 30 days from the date of mailing the notice prescribed by section 8-215, the clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the costs to the county treasurer, in order that the amount be levied upon the property and be collected by the county treasurer in the manner prescribed by the law of the state. Until fully paid, the cost and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property owner and a lien against the property as provided by law. The lien on the property is coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and superior to all titles and liens against the property. The lien shall continue until the cost is fully paid. At any time prior to collection as provided in this section the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon, including an action in personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. Upon receiving payment, in full, the clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the lien. 
(Ord. No. 812(16), § 8-216, 5-2-2016)  
CHAPTER 3. - DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to abate dilapidated buildings, 11 O.S. § 22-112 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative officer means the community development director or his designee. 
Boarding and securing or boarded and secured means the closing, boarding or locking of any or all exterior openings so as to prevent entry into the structure. 
Cleaning or cleaned means the removal of trash or weeds from the premises. 
Dilapidated building means: 
(1)  A structure which through neglect or injury lacks necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public; 
(2)  A structure which is unfit for human occupancy due to the lack of necessary repairs and is considered uninhabitable or is a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public; 
(3)  A structure which is determined by the city council or administrative officer of the city council to be an unsecured building, more than three times within any 12-month period; 
(4)  A structure which has been boarded and secured as provided in 11 O.S. § 22-112.1, for more than 18 consecutive months; or 
(5)  A structure declared by the city council to constitute a public nuisance. 
Unsecured building means any structure which is not occupied by a legal or equitable owner thereof, or by a lessee of a legal or equitable owner, and into which there are one or more unsecured openings such as broken windows, unlocked windows, broken doors, unlocked doors, holes in exterior walls, holes in the roof, broken basement or cellar hatchways, unlocked basement or cellar hatchways or other similar unsecured openings which would facilitate an unauthorized entry into the structure. 
(Prior Code, § 5-28, in part; Code 1999, § 8-301) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-112.  
Sec. 8-302. - Report to be made. 
Any officer or employee of the city who discovers or receives a report of a dilapidated building which has become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property, shall report such conditions to the administrative officer. 
(Prior Code, § 5-28, in part; Code 1999, § 8-302)  
Sec. 8-303. - Condemnation of dilapidated buildings, notice, removal, lien, payment. 
The administrative officer may cause dilapidated buildings within the city limits to be torn down and removed, in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  At least ten days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property before the city takes action or holds a hearing as provided herein. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to be affected. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent by mail to the property owner at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to any mortgage holder as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk to the last-known address of the mortgagee. At the time of mailing of notice to any property owners or mortgage holders, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property, or by publication, as defined by 11 O.S. § 1-102. Such notice may be published once not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action to be taken pursuant to this section; 
(2)  A hearing shall be held by the administrative officer to determine whether the property is dilapidated and has thereby become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property; 
(3)  If the administrative officer finds that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or a hazard, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of such conditions, the administrative officer may cause the dilapidated building to be torn down and removed, and shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement and completion of the work. The city clerk shall immediately file a notice of lien with the county clerk describing the property, the findings of the administrative officer at the hearing, and stating that the city claims a lien on the property for the destruction and removal costs and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing of the notice; 
(4)  The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the city council from an order of the administrative officer, and as provided by law. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within ten days after the administrative order is rendered; 
(5)  If the work is not performed by the property owner within the dates fixed by the administrative officer, the administrative officer shall direct the tearing down and removal be done by one of the following methods: 
a.  By the city; 
b.  On a private contract basis, in which case it shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder; 
(6)  After the building has been torn down and removed, the administrative officer shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings, and any other expenses as may be necessary in conjunction therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The city clerk shall forward a statement of such actual cost attributable to the dismantling and removal and a demand for payment by mail to the property owner at the address specified in this section. In addition, a copy of the statement shall be mailed to any mortgage holder at the address specified in this section. At the time of mailing of the statement of costs to any property owners or mortgage holders, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. If the city dismantles or removes any dilapidated buildings, the cost to the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance, and equipment required for the dismantling and removal of the dilapidated buildings. If dismantling and removal of the dilapidated buildings is done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder if required to be competitively bid; 
(7)  If payment is not made within six months from the date of the mailing of the statement, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the county treasurer of the county in which the property is located. The city shall have a lien on the property for such costs, together with interest thereon, and the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid as provided by law; 
(8)  When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city shall file a release of lien or part thereof; 
(9)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes; and 
(10)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from otherwise abating a dilapidated building as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Prior Code, § 5-28, in part; Code 1999, § 8-303)  
Sec. 8-304. - Clearing up of premises from which buildings have been removed. 
In all cases in which: 
(1)  A house or building has been removed before the taking effect of this chapter; or 
(2)  A house or building is torn down or demolished pursuant to order of the state fire marshal or one of his assistants or the sheriff of the county or the chief of the fire department as provided by state law or as provided in this chapter; 
and in which any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The premises have not been cleaned up; 
(2)  The premises are cleaned up, and all lumber, brick, concrete, cement, plaster, nails, wire, and other material have not been removed; 
(3)  The materials have been removed but the cellar space and excavations have not been filled; 
(4)  A cistern or well has not been filled or safely and securely closed and all openings to sanitary sewer have not been plugged to meet the requirements of the city plumbing inspector and securely closed; and 
(5)  The lots have not been leveled and left entirely free from trash or the same is not immediately done; 
then the owners of the lots and the person, firm, or corporation who tore down the house or building shall immediately comply with the provisions of this chapter by having all of the things done. 
(Code 1999, § 8-304)  
Sec. 8-305. - Boarding and securing dilapidated buildings, procedure. 
After a building has been declared dilapidated as provided in this chapter, and before the commencement of the tearing and removal of a dilapidated building, the city may cause the building to be boarded and secured in accordance with the following procedure. The city may determine that a building is unsecured and order that such building be boarded and secured in the manner provided for in this section even though such building has not been declared by city to be dilapidated. 
(1)  Before the city orders such action, at least ten days' notice that such unsecured building is to be boarded and secured shall be given by mail to any property owners and mortgage holders as provided in section 8-303. At the time of mailing of notice to any property owners or mortgage holders, the city clerk shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of the mailing and the name and address of the mailee. A copy of the notice shall also be posted on the property to be affected. However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication as defined in 11 O.S. § 1-102. Such notice shall be published one time, not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action by the city pursuant to the provisions of this section. If the administrative officer anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this section, the notice shall state that: any subsequent need for boarding and securing the building within a six-month period after the initial boarding and securing of the building pursuant to such notice may be summarily boarded and secured by the city, that the costs of such boarding and securing shall be assessed against the owner, and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the property owners or mortgage holders; 
(2)  The owner of the property may give his written consent to the city authorizing the boarding and securing of such unsecured building and to the payment of any costs incurred thereby. By giving the written consent, the owner waives his right to a hearing as provided in this section; 
(3)  If the property owner does not give his written consent to such actions, a hearing may be held by the administrative officer to determine whether the boarding and securing would promote and benefit the public health, safety or welfare. Such hearing may be held in conjunction with a hearing on the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass on the premises of such unsecured building held pursuant to this Code. In making such determination, the administrative officer shall apply the following standard: the administrative officer may order the boarding and securing of the unsecured building when the boarding and securing thereof would make such building less available for transient occupation, decrease a fire hazard created by such building, or decrease the hazard that such building would constitute an attractive nuisance to children. Upon making such a determination, the administrative officer may order the boarding and securing of the unsecured building; 
(4)  After the administrative officer orders the boarding and securing of such unsecured building, the city clerk shall immediately file a notice of unsecured building and lien with the county clerk describing the property, stating the findings of the city at the hearing at which the building was determined to be unsecured, and stating that the city claims a lien on the property for the costs of boarding and securing the building and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing the notice; 
(5)  Pursuant to the order of the administrative officer, the agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the property for the performance of the boarding and securing of such building and for the performance of all necessary duties as a governmental function of the city; 
(6)  After an unsecured building has been boarded and secured, the administrative officer shall determine the actual costs of such actions and any other expenses that may be necessary in conjunction therewith, including the cost of the notice and mailing. The city clerk shall forward a statement of the actual costs attributable to the boarding and securing of the unsecured building and a demand for payment of such costs by mail to any property owners and mortgage holders as provided in section 8-303. At the time of mailing of the statement of costs to any property owners or mortgage holders, the city clerk shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee; 
(7)  If the city boards and secures any unsecured building, the cost to the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, materials and equipment required for the performance of such actions. If such actions are done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder; 
(8)  When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city clerk shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to the actual costs of the boarding and securing of the unsecured building is not made within 30 days from the date of the mailing of the statement to the owner of the property, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the costs to the county treasurer of the county in which the property is located. The costs shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as are other taxes authorized by law. Until fully paid, the costs and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date the notice of unsecured building and lien is filed with the county clerk. The lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and shall continue until the costs and interest are fully paid. At any time prior to collection as provided herein, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon, including an action in personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. A mineral interest if severed from the surface owner shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien created pursuant to this section. Upon receipt of payment in full, the city clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and direct discharge of the lien; 
(9)  An appeal may be taken from the decision of the administrative officer to the city council if filed in writing with the city clerk within ten days after the administrative order is rendered; 
(10)  If the city causes a structure to be boarded and secured, in accordance with the procedures provided for in this section, any subsequent need for boarding and securing the property within a six-month period may be declared a nuisance and may be summarily abated without prior notice to the property owner. At the time of such summary abatement, the city clerk shall notify the property owner of the boarding and securing and of the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may request a hearing within ten days from the date of mailing the notice. The notice and hearing shall be as provided in this section. Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected as provided in this section. This section shall not apply if the records of the county clerk show that the property was transferred after notice was given pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1999, § 8-305)  
Sec. 8-306. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense against the city and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 8-306)  
CHAPTER 4. - ABANDONED, JUNK VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 8-401. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicate a different meaning: 
Director means the director of the community development department. 
Enforcement officer means the community development director, code enforcement officer or any city police officer. 
Junk vehicle means any motor vehicle or vehicle, as defined herein, which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned, operable unlicensed or discarded, but does not include motor vehicles or vehicles for which a permit has been obtained pursuant to this chapter for so long as the terms and conditions of the permit are in force and obeyed. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground or water and the term shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, boats, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, and golf carts. 
Operable condition means immediately capable of being legally operated on a public street. 
Private property means any real property within the city which is not public property. 
Public property means any real property which is dedicated to the public use which the federal or any state or municipal government, or any political subdivision thereof, owns or leases, or exercises control and dominion over for public purposes. 
Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and to transport persons or property or pull machinery and includes, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggys and wagons. 
Vessel means every device, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, including, but not limited to, personal watercraft. 
(Code 1999, § 8-401; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988; Ord. No. 460, 8-15-1988; Ord. No. 360(02), 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 653(09), 8-8-2009)  
Sec. 8-402. - Prohibited acts; nuisances declared; exceptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful and an offense for any person to park, store or leave, or to permit the parking, storing, or leaving of, any junk vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, operative unlicensed, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any private property within the city for a period of time in excess of ten days. 
(b)  The presence of any junk vehicle or any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or boat or parts thereof on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to paint any vehicle, motor vehicle, automobile, or boat in any area of the city with a residential zoning classification as designated in part 12. 
(d)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to any vehicle or motor vehicle: 
(1)  Enclosed within a building on private property; 
(2)  Held in connection with a lawful business enterprise which is properly operated as such business enterprise in the appropriate zone, pursuant to the zoning provisions of this Code; 
(3)  In operable condition which is not a junk vehicle as defined herein. 
(e)  The provisions of subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to any vehicle, motor vehicle, automobile, or boat held in connection with a lawful business enterprise which is properly operated as such business enterprise in the appropriate zone, pursuant to the zoning provisions of this code. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vehicle to make extensive auto repairs on the property of another. 
(g)  Any tarp, cloth, canvas or other similar covering shall be allowed to cover vehicles not meeting the definition of the term "junk" or "abandoned" as defined herein. However, such covering shall be kept in good condition at all times and free from significant tears and holes. 
(Code 1999, § 8-402; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988; Ord. No. 460, 8-15-1988; Ord. No. 254(99), 4-5-1999; Ord. No. 653(09), 8-8-2009)  
Sec. 8-403. - Permits for reconstruction/repair of vehicles. 
(a)  Any person desiring to: 
(1)  Reconstruct; or 
(2)  Make repairs to an inoperable vehicle or motor vehicle; 
for a period in excess of ten days may, upon making application to the city, payment of an application fee, and compliance with the terms of a permit, make repairs to such vehicle on a cement, asphalt or other sealed driveway or space; and keeping such vehicle in a wholly enclosed garage or other wholly enclosed structure between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day pursuant to the terms of the permit. 
(b)  The application shall state that the owner, only, of such vehicle or motor vehicle seeks to have a permit issued, permitting such vehicle or motor vehicle to be on private property, owned or leased by the vehicle owner, within the city in an inoperable, unlicensed or untagged condition for a specific period of time. All applications shall state with specificity how the reconstruction or repairs shall be accomplished and contain deadlines for the completion of each stage, which shall become part of the permit. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant agrees in the application to allow the city to abate any violation of the terms of any permit within ten days of the mailing by certified mail of a written demand to do so. 
(d)  Initial permits for any vehicle or motor vehicle shall be issued for a maximum period of six months, and may be extended for periods not to exceed six months each upon successful completion of a full application process for each and every renewal period. 
(e)  No permit shall be in force as to more than one person or one residence at any time. 
(f)  Such vehicle or motor vehicle for which a permit has been issued shall prominently display a sticker to be provided by the city, indicating the permit number and its date of expiration. The sticker may be physically inspected without notice by any officer of the city between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., during weekdays, and the right to inspect shall be a condition of the issuance of a permit. 
(g)  A permit may be revoked by the director upon reasonable notice and opportunity for a hearing, if any of the terms of the permit are not complied with. 
(Code 1999, § 8-403; Ord. No. 460, 8-15-1988; Ord. No. 653(09), 8-8-2009)  
Sec. 8-404. - Procedures for abatement. 
The provisions for abatement of public nuisances contained in sections 8-101 through 8-119 shall not apply to junk vehicles or to those which are in abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any public property within the city for a period of time in excess of 24 hours. The notice, hearing and abatement shall be pursuant to the procedures described herein for public nuisance on public property. 
(Code 1999, § 8-404; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-405. - Presumption of abandoned, junk vehicle. 
A rebuttable presumption shall exist that vehicles have been abandoned or fall within the definition of a junk vehicle when: 
(1)  Weed or grass undergrowth would indicate to a reasonable person that the vehicle has not been moved, thereby permitting such growth to occur; 
(2)  One or more wheels are flat or missing or the vehicle or boat displays an expired license; 
(3)  Portions of the vehicle which are needed for its street legal operation or control are missing, including, but not limited to, missing, broken, or inoperable headlights, taillights, and/or turn signals; 
(4)  The city has received reports from others as to the length of time such vehicle has been standing in one place without being moved, or that parts are being taken from or added to such vehicle, indicating a salvage or garage operation; 
(5)  Evidence exists that provisions of this Code pertaining to zoning or to junk and salvage yards are being violated; 
provided, however, the owner/operator may rebut the presumption by driving the vehicle a distance of at least 30 feet on a public street in the presence of an enforcement officer. 
(Code 1999, § 8-405; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988; Ord. No. 653(09), 8-8-2009)  
Sec. 8-406. - Notice to remove from public property. 
Whenever it comes to the attention of the director or enforcement officer that any junk vehicle, as defined herein, exists as a public nuisance in the city, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in the event that there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this chapter. A written, public nuisance "Notification to Remove" shall be placed on the vehicle advising the owner of the violation of this Code and of the 24 hours to remove the nuisance from the public property. Concurrent with the abatement notice placed on the vehicle or motor vehicle, the owner of the vehicle or motor vehicle may be issued a citation. Failure to remove the vehicle or motor vehicle shall be an offense, and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 8-406; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988; Ord. No. 653(09), 8-8-2009)  
Sec. 8-407. - Responsibility for removal from public property. 
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the junk vehicle or other abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or boat on public property shall be liable for all expenses reasonably incurred by the removal and disposition. 
(Code 1999, § 8-407; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-408. - Notice to remove from private property. 
(a)  The enforcement officer shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where any junk vehicle or any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or boat is located at least ten days before the time set for compliance. Minimum standards of due process require that administrative proceedings which may directly and adversely affect legally protected interests be preceded by notice calculated to provide knowledge of the exercise of adjudicative power and an opportunity to be heard. Notice will be by certified mail addressed to the vehicle owner and owner of the private property, if different from the vehicle owner, return receipt requested. When certified mail is returned unclaimed, a reasonable effort shall be made to determine if another address for the vehicle and/or property owner may be found before undertaking removal. 
(b)  The notice to remove shall contain the demand for removal within ten days, and the notice to remove shall state that, upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city shall prosecute a criminal complaint for failure to abate the nuisance or undertake such removal with the cost to be levied against the owner of the junk vehicle or the occupant of the property. 
(Code 1999, § 8-408; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988; Ord. No. 653(09), 8-8-2009)  
Sec. 8-409. - Hearing. 
(a)  Any person to whom any notice to remove is directed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any other interested party, or any duly authorized agent thereof, may file a written request for hearing before the director within the ten-day compliance period, for the purpose of contesting the city's demand for removal. The director, chief of police or his designee and the city attorney or his designee shall constitute a hearing board to hear the request. 
(b)  The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable, but not earlier than five days after receipt of the request, and not later than 15 days after such receipt. Notice of the time and place of hearing shall be directed to the person making the request. At any such hearing the city and the person to whom notice has been directed may introduce witnesses and evidence. 
(c)  Persons to whom the notice to remove is directed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or their duly authorized agent, may appear in municipal court pursuant to the citation and summons. Those convicted of failing to abate a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed court costs in addition to any other penalty assessed by the municipal court. If the public nuisance is abated prior to the hearing date stated on the summons, and the person issued the summons to appear in municipal court signs an affidavit before the court clerk attesting to the abatement, the city attorney may recommend to the municipal court that charges be dropped. 
(Code 1999, § 8-409; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-410. - Removal of motor vehicles from property. 
If the violation described in the notice to remove has not been remedied within the ten-day period of compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting hearing is timely filed, a hearing had, and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the director or his designee, the city attorney shall institute and prosecute additional charges on a daily basis, for failure to abate the nuisance, and the city shall, in the discretion of the enforcement officer, take possession of the junk vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder anyone whom the city or the director authorizes to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 8-410; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988; Ord. No. 653(09), 8-8-2009)  
Sec. 8-411. - Notice of removal. 
Within 48 hours of the removal of such junk vehicle, the director or his designee shall give notice to the registered owner of the junk vehicle, if known, that the vehicle or motor vehicle was removed and that the vehicle or motor vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the location where the vehicle is stored and the proper procedure for redeeming the vehicle, including cost of redemption. 
(Code 1999, § 8-411; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-412. - Appraisal. 
Upon removing a junk vehicle under the provisions of this chapter, the city shall, after ten days, cause it to be appraised. If the vehicle or boat appraises at $75.00 or less, the director or his designee shall execute an affidavit so attesting and describing the vehicle or motor vehicle, including the license plates, if any, and stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle or motor vehicle. After complying with the above, the city may summarily dispose of the vehicle or boat and execute a bill of sale. If the vehicle or boat is appraised at over $75.00, notice of public sale shall be given not less than ten days before the date of the proposed sale. 
(Code 1999, § 8-412; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-413. - Redemption of impounded vehicles or motor vehicles. 
The owner of any vehicle or motor vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter may redeem such vehicle or motor vehicle at any time after its removal, but prior to the sale or destruction thereof, upon proof of ownership and payment to the city clerk of such sum as may be determined by the director and fixed as the actual and reasonable expense of removal, plus storage. 
(Code 1999, § 8-413; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-414. - Collection of city's costs of removal. 
(a)  Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of property on which junk vehicles have been removed by the city to pay the unrecovered expense incurred by the city in such removal, the amount of the unrecovered cost may be added to the municipal utility bills directed to the occupants of the private property from which the junk vehicle was removed, and may be recovered in the same manner of such utility bills. 
(b)  If the private property is not served by the municipal utilities, or if collection efforts are not successful, the costs may be certified by the city clerk to the county clerk, who shall add the same to the ad valorem taxes assessed against the property, until paid, and shall be collected in the same manner as ad valorem taxes against the property; and when collected shall be paid to the city. 
(Code 1999, § 8-414; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-415. - Penalty; continuing violations. 
In addition to the procedures for removal of vehicles, any person who shall violate any of the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of an offense against the city. Each act in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate offense and may be chargeable as such. Each day's continued violation of any of the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate offense and may be punishable as such as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 8-415; Ord. No. 454, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-416. - Vehicle parking prohibited on non-paved surfaces in certain districts. 
(a)  In the following zoning classifications, Single-Family R-1, Two-Family Dwelling R-2, General Residential R-3, Multiple Family Dwelling R-4, and Mobile Home Dwelling R-5, vehicles shall be parked in the following manner: 
(1)  Vehicles shall be parked on a permanent hard surfaced (paved) driveway or parking area meeting the requirements of this section; 
(2)  A parking area shall be of a pad or slab type design at least equal to the length and width of the vehicle with no ground exposed underneath the vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this section, the code enforcement officer or police officer finding the vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its owner, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a citation in written form, provided by the city, for the owner of the vehicle to answer to the charge against him within ten days at the time and place specified in the citation. The issuing officer shall deliver a copy to the municipal court clerk. Any owner found in violation of this section shall be punished according to section 1-108. Nothing in this section shall prevent the code enforcement officer or police officer from issuing a warning to the vehicle owner that they are in violation of this section. 
(c)  In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the vehicle described in the citation was parked in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation was, at the time the citation was issued, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. 
(Code 1999, § 8-416; Ord. No. 117(95), 3-20-1995; Ord. No. 141(95), 1-2-1996; Ord. No. 359(02), 5-6-2002)  
Sec. 8-417. - Storage and parking of recreational vehicles, trailers, vessels and commercial vehicles. 
(a)  Commercial vehicles, trailers of all types, including camping and hauling, mobile homes, recreational vehicles and vessels shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Not more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed 1½ tons rated capacity, per family living on the premises, shall be permitted, and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted; 
(2)  Not more than one camping or travel trailer or hauling trailer, recreational vehicle or vessel per family living on the premises shall be permitted which shall not be parked on or in the public utility, street or highway. The term "street" or "highway" means all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways, roads, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, recreations or parklands used for vehicular traffic, or other parkways or thoroughfares in the city over which it has jurisdiction, which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state, provided that the trailer, recreational vehicle or vessel shall not be parked or stored for more than 48 hours unless it is located behind the front yard building line. Vehicles commonly known as recreational vehicles shall be parked on a sealed surface complying with section 8-416. In the event it is impossible to park the trailer, recreation vehicle or vessel behind the front building, the trailer, recreational vehicle or vessel may be parked in front of the front building line so long as the trailer, recreational vehicle, or vessel does not create a traffic hazard and the trailer, recreational vehicle or vessel is parked on a sealed surface complying with section 8-416. A camping trailer or recreational vehicle shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area within the incorporated limits except in a mobile home park authorized under the ordinance of the city; 
(3)  A mobile home shall be parked or stored only in a mobile home park which is in the conformity with the ordinances of the city; and 
(4)  A travel trailer or manufactured home may be parked and used, with hookup of all utilities, for the office and living quarters only of a security officer or guard on the premises on which the manufactured home is parked and used, provided that the security officer or guard is C.L.E.E.T. certified. An occupancy permit shall be obtained from the community development department prior to occupancy of any trailer or manufactured home for security purposes. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-92; Code 1999, § 8-417; Ord. No. 61(93), 9-20-1993; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 361(02), 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 476(04), 9-7-2004)  
Sec. 8-418. - Truck parking restricted in residential subdivisions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bus means any vehicle designed for carrying more than 18 passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation excluding school buses owned and operated by public or private schools or school districts and church buses from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
Pole trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
Tank vehicle means any commercial motor vehicle designed to transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank that is either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or the chassis. Such vehicles include, but are not limited to, cargo tanks and portable tanks as defined by 49 CFR 171; provided, however, the term "tank vehicle" shall not include a portable tank having rated capacity of under 1,000 gallons. 
Truck means any truck above one ton capacity or truck-tractor with or without a semi-trailer or pole trailer attached or any other combination of vehicles. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any truck, bus, semi-trailer, pole trailer, or tank vehicle to be parked or stored on public or private property within an area zoned for residential used or other zoning districts within 300 feet of residential subdivisions except for purposes of loading and unloading. 
(c)  The following trucks or buses are exempt from the 300-foot restriction subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  Those used in business lawfully established within commercial or industrial zoning districts; 
(2)  Those used for farming by the owner or occupant in agricultural zoning districts; or 
(3)  Buses operated by schools and churches within residential zones. 
(Code 1999, § 8-418; Ord. No. 507, 2-8-1990; Ord. No. 150(96), 4-1-1996; Ord. No. 362(02), 5-6-2002)  
CHAPTER 5. - LITTER AND TRASH 
 
Sec. 8-501. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means trash, refuse, rubbish and all like material. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including ashes, dead animals, solid market and industrial wastes and all like material. 
Roadway means any avenue, street, road, alley or other public way within the city. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, in solid or semisolid form, including, but not limited to, dirt, ashes or incinerator residue, street wastes, demolition wastes, industrial wastes, tin cans, wood, leaves, glass, pieces of iron and other metals and like similar material. 
Trash means any refuse, litter, debris, paper, combustible materials, rubbish, offal, waste or matter of any kind of form which is uncared for, discarded or abandoned. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn. 
(Code 1999, § 8-501; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988)  
Sec. 8-502. - Prohibited generally. 
No person shall throw, place, leave, drop, put or otherwise abandon litter upon any public property, private property or roadway except as otherwise specifically permitted in this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 8-502; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988)  
Sec. 8-503. - Littering and spilling from vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  No driver or operator of a vehicle shall commit, or permit to be committed, from the operator's vehicle any of the acts prohibited in section 8-502. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any roadway unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from escaping from the vehicle by dropping, shifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise, except that salt or sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be used on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(c)  No person shall operate on any roadway any vehicle with any load unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the roadway or others. 
(d)  No person shall operate on any roadway any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, dirt, gravel or other loose material susceptible to blowing or escaping unless such load is covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the load from the vehicle. 
(e)  No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, a vehicle, any part of which is covered or laden with dirt, mud, gravel, sand, clay or other material from any construction, excavation, parking or other site, in such a manner or condition that the material will become tracked or shall fall upon the roadway; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons who must enter upon improved or paved roadways from unimproved or non-paved roadways or residential driveways. 
(Code 1999, § 8-503; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988)  
Sec. 8-504. - Refuse, rubbish and trash. 
(a)  No person shall place or cause to be placed in or upon any public ground or easement any refuse, rubbish or trash unless it is in suitable receptacles to be disposed of in a regular and proper manner pursuant to city ordinances. 
(b)  No person doing work or making excavations shall place or cause to be placed any dirt, refuse, or rubbish therefrom onto any roadway or sidewalk. 
(c)  No person shall sweep, throw, or abandon in any manner or cause to be swept, thrown, or abandoned into or upon any lot or piece of ground, whether the lot or ground shall belong to himself or another, any trash of any kind whatever, which can be, or is likely to be, blown by the wind along the city's roadways or sidewalks. 
(Code 1999, § 8-504; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988)  
Sec. 8-505. - Deposits of dirt or rubbish on public property and roadways. 
No owner, occupant or agent of any land abutting upon any public property shall allow dirt, earth or any rubbish from the land to fall, or wash, upon any part of the public property. 
(Code 1999, § 8-505; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988)  
Sec. 8-506. - Businesses to provide facilities for disposal of materials. 
Each person who owns, manages, leases, or operates any business establishment within the city which delivers, sells or provides products to customers for consumption or use on or off the premises shall provide suitable containers, adequate in number and location, for the disposal of any product or their wrappings, or parts thereof, abandoned, dropped, left, put or placed on the premises; and shall maintain the outside premises of the business establishment free from such product, wrappings or parts thereof or other discarded items associated with the conduct of the business. 
(Code 1999, § 8-506; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988)  
Sec. 8-507. - Removal of spilled materials. 
(a)  All litter, refuse, rubbish or dirt deposited or spilled from a vehicle on any public property or roadway shall be immediately removed by either the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle. The person by whom such driver or other person is employed shall be likewise responsible for removal. The failure to immediately remove all of the material or earth so deposited or spilled shall render both the driver or other person in charge and the person by whom they are employed subject to punishment as provided herein. 
(b)  Each day that such material or dirt so wasted or spilled remains on the public property shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1999, § 8-507; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988)  
Sec. 8-508. - Prohibited hauling or depositing refuse, rubbish or trash. 
No person shall, without first securing a written permit from the city or the county health department, dump or deposit any rubbish, refuse or trash, or similar material, on any public or private property or haul or carry and dump or deposit any such materials within the city's limits for the purpose either of filling low ground or disposing of the materials. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the otherwise lawful hauling and dumping of dirt, sand, rock and gravel for landfill purposes. 
(Code 1999, § 8-508; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988)  
Sec. 8-509. - Unlawful hauling, dumping, presumptions. 
(a)  There is a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of a vehicle committed a violation. In any prosecution charging a violation of section 8-508, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was used for the purpose of unlawfully hauling or dumping of rubbish, refuse or trash as prohibited therein, together with proof that the individual named in the complaint was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation. 
(b)  There is a prima facie presumption that a person whose address appears on three or more items of unlawfully disposed of refuse matter committed violation. In any prosecution charging a violation of section 8-508, proof that unlawfully disposed of refuse matter as described therein which contains three or more items bearing a common address in a form which tends to identify the latest owner of the items shall be a prima facie presumption that all competent persons residing at such address committed the unlawful act of disposal, provided that one of the items of solid waste bears a date subsequent to August 1, 1988. 
(c)  Any person found to be in violation of section 8-508 shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. Notwithstanding the penalty provided for in this section, the municipal court may also require the person to remove the rubbish, refuse or trash or similar material. Failure to comply with the court's order as directed shall be deemed a separate offense and, upon conviction, the person shall be punished as provided in section 1-108 for each day the rubbish, refuse or trash remains past the date established by the municipal court for its removal. 
(Code 1999, § 8-509; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988; Ord. No. 229(98), 4-6-1998)  
Sec. 8-510. - Allowing refuse, rubbish, trash or litter to be deposited or to remain on premises. 
No owner or occupant of lands or lots shall knowingly permit the throwing or dumping upon his premises of any litter, or permit such materials to remain on his premises for more than ten days after being notified to remove them by the city or county health department, whether or not the owner or occupant shall have known of or permitted the throwing or depositing. 
(Code 1999, § 8-510; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988; Ord. No. 537, 9-4-1990)  
Sec. 8-511. - Duty of maintenance of private property. 
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any private property or premises shall maintain or keep any litter or similar material, except dirt, thereon; nor shall such person allow the accumulation of the material, notwithstanding such person did not permit the accumulation; nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value of the other property in the neighborhood in which premises are located. No prosecution may be undertaken under this section until such person shall have been given ten days' notice by the city to abate fully any alleged deficiency. 
(Code 1999, § 8-511; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988; Ord. No. 537, 9-4-1990)  
Sec. 8-512. - Disposal of vehicle or mechanical devices regulated. 
No person shall discharge or dispose of any crank case, radiator, or transmission drainings, from any vehicle or other mechanical device, into the sanitary sewer system, storm drainage system, or upon any public or private property or roadway. 
(Code 1999, § 8-512; Ord. No. 25(92), 5-4-1992)  
Sec. 8-513. - Offenses and abatement. 
(a)  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be an offense, and any person violating such provisions shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(b)  Upon ten days' written notice, served upon a person to be charged, the city may abate as a public nuisance any condition prohibited under this chapter pursuant to any other provision of this Code or state law, which shall be cumulative. 
(Code 1999, § 8-513; Ord. No. 452, 8-1-1988; Ord. No. 25(92), 5-4-1992)  
CHAPTER 6. - FOOD AND MILK REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE A. - FOOD SERVICE SANITATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Requirements of food establishments, 63 O.S. § 1-1101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-601. - Regulations adopted. 
The latest edition of the "Oklahoma State Department of Health Rules and Regulations pertaining to Food Establishments" is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference in this Code. At least one copy of the rules and regulations shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. The rules and regulations shall govern except in case of conflict with the provisions of this article, in which case the more restrictive terms shall prevail. 
(Prior Code, §§ 12-36, 12-56 et seq.; Code 1999, § 8-601)  
Sec. 8-602. - Food service licenses generally. 
No person shall operate a food service establishment that does not have a valid annual or mobile license issued to it. Only an establishment which complies with the requirements of this Code shall be entitled to receive or retain such a license. Licenses are not transferable. A valid license shall be posted in every food service establishment. 
(Prior Code, §§ 12-37, 12-39; Code 1999, § 8-602; Ord. No. 796(15), § 8-602, 8-3-2015)  
Sec. 8-603. - Temporary, seasonal and mobile food vendor licenses. 
(a)  A temporary and seasonal food and beverage vendor is a person, partnership, corporation or other form of business entity which offers for sale to the general public, either for consumption on or off any premises, food or beverage in a context normally associated with, or constituting, food booths, carnivals, circuses, community festivals, snow cone stands, and barbecue stands during the months of May through September, or during other specified times as approved by the community development director. 
(b)  Zoning and building regulations. 
(1)  No temporary and seasonal food beverage vendor shall operate or conduct sales in the city, unless licensed in compliance with the zoning regulations, part 12 of the Moore City Code including uses allowed within specified zoning districts, setback requirements and adequate parking facilities. 
(2)  All water and sewer service shall be provided by permanent connections to city municipal water and sewer service and meet all requirements of the adopted plumbing codes and utility connection requirements. 
(3)  Permanent electrical service shall be provided and shall meet adopted electrical codes. 
(4)  Structures with permanent utility connections shall be secured on an approved foundation with approved anchoring/tie down methods. 
(5)  Restroom facilities shall be required on-site. A written agreement with a business operating on the same site allowing use of an existing restroom during all business hours may be submitted for community development director review and approval. 
(6)  Occupancy permit application and approval is required and shall be approved by the building official, fire marshal and community development director. 
(c)  Approval from the county health department shall be required and proof of which shall be presented to the city. All temporary and seasonal food and beverage vendors shall be open to the inspection by state, county and city officials during the normal business hours of the vendor's operations. 
(d)  A mobile temporary food service license shall be for facilities that are vehicle-mounted and readily moveable. A person desiring to operate a mobile food service establishment may apply for either a 30-day or 180-day mobile temporary food vendor license at least 24 hours prior to any sales at said establishment. This temporary license shall be issued by the city clerk following approval of the application by the county health authority and city clerk. The temporary license may be renewed for an additional 180 days following approval by the county health authority and city clerk. 
(e)  Application process. 
(1)  Applicants for a permit under this section must file with the city clerk a (verified) sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
a.  Name and description of applicant. 
b.  Address. 
c.  Brief description of business, goods to be sold, and location desired. 
d.  Time period for which the applicant wishes to do business. 
e.  License number and description of vehicle to be used, if any. 
f.  Verification that applicant is bonded as group II vendor by the state tax commission or other proof that sales tax has been or is being paid on the merchandise sold or to be sold, if applicable. 
g.  Proof that a county health permit and inspection has been obtained. 
h.  At time of filing, the fee as provided in the fee schedule shall be paid to the city clerk. 
i.  Each applicant, if the applicant does not operate a fixed, permanent restaurant within the city, shall file with the application a certificate of insurance from the appropriate insurer that the applicant has general liability and vehicular insurance in the amount required by the state. 
j.  Detailed map of location to where the vehicle will be placed. 
(2)  The city clerk shall review the application to ensure: 
a.  The applicant is aware of his responsibility to collect and pay sales tax and that the applicant is properly registered with the state tax commission. If the applicant is not properly registered with the state tax commission, the permit will not be issued. 
b.  That a valid county health permit and inspection is obtained. 
(3)  Within seven days after receipt of the application, the city clerk shall either approve or disapprove of the application. 
a.  If the application is approved, the clerk shall issue the permit within three days after the approval. 
b.  If the application is not approved, the city clerk must state with specificity the reasons for non-approval and the city clerk shall notify the applicant within three days after non-approval. A notice sent to the proper mailing address shown on the application shall be adequate notification to the applicant. 
(f)  Conditions of permit issuance. 
(1)  All mobile temporary food vendors must have the permission of the property owner prior to operating on the subject property. City staff will approve the location and placement of the vehicle at city events. 
(2)  No mobile temporary food vendor may stop for longer than 12 hours at a single location or address in a 24-hour period. A single location or address shall include a single parking lot shared by multiple businesses. This subsection shall not apply to food sales at events that are not open to general public or are sponsored, catered, or hosted by a business group. 
(3)  Mobile temporary food vendors may not sell food on public rights-of-way except for a brief stop for point of sale. For purposes of this subsection, the term "public right-of-way" means any street or highway and property adjacent to streets and highways which is dedicated to public use and over which the federal, state or municipal government, or any agency, department or subdivision thereof, exercises control and dominion; or any bridge alley, sidewalk, pedestrian way, stairs or elevator which is dedicated to public use and over which the federal, state or municipal government, or any agency, department, or subdivision thereof, exercises control and dominion. 
(4)  Except for sales associated with an approved city event or with written city approval, no such sales shall be conducted at or within 75 feet of any city-owned parks. 
(5)  Permit issuance. 
a.  Permits shall be issued by the city clerk. 
b.  A permit must be issued not less than 24 hours prior to any actual selling activity by the applicant. 
c.  The permit shall be prominently displayed at the applicant's selling location. 
(6)  Permit fees. The application fee to be paid to the city clerk upon submission of the application for a temporary food license shall be established by the fee schedule of the city. 
(g)  The code enforcement division of the city shall enforce the provisions of this section and may initiate any proper proceedings to enforce compliance herewith. 
(h)  Violations of this section shall be misdemeanors, and any person, partnership, corporation or other form of business entity, which violates any of the provisions of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. Each day's offense shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(i)  No temporary and seasonal food and beverage vendor shall operate or conduct sales in the city, unless licensed in compliance with section 8-602. 
(Code 1999, § 8-603; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 358(02), 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 797(15), § 8-603, 8-3-2015)  
Sec. 8-604. - Food handler's permits. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person who operates a food service establishment or any place selling open and prepared foods in the city to hire, or permit to be hired, or permit to work gratis, any person who does not possess a current and unrevoked permit approved by the health officer. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to work in any food service establishment or any place selling open and prepared foods in the city who does not have in his possession a current and unrevoked permit approved by the county. 
(Prior Code, §§ 12-46—12-49; Code 1999, § 8-604)  
Sec. 8-605. - Sale of uncooked, unprepared foods from vehicles prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell for retail or offer to sell at retail any uncooked or unprepared meat, poultry or fish from any truck, wagon, trailer or any other portable motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 12-41; Code 1999, § 8-605)  
Sec. 8-606. - Outside sales. 
Food service establishments holding valid licenses may have outside sales on their premises if all conditions of the food code, zoning ordinances and fire code are met. 
(Prior Code, 12-38; Code 1999, § 8-606)  
Sec. 8-607. - Sale prohibited. 
No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale in any public market, or at any place within the limits of the city, any unsound, diseased, stale, rotten, fermented, nauseous or unwholesome meat, poultry, fish, vegetables, fruits or other articles of food or provisions, or any unwholesome bread, cake or pastry, manufactured in whole or in part from unwholesome flour or meal. 
(Prior Code, § 12-57; Code 1999, § 8-607)  
Sec. 8-608. - Not to maintain adulterated or misbranded food. 
It is unlawful for any person to maintain within the city any article of food or confectionery which is adulterated or misbranded within the meaning of this article and any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 12-58; Code 1999, § 8-608)  
Sec. 8-609. - Compounds, imitations or blends to be labeled as such. 
All articles shall be labeled, branded or tagged so as to plainly indicate that they are compounds, imitations or blends, and the word "compound," "imitation," or "blend," as the case may be, is plainly stated on the package in which it is offered for sale, provided that nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring or compelling proprietors or manufacturers of proprietary foods which contain no unwholesome added ingredients to disclose their trade formulas, except insofar as the provisions of this article may require to secure freedom from adulteration or misbranding. 
(Prior Code, § 12-59; Code 1999, § 8-609)  
Sec. 8-610. - Examination of food. 
The examination of specimens of food or confectionery shall be made by the health officer or under his direction. If it shall appear from such examination of any of such specimens that they are adulterated or misbranded within the meaning of this article, the health officer shall cause a complaint to be sworn out and may embargo the food or confectionery until released by the health officer. 
(Prior Code, § 12-60; Code 1999, § 8-610)  
Sec. 8-611. - Sample to be provided. 
Whosoever offers, exposes or has in his possession for sale to dealers or consumers in the city any food shall, upon application of the health officer or his assistant or agent, upon tender of the value thereof, furnish a sample sufficient for the analysis of such of food. Whosoever is convicted of a refusal to sell or give such sample as provided herein shall be subject to punishment a provided in section 1-108. 
(Prior Code, § 12-62; Code 1999, § 8-611)  
Sec. 8-612. - Poisonous preservatives. 
Any meat, fish or other food which shall be treated with or shall contain any of the salts of sulphurous acid or other poisonous preservation or coloring matter are hereby declared to be unwholesome, and any person who shall sell or offer to sell, serve or deliver or cause the same to be done, any meats, fish or any other kind of food in any form having therein and containing any of the salts of sulphurous acid or other poisonous preservative or coloring matter, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 12-63; Code 1999, § 8-612)  
Sec. 8-613. - Sleeping areas of employees. 
The sleeping place for workers or other employees in bake houses and restaurants shall be separate and distinct from the place used for making bread, pastry and other articles of food, and from food storage preparation and serving areas. 
(Prior Code, § 12-65; Code 1999, § 8-613)  
Sec. 8-614. - Inspection. 
The health officer shall have power to inspect all articles of food or drinks wherever located that may be sold or offered for sale for human consumption and to analyze samples of the same upon his own motion. 
(Prior Code, § 12-66; Code 1999, § 8-614)  
Sec. 8-615. - Destruction authorized. 
The health officer shall have authority to destroy, at the expense of the owner or keeper, any foods, drinks, meats and fish that he finds to be unwholesome and unfit for use. 
(Prior Code, § 12-67; Code 1999, § 8-615)  
Sec. 8-616. - Places where food is sold or served. 
The health officer shall have full power to pass on the sanitary condition of any place where foods, milk, drinks, and meats are offered for sale or served to the public. Any person who shall, after having been duly notified to clean up or place his place of business in sanitary condition, refuse to do so, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 12-68; Code 1999, § 8-616)  
Sec. 8-617. - Acts of agents deemed act of principal. 
When construing and enforcing the provisions of this article the act, omission or failure of any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation, company, society or association, within the scope of his employment or office, shall in every case be deemed to be the act, omission, or failure of such corporation, company, society or association, as well as that of the person. 
(Prior Code, § 12-69; Code 1999, § 8-617)  
Sec. 8-618. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from continuing such violations. Each day upon which such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1999, § 8-618)  
ARTICLE B. - MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Milk regulations, 2 O.S. § 7-401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-621. - Regulations adopted. 
The latest edition of the United States Public Health Service Recommendation "Grade A Pasteurized Milk Ordinance with Administrative Procedures" and the provisions of state law governing milk and milk products as set out in Oklahoma Milk and Milk Products Act (2 O.S. § 7-401 et seq.), as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference in this Code and are enforceable by the city as fully as if they were set out at length herein. At least one copy of the milk ordinance and referenced state law shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. The milk ordinance and the referenced state law shall govern except in case of conflict with the provisions of this article, in which case the more restrictive terms shall prevail. 
(Code 1999, § 8-620)  
Sec. 8-622. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. Such persons may also be enjoined from continuing such violations. Each day upon which such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1999, § 8-621)  
CHAPTER 7. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND INDOOR WORKPLACES 
 
Sec. 8-701. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Educational facility means a building owned, leased or under the control of a technology center school district or a public or private college or university. 
Health facility means an entity which provides health services, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, kidney disease treatment centers, health maintenance organizations and ambulatory treatment centers. 
Indoor workplace means any indoor place of employment or employment-type service for or at the request of another individual or individuals, or any public or private entity, whether part-time or full-time and whether for compensation or not. Such services shall include, without limitation, any service performed by an owner, employee, independent contractor, agent, partner, proprietor, manager, officer, director, apprentice, trainee, associate, servant or volunteer. An indoor workplace includes work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or visited by employees, and all space between a floor and ceiling that is predominantly or totally enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed windows, stairways, or the like. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to such indoor workplace at any given time, whether or not work is being performed. 
Meeting means a meeting as defined in the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act (25 O.S. § 301 et seq.). 
Public body means a public body as defined in the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act (25 O.S. § 301 et seq.). 
Public place means any enclosed indoor area where individuals other than employees are invited or permitted. 
Restaurant means any eating establishment regardless of seating capacity. 
Smoking means the carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted smoking device. 
Stand-alone bar , stand-alone tavern , and cigar bar mean an establishment that derives more than 60 percent of its gross receipts, subject to verification by competent authority, from the sale of alcoholic beverages and low-point beer and no person under 21 years of age is admitted, except for members of a musical band employed or hired as provided in 37 O.S. § 537(B)(2) and that is not located within, and does not share any common entryway or common indoor area with, any other enclosed indoor workplace, including a restaurant. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 63 O.S. § 1-1522.  
Sec. 8-702. - Smoking in certain places prohibited; exemptions. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided in this section, no person shall smoke in a public place, in any part of a zoo to which the public may be admitted, whether indoors or outdoors, in an indoor workplace, in any vehicle providing public transportation, at a meeting of a public body, in a nursing facility licensed pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act (63 O.S. § 1-1901 et seq.), or in a child care facility licensed pursuant to the Oklahoma Child Care Facilities Licensing Act (10 O.S. § 401 et seq.). A nursing facility licensed pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act (63 O.S. § 1-1901 et seq.) may designate smoking rooms for residents and their guests. Such rooms shall be fully enclosed, directly exhausted to the outside, and shall be under negative air pressure so that no smoke can escape when a door is opened and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building. Commercial airport operators may prohibit the use of lighted tobacco in any area that is open to or used by the public whether located indoors or outdoors, provided that the outdoor area is within 175 feet from an entrance. 
(b)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section, a technology center school district which offers an early childhood education program or in which children in grades kindergarten through 12 are educated shall prohibit smoking, the use of snuff, chewing tobacco or any other form of tobacco product in the educational facility buildings and on the grounds of the facility by all persons, including, but not limited to, full-time, part-time, and contract employees, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., during the school session, or when class or any program established for students is in session. 
(2)  A technology center school district may designate smoking areas outside of buildings, away from general traffic areas and completely out of sight of children under 18 years of age, for use by adults attending training courses, sessions, meetings or seminars. 
(3)  A technology center school district or college or university may designate smoking areas outside the educational facility buildings for the use of adults during certain activities or functions, including, but not limited to, athletic contests. 
(4)  Smoking shall be prohibited in an educational facility as defined in the 24/7 Tobacco-free Schools Act (70 O.S. § 1210.211 et seq.) and as provided for in this section. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit educational facilities from having more restrictive policies regarding smoking and the use of other tobacco products in the buildings or on the grounds of the facility. 
(d)  A private residence is not a public place within the meaning of this section except that areas in a private residence that are used as a licensed child care facility during hours of operation are public places within the meaning of this section. 
(e)  Smoking is prohibited in all vehicles owned by the state and all of its agencies and instrumentalities. 
(f)  Veterans centers operated by the state pursuant to the provisions of 72 O.S. § 221 et seq., shall be designated nonsmoking. 
(g)  An employer not otherwise restricted from doing so may elect to provide smoking rooms where no work is performed except for cleaning and maintenance during the time the room is not in use for smoking, provided each smoking room is fully enclosed and exhausted directly to the outside, in such manner that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area. No exhaust from a smoking room shall be located within 15 feet of any entrance, exit or air intake. If smoking is to be permitted in any space exempted in subsection (h) of this section or in a smoking room, such smoking space must either occupy the entire enclosed indoor space or, if it shares the enclosed space with any nonsmoking areas, the smoking space shall be fully enclosed, exhausted directly to the outside with no air from the smoking space circulated to any nonsmoking area, and under negative air pressure so that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area when a door to an adjacent nonsmoking area is opened. Air from a smoking room shall not be exhausted within 15 feet of any entrance, exit or air intake. 
(h)  This section shall not prohibit smoking in: 
(1)  Stand-alone bars, stand-alone taverns or cigar bars; 
(2)  The rooms where licensed charitable bingo games are being operated, but only during the hours of operation of such games; 
(3)  Up to 25 percent of the guest rooms at a hotel or other lodging establishment; 
(4)  Retail tobacco stores predominantly engaged in the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental and in which no food or beverage is sold or served for consumption on the premises; 
(5)  Workplaces where only the owner or operator of the workplace, or the immediate family of the owner or operator, performs any work in the workplace, and the workplace has only incidental public access; 
(6)  Workplaces occupied exclusively by one or more smokers, if the workplace has only incidental public access. The term "incidental public access" means that a place of business has only an occasional person, who is not an employee, present at the business to transact business or make a delivery. The term "incidental public access" does not include businesses that depend on walk-in customers for any part of their business; 
(7)  Private offices occupied exclusively by one or more smokers; 
(8)  Workplaces within private residences, except that smoking shall not be allowed inside any private residence that is used as a licensed child care facility during hours of operation; 
(9)  A facility operated by a post or organization of past or present members of the Armed Forces of the United States which is exempt from taxation pursuant to section 501(c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC 501(c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19), when such facility is utilized exclusively by its members and their families and for the conduct of post or organization nonprofit operations except during an event or activity which is open to the public; 
(10)  Any outdoor seating area of a restaurant, provided smoking shall not be allowed within 15 feet of any exterior public doorway or any air intake of a restaurant; and 
(11)  Medical research or treatment centers, if smoking is integral to the research or treatment. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 63 O.S. § 1-1523.  
Sec. 8-703. - Measures to prevent smoking in places. 
The state or local governmental agency or the person who owns or operates a public place shall, at a minimum, do the following in order to prevent smoking in public places: 
(1)  Post conspicuous signs at entrances to and in prominent locations within places where smoking is prohibited which state that smoking is prohibited or that the indoor environment is free of tobacco smoke; and 
(2)  Ask smokers to refrain from smoking upon observation of anyone violating the provisions of this section. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 63 O.S. § 1-1525.  
Sec. 8-704. - Violation and penalty. 
The possession of lighted tobacco in any form is a public nuisance and dangerous to public health. Any person who knowingly violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(Code 1999, § 8-706; Ord. No. 583(07), § I, 5-21-2007)  
CHAPTER 8. - PUBLIC BATHING/TANNING 
 
Sec. 8-801. - Regulations adopted. 
(a)  The following regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference in this Code, punishable as if set out fully at length herein, to govern public bathing and tanning facilities: 
(1)  "Design Standards and Operational Criteria for Public Bathing Places," adopted by the Oklahoma State Board of Health, 93 pages, March 27, 1986, or latest edition thereof; and 
(2)  "Sunlamp Products; Performance Standard," issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, 21 CFR 1040, and as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  At least one copy of the above regulations are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 8-801)  
CHAPTER 9. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 8-901. - Obstructing officer. 
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or interfere with any officer or health or administrative officer charged with the enforcement of this part. 
(Prior Code, § 12-4, in part; Code 1999, § 8-901)  
Sec. 8-902. - Action by county health department. 
By contract or other method, the city manager may appoint the county health department as its agent to enforce provisions of this part and the health ordinances of the city. Such responsibilities may include determination of public health nuisances and hazards, service as expert witnesses for the city, and assistance in evaluation and development of remedial action on matters which deal with the public health. 
(Code 1999, § 8-902)  
Sec. 8-903. - Enforcement; citations; appeals. 
(a)  With respect to public nuisance abatement, the city manager may further delegate to the director of community development division or his staff the aforementioned duties of the city manager, including the duty of administrative officer. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee are designated to issue citations for violations this part, including nuisances, weeds and trash, abandoned vehicles and health laws. 
(c)  Any administrative hearings for violations of the above-referenced sections shall be before an administrative officer designated by the city manager. A hearing shall be scheduled on completion and filing with the city clerk an application therefor, pursuant to the appropriate sections of this part, in accordance with the provisions contained therein. 
(d)  Appeals from the decision of the administrative officer shall be to the municipal court, in accordance with the applicable code provisions. 
(Code 1999, § 8-903; Ord. No. 451, 7-18-1988)  
Sec. 8-904. - Penalty and other actions. 
(a)  The procedures for abating nuisances declared in this part and any other provisions of law and ordinances are cumulative to one another, and the city may elect to follow any such procedure which is applicable in abating any particular nuisance or violation. 
(b)  The city may, in addition to other remedies or punishments or abatements, bring an action for abatement of any nuisance. 
(c)  Any violation of any provision of this part is punishable as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 8-904)  
CHAPTER 10. - GRAFFITI 
 
Sec. 8-1001. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Graffiti Eradication Ordinance." 
(Code 1999, § 8-1001; Ord. No. 65(93), 11-15-1993)  
Sec. 8-1002. - Statutory authority. 
This chapter is being enacted under the authority of 11 O.S. § 22-121. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1002; Ord. No. 65(93), 11-15-1993)  
Sec. 8-1003. - Legislative findings. 
The council of the city hereby makes the following findings: 
(1)  That unsightly graffiti on public and private property within the city is detrimental to the beauty of our community; 
(2)  That graffiti on public and private property within the city is often related to criminal street gang activity, with graffiti being used to convey information to gang members and mark gang territory; 
(3)  That gang-related graffiti often provides a catalyst for gang-related criminal violence within the city; 
(4)  That gang-related graffiti constitutes a growing blight on, and a substantial detriment to, the health and safety of the residents of our community; and 
(5)  That by reason of the foregoing findings, graffiti constitutes a public nuisance to our community. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1003; Ord. No. 65(93), 11-15-1993)  
Sec. 8-1004. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the prevention and removal of graffiti within the city. The intent of the council is to prevent and remove a public nuisance that is a growing blight on, and a substantial detriment to, the health, safety and general welfare of our community and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1004; Ord. No. 65(93), 11-15-1993)  
Sec. 8-1005. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertising means any letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind lawfully placed on property by an owner or occupant of the property, or an agent of such owner or occupant, for the purpose of promoting products or services or conveying information to the public. 
Applies graffiti, apply graffiti or applying graffiti means the act of drawing, painting, chiseling, scratching or etching graffiti on public or private property within the city. 
City manager means the city manager or the trust manager of the city public works authority, or his designee. 
Graffiti means, without limitation, any letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind visible to the public that is drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched or etched on a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other structure; provided, however, that this definition shall not include advertising or any other letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind lawfully placed on property by an owner of the property, an occupant of the property, or by an authorized agent for such owner or occupant. 
Occupant means any person shown by the records of the county clerk's office as a tenant of property, or any person in actually physical possession of property. 
Owner means any person shown by the records of the county clerk's office as the owner of a fee simple interest in property. 
Removal, remove or removed, when used in relation to the eradication of graffiti, means the act of taking graffiti off of, or masking the presence of graffiti on, a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other structure. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1005; Ord. No. 65(93), 11-15-1993)  
Sec. 8-1006. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
The council of the city hereby declares that graffiti on public or private property within the city constitutes a public nuisance to the detriment of the city and its inhabitants and visitors. The provisions for prevention and removal of such public nuisance are set forth in sections 8-1007 and 8-1008. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1006; Ord. No. 65(93), 11-15-1993)  
Sec. 8-1007. - Application of graffiti prohibited; offense; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall apply graffiti to public or private property within the city. 
(b)  Any person who applies graffiti to public or private property within the city shall be deemed guilty of an offense. Each act of applying graffiti shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person convicted of the offense of applying graffiti to public or private property within the city shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the police department and code enforcement officer as determined by the city manager. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1007; Ord. No. 65(93), 11-15-1993)  
Sec. 8-1008. - Removal of graffiti from private property within neighborhood initiative area designated by the city manager. 
The city manager or his designee may cause graffiti to be removed from private property located within the neighborhood initiative area designated by the city manager in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The manager or his designee shall contact the owners of the property to encourage the property owners cooperation in removing any such graffiti; 
(2)  Prior to removal attempts by the city, the manager or his designee shall obtain the written consent of all owners and occupants for removal of graffiti from the property; and 
(3)  Upon obtaining the written consent required by subsection (2) of this section, the manager may, to the extent authorized by the owners and occupants, enter onto the property and remove the graffiti. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1008; Ord. No. 65(93), 11-15-1993)  
CHAPTER 11. - EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1101. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for maintenance of structures and exterior property. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1101; Ord. No. 102(94), 12-5-1994)  
Sec. 8-1102. - Responsibility. 
The owner or occupant of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. A person shall not occupy as owner/occupant or permit another person to occupy or use premises which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1102; Ord. No. 102(94), 12-5-1994)  
Sec. 8-1103. - Vacant structures and land. 
All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided in this chapter so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1103; Ord. No. 102(94), 12-5-1994)  
Sec. 8-1104. - Violations and penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of an offense and be subject to a fine in an amount as provided in section 1-108. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1104; Ord. No. 102(94), 12-5-1994)  
Sec. 8-1105. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved means approved by the code official. 
Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
Code official means the city official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or any duly authorized representative. 
Exterior property means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of the owner or occupant of such premises. 
Major violation means a combination of two or more minor violations occurring at the same time, or one or more violations that are determined by the code official to pose a serious threat to the health and safety of the owner or occupant of the structure in question. 
Minor violation means a singular violation of any one of the various provisions of this chapter, either through lack of maintenance or act of nature, which in and of itself does not cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
Occupant means any person legally living or sleeping in a building, or having legal possession of a space within, a building. 
Owner means any person, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property, including the guardian, executor or administrator of the estate of such person. 
Premises means a lot, plot, tract or parcel of land, including the buildings and structures thereon. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1105; Ord. No. 102(94), 12-5-1994; Ord. No. 196(97), 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 451(04), 4-19-2004)  
ARTICLE B. - EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE VIOLATIONS DEFINED 
 
Sec. 8-1111. - Exterior property areas. 
(a)  Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon, except for water detention or retention areas approved by the city. 
(b)  Rat harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rat infestation. Where rats are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation. 
(c)  Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. Each separate accessory structure shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1110; Ord. No. 451(04), 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 8-1112. - Exterior structure general maintenance. 
The owner, lessee, occupant, or person or entity having charge of the property shall keep all parts of the exterior property in a clean and sanitary condition. No premises shall be in a condition that constitutes a health hazard, safety hazard, or general nuisance. 
(1)  Street numbers. Each building to which a street number has been assigned shall have such number displayed in a position easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way. All numbers shall be at least three inches high and one-half inch stroke. 
(2)  Structural members. Any structural member of a structure which has become deteriorated or damaged to the extent that it does not serve the purpose as originally intended shall be renewed, restored, repaired, or replaced as is necessary to serve the purpose as originally intended. All structural members shall be maintained free of deterioration, and capable of safely bearing the imposed dead and live loads. 
(3)  Exterior walls and surfaces. Exterior walls and other exterior surface materials shall he free of holes, cracks, loose or rotting boards and timbers or any other condition as to prevent rodents, rain, or dampness to the interior of the dwelling. All canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, exterior stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, porches, balconies, and similar overhanging extensions, and their supporting structures where exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of ripping, tearing, or deterioration. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. 
(4)  Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects which admit rain. Rain gutters, downspouts, leaders, or other means of water diversion shall be provided to collect/conduct and discharge all water from the roof and maintained so as not to leak or cause dampness in the walls, ceiling, or basements or adversely affect adjacent properties. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. 
(5)  Overhang extensions. All canopies, marquees, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, gutters and similar overhang extensions shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(6)  Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe, sound, and in good repair. Where required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(7)  Handrails and guardrails. Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of bearing normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(8)  Windows, skylights, doors and frames. Windows shall be fully supplied with window glass or an approved substitute which is glazed and is without open cracks or holes, shall have sashes in good condition which fit within frames, be capable of being easily opened and held in position by hardware, and maintained so as to exclude adverse weather elements from entering the structure. Skylights, doors, and frames shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather-tight. 
(9)  Insect screens. All insect screens shall be tightly fitting and maintained in sound condition and good repair, free from holes, cuts, or rips. 
(10)  Exterior doors and frames. All exterior doors, frames and hardware, including garage doors, shall be maintained in sound condition, good repair and weather-tight. 
(11)  Basement, foundation, vents, and windows. Every basement/foundation hatchway, vent or window shall be maintained in sound condition, good repair and weather-tight. Foundations shall support the building at all points and shall be free of all holes and cracks as to prevent rodents, water or dampness to the interior of the building or any conditions tending to reduce the capability of the foundation to support the building. 
(12)  Porches, decks, and docks. Every porch, deck, or dock shall be constructed and maintained so as to be free of missing, defective, rotting or deteriorated foundations, supports, floors, other members, including steps, and kept in sound condition and in good repair. 
(13)  Decorative features. All cornices, entablatures, bell courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(14)  Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces, parking lots and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1111; Ord. No. 451(04), 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 806(15), § 8-1111, 10-19-2015)  
Sec. 8-1113. - Appearance. 
All buildings and the exterior of all premises shall be properly maintained to achieve a presentable appearance and to avoid blighting effects and hazardous conditions. 
(1)  Exterior space. The exterior open space around each structure shall be maintained or improved so as to provide for: 
a.  The immediate diversion of water away from buildings and proper drainage of the lot; 
b.  Grass, plantings, or other suitable ground cover to prevent soil erosion which is or may become detrimental to the structures, lot use or adjacent lots and structures; and 
c.  Sidewalks, walkways, parking areas, driveways and exterior steps which are of a permanently hard, dust-free surface of sound construction, and properly maintained. 
(2)  Buffer and screening requirements. When commercial or industrial property is being developed, and it abuts property zoned or used for residential purposes, a six-foot tall buffer shall be constructed of an appropriate mounding, fencing, or vegetative material, along the entire length of any abutting side or rear yard. Screen plantings shall have a minimum height of five feet and should be of such size, species, and spacing as can reasonably be expected to produce an opaque six-foot screen within three years. 
(3)  Vegetative ground cover required. All green areas shall be graded and seeded with an all-season, well maintained vegetative ground cover. 
(4)  Fences and walls. All fences, retaining walls, or similar structures shall be anchored firmly in the ground, shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner and maintained in that same manner so that such approved fences, retaining walls, or similar structures shall always be in the state of good structural repair. If any fence, retaining wall, or similar structure is found not to be in the state of good structural repair, it shall be removed, replaced, or repaired, as required. Except when constructed of materials that have been designed or manufactured to remain untreated, all fences shall be treated periodically with paint or chemicals so as to retard deterioration. Fences and/or walls shall be constructed of wood, iron, decorative aluminum, stone, brick, or decorative block. Retaining walls shall be constructed of stone, decorative wall systems, brick, or wood. 
(5)  Yards. All yards, courts, and lots shall be kept free of noxious weeds, overgrown grasses, debris, and other materials which may cause a fire, health or safety hazard, or general unsightliness. 
(6)  Hazards. Hazards and unsanitary conditions shall be eliminated. 
(7)  Grading. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
(8)  Drainage. All portions of all premises shall be so graded that there is no pooling of water or recurrent entrance of water into any part of any building except where such pooling or retention of water is part of a plan approved by the city engineer. All condensate and waste cooling water shall be appropriately discharged into an approved drainage system. 
(9)  Drainage swales. Swales are to be maintained by the owners of the parcels on which they are located, and at no time will anyone plant trees and/or shrubs or discharge, empty, or place any material fill or waste into any swale so as to impede or divert drainage flow. 
(10)  Traffic markings. All traffic markings such as directional arrows, lane division lines, parking space lines, stop signs, etc., shall be maintained so as to be clearly visible and easily recognized. 
(11)  Exterior light fixtures. Exterior lighting fixtures over steps, paths, walkways, courts, drives and parking lots shall be neatly maintained in operable condition and lighted for sufficient periods of time before and after business hours to provide for pedestrian and employee safety and properly aimed so as not to shine on adjacent properties (per local zoning regulation). 
(12)  Driveways and walkways. All driveways, walkways, stairs, parking spaces, parking lots and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(13)  Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation. 
(14)  Mosquito infestation. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free of the accumulation of stagnant water by any means, which may yield the potential for serving as a breeding ground for mosquitoes. 
(Ord. No. 806(15), § 8-1112, 10-19-2015)  
Sec. 8-1114. - Signage. 
(a)  Sign maintenance. All signage and incidental landscaping and/or lighting shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of deterioration. Neither lighting nor signage shall be permitted to be posted on trees or utility poles. 
(b)  Visibility triangles. All signage shall be located outside of all visibility triangles at intersections and ingress/egress points, and shall not be located in such a manner as to constitute a traffic or safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 806(15), § 8-1113, 10-19-2015)  
Sec. 8-1115. - Enforcement. 
An annual inspection of all commercial and industrial property shall be made by the building official or his designee to determine compliance with the exterior property maintenance code. 
(Ord. No. 806(15), § 8-1114, 10-19-2015)  
ARTICLE C. - NOTICE AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 8-1121. - Determination of violation. 
Upon report of a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the code official shall determine whether a violation exists, and whether such violation is deemed to be a minor violation or a major violation, as defined in section 8-1105. If the violation is determined to be a minor violation, no action shall be taken until such time as it is determined that a major violation exists. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1140; Ord. No. 102(94), 12-5-1994; Ord. No. 196(97), 6-16-1997)  
Sec. 8-1122. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the code official determines that a major violation exists, written notice shall be given to the owner of the premises stating the violations and directing that the violations be corrected. 
(b)  The written notice shall be sent by certified mail to the owner of the property at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer. If the property owner cannot be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property. 
(Code 1999, § 8-1141; Ord. No. 102(94), 12-5-1994; Ord. No. 196(97), 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 451(04), 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 8-1123. - Correction of violation. 
(a)  The notice required in section 8-1122 shall state that the owner or occupant must correct the violations outlined in the notice within 30 days of the date of the notice. Upon reinspection of the property within the 30-day notice period, the community development director may authorize an additional time for the owner or occupant to correct the violations. Once a notice of violation has been issued, each minor violation included in such notice shall be corrected prior to the code official clearing the violation. If the owner or occupant fails to correct the violations within the allotted time period, a citation or citations shall be issued to the owner or occupant, as provided in section 8-1104. 
(b)  At any time within ten days form the date of the notice, the owner or occupant may request, in writing addressed to the code official, a hearing for the purpose of contesting the determination of a violation on the property. The code official shall conduct a hearing as soon as practicable but not later than 15 days after receipt of the owner or occupant's request for such hearing. At such hearing the owner or occupant shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony, other evidence and arguments, and to cross examine witnesses. If the code official determines after such hearing that a major violation exists on the property, he shall direct that the violations be corrected within the time period established in the notice or other agreed upon timeline, as appropriate. Such finding shall be made in writing and shall be served upon the owner or occupant. An appeal of the final order of the code official may be had by any person aggrieved by such order. Such appeal shall follow the procedures established in section 8-205(f) and (g). 
(Code 1999, § 8-1142; Ord. No. 102(94), 12-5-1994; Ord. No. 196(97), 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 451(04), 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 807(15), § 8-1142, 10-19-2015)  
CHAPTER 12. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA 
 
Sec. 8-1201. - Definitions. 
(a)  [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Medical marijuana dispensary means any retail medical marijuana establishment licensed by the State of Oklahoma and the City of Moore to sell or dispense medical marijuana or medical marijuana products. 
Commercial medical marijuana growing facilities means any medical marijuana growing facility licensed by the State of Oklahoma and the City of Moore to grow marijuana in excess of 12 plants for non-personal use. Growing includes the cultivation, manufacturing, packaging, and distribution of marijuana and marijuana products. 
Commercial medical marijuana processing facilities means any medical marijuana processing facility licensed by the State of Oklahoma and the City of Moore to process the active ingredients of marijuana. Processing includes, but is not limited to: drying, cleaning, curing, packaging, and extraction of active ingredients to create medical marijuana, medical marijuana products or concentrates. 
Medical marijuana wholesale and/or storage facility means any wholesale or storage establishment licensed by the State of Oklahoma and the City of Moore that acquires, possesses, stores, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies, sells or dispenses marijuana or related supplies and educational materials to the holder of a valid medical marijuana dispensary license. 
Medical Marijuana growing for personal use means any individual licensed by the State of Oklahoma to grow up to six mature marijuana plants and up to six seedling plants within a single residence for personal medical use. 
(b)  The city hereby adopts all other terms and definitions as established by state law or department of health regulations. In the event of a conflict between any definitions contained herein, the definition promulgated by the State or the department of health shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 892(18) , § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 8-1202. - General requirements. 
(a)  Applicants for any license contained herein shall be required to possess a valid State of Oklahoma issued medical marijuana license prior to making application for the city license. 
(b)  The commercial licenses outlined in this chapter will be subject to property inspection by an authorized city inspector prior to issuance to ensure compliance with all codes of the city. 
(c)  The property inspection will occur at a time scheduled and approved by both the applicant and the city inspector. 
(d)  The applicant will be required to be present during the inspection. 
(e)  All structures, equipment, and apparatus shall comply with all building and fire codes currently adopted by the State of Oklahoma and the City of Moore. 
(f)  A medical marijuana business license application shall be filled out and signed by the property and business owner and submitted to the city clerk prior to scheduling an inspection. 
(g)  A nonrefundable license fee, as established by this chapter, shall be paid at the time the application is submitted. 
(h)  The license fee shall be set according to and used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration, and enforcement of this article. 
(i)  All medical marijuana dispensary, commercial medical marijuana growing and/or processing facilities, and medical marijuana wholesale and/or storage facility establishments shall be located within an entirely enclosed and secure structure, as required by the rules and regulations of the department of health, as may be amended from time to time. 
(j)  License holder shall remit all required state and city sales tax. 
(k)  It is the intent of the City of Moore that nothing in the medical marijuana ordinance be construed to: 
(1)  Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the City of Moore, or causes a public nuisance; 
(2)  Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or 
(3)  Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by state law. 
(l)  Additional regulations. 
(1)  Smoking and vaping marijuana shall be prohibited on all city property including vehicles, buildings, and parks as well as other property defined in 63 O.S. § 1-5121 et seq., to be cited as the "Smoking in Public Places and Indoor Workplace Act". 
(2)  Revocation or suspension of municipal issued marijuana license: 
a.  The city manager or designee shall revoke or suspend a license issued under this section on any of the following grounds: 
i.  The license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact or a fact concerning the applicant was not disclosed at the time of the application, and such fact would have constituted just cause for refusal to issue the license; 
ii.  Violation of any city ordinance, state law, or department of health regulations governing medical marijuana; 
iii.  Or any acts deemed to be a public nuisance. 
b.  Prior to suspension or revocation, the permittee shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard before the city manager. If an employee has been designated by the city manager, such employee shall make a report to the city manager together with a recommendation as to whether the license should be suspended or revoked. 
c.  The operation of a commercial medical marijuana facility without achieving and maintaining a current applicable municipal issued medical marijuana business license shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and each day the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(3)  Any person or entity applying for or issued a license by the City of Moore shall comply with all state law and department of health rules and regulations, as may be amended from time to time. 
(4)  Revocation of the state issued license shall result in immediate revocation of the city issued license. 
(Ord. No. 892(18) , § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 8-1203. - Medical marijuana dispensary. 
Medical marijuana dispensaries are hereby allowed within the municipal boundaries of Moore, Oklahoma upon compliance of the above general requirements, issuance of a retail medical marijuana dispensary business license and the following additional provisions: 
(a)  A medical marijuana dispensary shall be considered the same as a pharmacy and shall only be located within a zoning district where a pharmacy would be allowed. 
(b)  Medical marijuana dispensary business license shall not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within 1,000 feet of any public or private school entrance. The distance described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the nearest property line of the parcel of land on which the use described in herein is located to the nearest entrance of the building or unit of the public or private school. 
(c)  Conditions of operation. 
(1)  Buildings where medical marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off premises. 
(2)  The retail establishment must maintain a valid sales tax permit issued by the State of Oklahoma. 
(3)  No on premises use of marijuana or its derivatives shall be allowed. 
(4)  Medical marijuana dispensaries may sell medical marijuana, medical marijuana products and derivatives of medical marijuana between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Sunday through Saturday. 
(5)  Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of the retail medical marijuana business license. 
(d)  There shall be a business license fee and an annual renewal fee as set forth in [the city's fee schedule on file with the city clerk's office]. The annual business license will expire on June 30 th and shall be renewed prior to July 1 st of each year. The initial business license fee will be reduced on a pro rata basis depending on number of months remaining until renewal. If the date of the initial business license is issued on the 15 th of the month or before, that month will be included in the payment portion of the pro rata calculation. If the date of the initial business license is issued after the 15 th of the month, the remaining portion of that month will not be included in the pro rata calculation. Failure to renew will result in a penalty fee of 50 percent of the annual fee and shall require re-inspection as required in section (b) of the general requirements. 
(Ord. No. 892(18) , § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 8-1204. - Commercial medical marijuana growing facilities. 
Commercial medical marijuana growing facilities are hereby allowed within the municipal boundaries of Moore, Oklahoma upon compliance with the general requirements above, issuance of a commercial medical marijuana growing license and the following provisions: 
(a)  Commercial medical marijuana growing facilities shall only be located within one of the following zoning districts: 
(1)  A-1—Rural Agriculture in excess of a ten acre lot and minimum of 150 feet from property line. 
(2)  A-2—Suburban Agriculture in excess of a ten acre lot and minimum of 150 feet from property line. 
(3)  I-1—Light Industrial. 
(4)  I-2—Medium Industrial. 
(5)  I-3—Heavy Industrial. 
(b)  Conditions of operation. 
(1)  The facility shall be a secure building with limited access. The secure area must be locked at all times. 
(2)  The establishment must maintain a valid sales tax permit issued by the State of Oklahoma. 
(3)  The facility must be constructed in such a manner that the growing of the medical marijuana plants cannot be seen by the public from the public right-of-way. 
(4)  The growing area including any lighting, plumbing or electrical components used shall comply with all building and fire codes adopted by the State of Oklahoma and the City of Moore. 
(5)  The buildings/area where marijuana is grown must be properly ventilated so as to not create humidity, mold or other related problems and must be equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectible off premises. 
(6)  All commercial medical marijuana growing facilities shall meet the commercial development standards as set forth in Part 12 of the City of Moore Land Development Code. 
(c)  There shall be a business license fee and an annual renewal fee as set forth in [the city's fee schedule on file with the city clerk's office]. The annual business license will expire on June 30th and shall be renewed prior to July 1st of each year. The initial business license fee will be reduced on a pro rata basis depending on number of months remaining until renewal. If the date of the initial business license is issued on the 15th of the month or before, that month will be included in the payment portion of the pro rata calculation. If the date of the initial business license is issued after the 15th of the month, the remaining portion of that month will not be included in the pro rata calculation. Failure to renew will result in a penalty fee of 50 percent of the annual fee and shall require re-inspection as required in section (b) of the general requirements. 
(Ord. No. 892(18) , § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 8-1205. - Commercial medical marijuana processing facility. 
Commercial medical marijuana processing facilities are hereby allowed within the municipal boundaries of Moore, Oklahoma upon compliance with the general requirements above, issuance of a commercial medical marijuana processing license and the following provisions: 
(a)  Commercial medical marijuana processing facilities shall only be located within one of the following zoning districts: 
(1)  A-1—Rural agriculture in excess of a ten acre lot and minimum of 150 feet from property line. 
(2)  A-2—Suburban agriculture in excess of a ten acre lot and minimum of 150 feet from property line. 
(3)  I-1—Light industrial. 
(4)  I-2—Medium industrial. 
(5)  I-3—Heavy industrial. 
(b)  Conditions of operation. 
(1)  The facility shall be a secure building with limited access. The secure area must be locked at all times. 
(2)  The establishment must maintain a valid sales tax permit issued by the State of Oklahoma. 
(3)  The facility must be constructed in such a manner that the processing of the medical marijuana plants cannot be seen by the public from the public right-of-way. 
(4)  The processing area including any lighting, plumbing or electrical components used shall comply with all building and fire codes adopted by the State of Oklahoma and the City of Moore. 
(5)  The buildings where medical marijuana is processed must be properly ventilated so as to not create humidity, mold or other related problems and must be equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectible off premises. 
(6)  All commercial medical marijuana processing facilities shall meet the commercial development standards as set forth in Part 12 of the City of Moore Land Development Code. 
(c)  There shall be a business license fee and an annual renewal fee as set forth in [the city's fee schedule on file with the city clerk's office]. The annual business license will expire on June 30th and shall be renewed prior to July 1st of each year. The initial business license fee will be reduced on a pro rata basis depending on number of months remaining until renewal. If the date of the initial business license is issued on the 15th of the month or before, that month will be included in the payment portion of the pro rata calculation. If the date of the initial business license is issued after the 15th of the month, the remaining portion of that month will not be included in the pro rata calculation. Failure to renew will result in a penalty fee of 50 percent of the annual fee and shall require re-inspection as required in section (b) of the general requirements. 
(Ord. No. 892(18) , § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 8-1206. - Medical marijuana wholesale and/or storage facilities. 
Medical marijuana wholesale and/or storage facilities are hereby allowed within the municipal boundaries of Moore, Oklahoma upon compliance with the general requirements above, issuance of a medical marijuana wholesale and/or storage facility license and the following additional requirements: 
(a)  Medical marijuana wholesale or storage facilities shall only be located within one of the following zoning districts: 
(1)  A-1 - Rural agriculture in excess of a ten acre lot and minimum of 150 feet from property line. 
(2)  A-2 - Suburban agriculture in excess of a ten acre lot and minimum of 150 feet from property line. 
(3)  I-1—Light industrial. 
(4)  I-2—Medium industrial. 
(5)  I-3—Heavy industrial. 
(b)  Conditions of operation. 
(1)  The facility shall be a secure building with limited access. The secure area must be locked at all times. 
(2)  The establishment must maintain a valid sales tax permit issued by the State of Oklahoma. 
(3)  The storage area shall comply with all building and fire codes adopted by the State of Oklahoma and the City of Moore. 
(4)  The buildings where medical marijuana is stored or dispensed must be properly ventilated so as to not create humidity, mold or other related problems and must be equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectible off premises. 
(5)  All commercial medical marijuana wholesale or storage facilities shall meet the commercial development standards as set forth in Part 12 of the City of Moore Land Development Code. 
(c)  There shall be a business license fee and an annual renewal fee as set forth in [the city's fee schedule on file with the city clerk's office]. The annual business license will expire on June 30th and shall be renewed prior to July 1st of each year. The initial business license fee will be reduced on a pro rata basis depending on number of months remaining until renewal. If the date of the initial business license is issued is the 15th of the month or before, that month will be included in the payment portion of the pro rata calculation. If the date of the initial business license is issued after the 15th of the month, the remaining portion of that month will not be included in the pro rata calculation. Failure to renew will result in a penalty fee of 50 percent of the annual fee and shall require re-inspection as required in section (b) of the general requirements. 
(Ord. No. 892(18) , § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 8-1207. - Medical marijuana growing for personal use. 
Medical marijuana growing for personal use is hereby allowed within the municipal boundaries of Moore, Oklahoma upon compliance with the general requirements above and the following additional provisions: 
(a)  Individuals growing medical marijuana for personal use shall have a license issued by the State of Oklahoma authorizing the use of medical marijuana. Said license shall be made available to any authorized city employee upon request. The growing of medical marijuana is limited to the individual's primary residence and shall be limited to 12 plants (six full plants and six seedlings) per licensed card holder. 
(b)  Growing medical marijuana shall not be visible from the public right-of-way and shall at all times be grown inside the primary residence or an approved enclosed accessory building. 
(c)  The growing area including any lighting, plumbing or electrical components used shall comply with municipal building and fire codes. The growing area must be properly ventilated so as to not create humidity, mold or other related problems. Lighting shall not exceed 1,000 watts per light. The use of gas products (CO2, butane, etc.) or CO2 and ozone generators in the growing area is prohibited. 
(d)  Growing medical marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of life and property. 
(e)  The primary use of the residential property in which medical marijuana is grown shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking, eating, sleeping, and sanitation/bathing facilities with proper ingress and egress. No room shall be used for growing marijuana where such cultivation will impair or prevent the primary uses of cooking, eating, sleeping or sanitation/bathing. 
(Ord. No. 892(18) , § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Part 9 - LICENSE AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licenses generally, 11 O.S. §§ 22-106, 22-107. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Licenses generally, 11 O.S. §§ 22-106, 22-107. 
 
Sec. 9-101. - Licenses conditioned on compliance with Code provisions. 
All permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this Code for or to any person, business, activity, device or machine shall be conditioned upon substantial compliance by the permittee or licensee with all provisions of this Code for the regulation and maintenance of the public order, welfare, peace, health and safety. In addition, the permits and licenses shall be conditioned upon strict compliance with the provisions of this Code relating specifically to the person, business, activity, device or machine covered by the permit or license. 
(Code 1999, § 9-101)  
Sec. 9-102. - Issuance conditioned upon approval, fees, inspection or bond. 
Whenever in any section any permit or license issued by an officer, agency or department is made contingent upon the approval of another officer, agency or department, or contingent upon the payment of any fee, or the making of any prior inspection or examination, or the furnishing of any bond in connection therewith, the issuance of the permit or license shall be withheld until the approval, inspection or examination is had or the bond provided and until the fee has been paid as required. 
(Code 1999, § 9-102)  
Sec. 9-103. - Transfer prohibited. 
No license or permit issued shall be transferable nor may any license or permit be sold, assigned, or mortgaged, except as may be specifically authorized by this Code. No person may attempt to do business under a license or permit transferred to him. 
(Code 1999, § 9-103)  
Sec. 9-104. - Issuing officer, signatures, corporate seal. 
The issuing officer or agency for any license or permit shall be as prescribed in the section authorizing and commanding it, but no license shall be valid until signed or stamped by the city clerk or his designated agent. 
(Code 1999, § 9-104)  
Sec. 9-105. - Free licenses and rebates; partial fees. 
No free licenses shall be granted, nor rebates allowed, except as specifically set forth by this Code, nor any sum accepted less than the amount specified, nor for a shorter period than required by this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 9-105)  
Sec. 9-106. - Expiration date. 
(a)  All annual licenses issued shall expire on April 30 or on the date specified in this Code or on the license. 
(b)  Where the fee prescribed and paid for is for a period less than one year, the license shall be issued only for such period and shall expire at the end thereof. 
(c)  All permits shall expire upon execution of the act or activity for which the permit was issued, or at the expiration time noted on the permit or in this Code, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1999, § 9-106)  
Sec. 9-107. - Suspension or revocation. 
Any permit or license shall be subject to suspension or revocation for failure to comply with the terms of this Code and as may otherwise be provided by this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 9-107)  
Sec. 9-108. - Licenses and permits, not to be construed as an endorsement. 
No permit or license shall be construed or used in any manner or by any person as an official endorsement by the city of the person, activity or thing licensed or permitted. 
(Code 1999, § 9-108)  
Sec. 9-109. - Renewal of licenses, general requirements. 
For all occupations, activities or businesses regulated in this Code, no applicant for an initial or renewal license may engage in the activity, occupation or business regulated without issuance of the license as provided in this chapter unless otherwise provided herein. Renewal applications and fees must be received by the city at least ten days prior to the expiration of the license, except where otherwise provided by this Code, or else the applicant must proceed in the manner required of an applicant for a new or initial license. 
(Code 1999, § 9-109)  
Sec. 9-110. - Processing fee for all licenses, permits. 
All license and permit fees shall be paid in advance to the city prior to the issuance of any license or permit. The fee, less the applicable charge for processing the application for a permit or license, shall be refunded to the applicant, upon demand, in case the license or permit filed for is not granted. Except as provided otherwise in this Code, the processing fee shall be as set by the city council by motion or resolution. 
(Code 1999, § 9-110)  
Sec. 9-111. - License required, purpose. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, conduct, operate or follow any of the trades, businesses, vocations, professions, callings or activities set out in this Code, unless he has a current license issued by the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 6-16, in part; Code 1999, § 9-111)  
Sec. 9-112. - Application. 
Application for a license required by this Code shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain such reasonable information as he may require, in addition to any information specifically required by other provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 6-17, in part; Code 1999, § 9-112)  
Sec. 9-113. - Posting. 
Each license issued under this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place where the business, vocation or calling is carried on, and the holder of such license shall immediately show the same to any officer of the city upon being requested so to do. 
(Code 1999, § 9-113)  
Sec. 9-114. - Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits; refusal to issue licenses or permits; notice and hearing. 
(a)  The council or other authorized official may refuse to issue or renew a license or permit, or the licenses or permits issued pursuant to this Code, unless otherwise provided, may be suspended or revoked by the council or such other authorized official, department, board or agency, where applicable, after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentations or false statements contained in the application for permit or license; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares, merchandise and services; 
(3)  Conviction of the applicant, licensee or permittee of any crime of misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or a violation of any act of the state, or any law of the United States having a reasonable relationship to the purpose and scope of the permit or license; or 
(4)  Conducting the activity under this Code or any ordinance of the city in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for the suspension or revocation of a license or permit shall be in writing given by the clerk, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Service of such notice shall be made by either personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant, licensee or permittee at the last-known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  In case of refusal to issue a permit or license or the suspension or revocation of a license or permit as herein provided, no portion of the application, license or permit fee shall be returned to the applicant, licensee or permittee unless otherwise provided in this Code or any ordinance of the city. 
(d)  Any suspension or revocation hereunder may be either in addition to or instead of any penalty or fine as prescribed in this Code or any ordinance of the city. 
(e)  The order of the council or such other authorized official, department, board or agency, where applicable, shall be the final municipal action for the purpose of judicial review unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(f)  This section is in addition to any other procedures in this Code for license suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1999, § 9-114)  
Sec. 9-115. - Weights and measures. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any food, fuel, clothing or any other commodity which does not weigh or measure fully as much, according to standard weights or measures of the state, as the weight or measure for which it is sold or offered for sale. 
(Code 1999, § 9-115)  
Sec. 9-116. - Penalty. 
A violation of this chapter is punishable as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 9-116)  
CHAPTER 2. - UNIFORM CODE FOR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Emergency Response Systems Development Act, 63 O.S. § 1-2501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambulance means any vehicle which is designed and equipped to transport ill or injured persons in a reclining position, to or from health care facilities. 
Base station physician means a physician licensed to practice medicine in the state, knowledgeable in the medical protocols, radio procedure, and the general operating policies of the ambulance system, and a person from whom the ambulance personnel may take medical direction by radio or other remote communications device; and who shall be approved by the medical director. 
Emergency medical personnel means those persons certified or licensed under state law to provide one or more emergency medical services. 
EMS means emergency medical service. 
EMS control center or control center means the single facility which is the central communications center from which all ambulances operating in the service area shall be dispatched and controlled, and which receives all 911 emergency medical calls. 
EMT or emergency medical technician and categories thereof shall have the meaning and scope of practice ascribed by state law. 
First responder means any person, fire department vehicle, law enforcement vehicle, or non-transporting ambulance unit capable of providing appropriate first responder service, under the first responder program administered by the medical director. 
Helicopter rescue unit means any rotary wing aircraft providing basic or advanced life support and transportation of patients. 
Medical director means the licensed physician serving as administrative officer in carrying out the duties in section 9-202. 
Medical protocol means any diagnosis-specific or problem-oriented written statement of standard procedure, or algorithm, promulgated by the medical director as the medically appropriate standard of pre-hospital care for a given clinical condition. 
Mutual aid agreement means a written agreement between one or more providers of emergency services, whereby the signing parties agree to lend emergency aid to one another subject to conditions specified in the agreement, and as approved by the medical director as to quality of care and medical accountability. 
Patient means an individual who is either sick, ill, wounded, helpless or otherwise incapacitated, and who is in need of, or at risk of needing, medical care or assessment during transport to or from a health care facility, and who is reclining or should be transported in a reclining position under the applicable medical protocols. 
Permit means that document required to be obtained annually by each provider of ambulance services under section 9-206. 
Person means and includes any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Primary provider means a public or private ambulance service organization which has been designated by one or more governmental entities to provide emergency ambulance coverage throughout a defined geographic area. 
Priority. 
Code three means an emergent type of call. This call is made with the use of emergency lights and sirens. An emergency call is defined as any request for ambulance services suspected of being life or limb threatening in nature and requiring the immediate response of an ambulance provider. 
Code one means the non-emergent type of call. This call is made without the use of emergency lights and siren. A non-emergent call is defined as any request for routine transport that is either medically urgent or scheduled in advance and non-life or -limb threatening in nature. 
Provider means any ambulance operation granted a permit by this jurisdiction to provide ambulance service in the service area. 
Response time standards. The response time for all emergency calls will be eight minutes or less, with a reliability of 90 percent or better, calculated, maintained and reported on a monthly basis. All non-emergent medically urgent calls shall be services within one hour of receipt. All scheduled transfers shall be serviced within one hour of the scheduled time. 
Service area means that primary service area which is contained within the boundaries of the municipalities which have adopted and agreed to enforce this uniform ambulance code. 
System standard of care means the written body of standards and policies governing clinical aspects of the EMS system. As used in this context, "system standard of care" is a comprehensive term including: 
(1)  Input standards (e.g., personnel certification requirements, in-service training requirements, equipment specifications, on-board inventory requirements, and other requirements which the system must fulfill before receipt of a request for service); 
(2)  Performance standards (e.g., priority dispatching protocols and pre-arrival instructions, medical protocols, standing orders, response time standards, and other performance specifications describing how the system should behave upon receipt of a request for service); and 
(3)  Outcome standards (e.g., results the system intends to achieve by meeting its input and performance standards). 
System status plan means the dispatching plan and protocols which determine how many ambulances will be available for dispatch, protocols for event-driven deployment and redeployment of those ambulances. 
(Code 1999, § 9-201; Ord. No. 503, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 20(92), 4-6-1992; Ord. No. 144(96), 2-5-1996)  
Sec. 9-202. - Medical director. 
(a)  The medical director shall: 
(1)  Promulgate a system standard of care to include medical protocols designed to achieve a state-of-the-art medical quality of emergency medical care within the service area; 
(2)  Prescribe EMS data system and reporting standard by rule or regulation; 
(3)  Prescribe and administer written and practical tests and criteria for the certification and licensing of emergency medical personnel and ambulance vehicles; 
(4)  Prescribe and administer a first responder and an emergency medical technician/defibrillator (EMT/D) program. 
(b)  The salary of the medical director shall be borne pro rata by providers. 
(c)  The medical director shall be provided by the primary ambulance provider with the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 9-202; Ord. No. 503, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 20(92), 4-6-1992; Ord. No. 144(96), 2-5-1996)  
Sec. 9-203. - Mandatory centralized dispatch and primary service answering point (P.S.A.P.). 
(a)  All providers rendering emergency service under this chapter shall be dispatched and controlled through the city P.S.A.P. It is unlawful for any provider to publish or advertise any telephone number for the purposes of receiving request for emergency ambulance service except the emergency number (911) of the P.S.A.P. Request for ambulance service received at the city P.S.A.P. will be transferred to the Midwest City Emergency Operations Center. 
(b)  The P.S.A.P. shall at all times have the authority to direct the positioning, movements and run response of all ambulance units of all providers at all times. The city P.S.A.P. will be notified anytime there is not an ambulance available in the city limits. Location and status of next available unit will also be reported to the P.S.A.P. at this time. 
(Code 1999, § 9-203; Ord. No. 503, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 20(92), 4-6-1992; Ord. No. 144(96), 2-5-1996)  
Sec. 9-204. - Mandatory EMS data system and reporting standards. 
(a)  As a condition of maintaining its permit in good standing, each provider shall comply with EMS data system and reporting standards as prescribed by the medical director. 
(b)  Failure to comply with data system and reporting requirements, or to keep the P.S.A.P. completely informed concerning the location and status of all units at all times, or failure to carry out P.S.A.P. directives shall constitute grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the provider's permit. 
(Code 1999, § 9-204; Ord. No. 503, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 20(92), 4-6-1992; Ord. No. 144(96), 2-5-1996)  
Sec. 9-205. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Each provider shall keep in full force and effect a policy of public liability and property damage insurance, issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state, with coverage provisions insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of the provider's ambulance, and providing that amount of recovery shall be in limits of not less than the following sums: 
(1)  For the damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident, not less than $1,000,000.00; 
(2)  For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, not less than $1,000,000.00; and 
(3)  For any injury to or destruction of property in any one accident, not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(b)  Each provider shall keep in full force and effect a general comprehensive liability and professional liability policy issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state, with coverage provisions insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the actions of the provider or any of his employees, and providing that the amount of recovery shall be in limits of not less than $3,000,000.00. 
(c)  Each provider shall furnish, prior to issuance of its license, an original and duplicate certificates of insurance which shall indicate the types of insurance, the amount of insurance and the expiration dates of all policies carried by the provider. Each certificate of insurance shall name the city as an additional named insured, and shall contain a statement by the insurer issuing the certificate that the policies of insurance listed thereon will not be canceled or materially altered by the insurer absent 30 days' written notice received by the city. 
(d)  Cancellation or material alteration of a required insurance policy or coverage shall automatically revoke the provider's permit, and the provider shall thereupon cease and desist from further ambulance service operations. 
(Code 1999, § 9-205; Ord. No. 503, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 20(92), 4-6-1992; Ord. No. 144(96), 2-5-1996)  
Sec. 9-206. - Ambulance permits. 
(a)  No person may provide ambulance service on an emergency or routing transfer basis or transport or treat patients in an ambulance, within this jurisdiction, without first obtaining a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, except for those uses exempted below. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof has paid an annual fee in the amount previously established by ordinance or resolution for the right to engage in the ambulance business, and the amount established by ordinance or resolution each year for each vehicle being a vehicle permit authorized under ordinances. 
(c)  No permit shall be assignable or transferable by the person to whom issued except as herein provided. 
(d)  No transfer or assignment of existing permits shall be effective absent the assent and approval of the city. 
(e)  Any transfer of shares of stock or interest of any person or provider so as to cause a change in the directors, officers, shareholders, or managers of such persons or provider shall be deemed a transfer or assignment, subject to these provisions. 
(f)  The issuance of any permit by the city shall be made only to a provider holding a valid state permit and such permit shall be conditioned upon written submission of an approval by the medical director of the following items: 
(1)  Proforma system status plan, which shall show assumed response time reliability based thereon; 
(2)  Proforma medical quality assurance plan, which shall describe the applicant's medical quality assurance plan, and which shall demonstrate the applicant's ability to deliver medical care meeting the system standard of care, as promulgated by the medical director; 
(3)  Proforma staffing plan, providing for staffing at not less than the EMT/paramedic level in accordance with state statutes; 
(4)  Proforma equipment plan, which will show compliance with the state department of health requirements for paramedic life support service unit equipment and drugs. All drugs carried shall be described in the patient care protocols and approved for use by the medical director. In addition to the described equipment and drugs, all units shall have the following diagnostic equipment: 
a.  Non-invasive cardiac pacemaker; 
b.  Portable ventilator and demand valve; 
c.  Pulse oximetry; 
d.  Electronic intravenous infusion control device; 
e.  Electronic blood flow detection device (Doppler); 
f.  Method for blood glucose determination; 
(5)  Evidence of insurance, as required in section 9-205. 
(g)  Upon approval by the medical control board of the applicant's submission, the applicant shall receive a probationary permit. Such probationary permit shall allow the applicant to provide, from the effective date of the probationary permit, ambulance service within this jurisdiction. 
(h)  Each provider shall comply with its proforma system status plan and its proforma medical quality assurance plan from the effective date of its probationary permit. 
(i)  During the six months of the provider's probationary permit, the provider's response times and clinical quality of care shall be carefully evaluated. If the provider's performance is consistently and substantially within the proforma plans, and in compliance with the terms of this chapter, such probationary permit shall become a valid permit, renewable annually upon continual compliance with this chapter. 
(j)  Thereafter, chronic failure to comply with response time standards or clinical quality of care shall be grounds to revoke the provider's permit. 
(k)  If any provider's permit is suspended three times within any three-year period for failure to make required payments, such permit shall be automatically revoked, upon the third event. 
(l)  The Midwest City Regional Hospital Ambulance Service is hereby granted a temporary permit which shall expire September 19, 1996, and be issued annually as a regular permit unless terminated by either the city or Midwest City Regional Hospital Ambulance Service upon 60 days' written notice of termination to the other party. 
(Code 1999, § 9-206; Ord. No. 20(92), 4-6-1992; Ord. No. 144(96), 2-5-1996)  
Sec. 9-207. - Response time performance required. 
Every provider, as a condition of maintaining its permit, shall employ sufficient personnel, acquire sufficient equipment, and manage its resources as necessary to achieve the response time standards on all emergency calls or requests for routine transport origination within the city limits, received by, or referred to the provider as established in section 9-201. The provider shall prepare and submit a monthly report showing compliance with section 9-201. 
(Code 1999, § 9-207; Ord. No. 20(92), 4-6-1992; Ord. No. 144(96), 2-5-1996)  
Sec. 9-208. - Prohibition against refusal to transport. 
It is a violation of this chapter for any provider to fail to respond to a call or to transport or to render emergency first aid treatment, as is necessary, or to otherwise refuse or fail to provide any ambulance services originating within the service area because of the patient's perceived, demonstrated or stated inability to pay for such services, or because of the location of the patient within the service area or because of the unavailable status of any ambulance unit at the time of the request. Chronic violation of this provision shall be grounds to revoke a provider's permit. 
(Code 1999, § 9-208; Ord. No. 503, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 20(92), 4-6-1992; Ord. No. 144(96), 2-5-1996)  
Sec. 9-209. - Violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful: 
(1)  To perform duties as an ambulance driver or attendant without a current state EMT license; 
(2)  To permit a person to work as an ambulance driver or attendant without a current state EMT license; 
(3)  To use, or cause to be used, any ambulance provider other than a provider holding a valid permit, except those services described in subsection (b) of this section; 
(4)  For any persons, firm or organization to provide ambulance service within this jurisdiction other than a provider which is a holder of a valid permit; 
(5)  To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an ambulance or helicopter rescue unit. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to an alleged violation that the vehicle or ambulance is: 
(1)  A privately-owned vehicle not ordinarily used in the business of transporting patients who are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or helpless; 
(2)  A vehicle rendering services as an ambulance in the event of a major catastrophe or emergency when ambulances with permits based in the locality of the catastrophe or emergency are incapacitated or insufficient in number to render the services needed; 
(3)  An ambulance owned or operated by the federal or state government; 
(4)  An ambulance transporting a patient to a location within this jurisdiction, which transport originated from a point outside the service area; 
(5)  An ambulance responding to a call pursuant to a mutual aid agreement with a licensed provider; 
(6)  An ambulance owned and operated by a hospital and used exclusively for specialized mobile intensive care or for inter-institutional transfers of admitted patients of the owner hospital, provided the ambulance or helicopter rescue unit has a valid special use permit issued by the medical director on a need and necessity basis; 
(7)  A vehicle transporting a patient from a medical facility or nursing home which is located within the service area to any jurisdiction outside the service area, if the receiving jurisdiction allows any ambulance service permitted hereunder to lawfully transport patients from medical facilities or nursing homes located within the receiving jurisdiction to a destination within the service area. Also, a vehicle transporting a patient to or from a medical facility or nursing home located within the service area to or from any unincorporated or unregulated area. 
(Code 1999, § 9-209; Ord. No. 503, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 20(92), 4-6-1992; Ord. No. 144(96), 2-5-1996)  
Sec. 9-210. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. This penalty does not serve to limit any other remedies available to this jurisdiction in law or equity. 
(b)  Each day that any violation of the provisions of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1999, § 9-217; Ord. No. 503, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 20(92), 4-6-1992; Ord. No. 144(96), 2-5-1996)  
CHAPTER 3. - BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS 
 
Sec. 9-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billiard hall or pool hall means a business establishment where a charge is made for the playing of pool or billiards for profit by the operators thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 6-56, in part; Code 1999, § 9-301)  
Sec. 9-302. - License fee. 
A license fee per table shall be paid annually to the city clerk for a billiard emporium license expiring April 30 of each year. 
(Prior Code, § 6-57; Code 1999, § 9-302)  
Sec. 9-303. - Alcoholic beverages; intoxicated persons. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage or low-point beer may be consumed or sold on the premises of a pool or billiard hall. 
(b)  Intoxicated persons shall not be permitted to remain on the premises. 
(Code 1999, § 9-303)  
Sec. 9-304. - Permitted hours of operation. 
A billiard hall may be open during the following hours only: 
(1)  6:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight Monday through Thursday; 
(2)  6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday; and 
(3)  12:00 noon until 5:00 p.m. Sunday. 
(Prior Code, § 6-59; Code 1999, § 9-304)  
CHAPTER 4. - CHILD CARE ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— State licensing of child care facilities, 10 O.S. § 401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-401. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Day care center means any place, home or institution which receives eight or more children under the age of 16 years, who are not of common parentage, for care apart from their parents, legal guardians or custodians, when such care is received for regular periods of time for compensation. 
Family day care home means any place, home or institution which receives seven or less children under the age of 16 years, who are not of common parentage, for care apart from their parents, legal guardians or custodians, when such care is received for regular periods of time for compensation. 
(Prior Code, § 6-96; Code 1999, § 9-401; Ord. No. 35(92), 9-21-1992)  
Sec. 9-402. - Exceptions. 
Places, homes or institutions excepted from the definitions of a day care center or family day care home are: 
(1)  Those public and private schools organized, operated or approved under the laws of the state and regulated by the state department of education; 
(2)  Those where custody of the children has been fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(3)  Those where children are related by blood or marriage within the third degree of the custodial person; and 
(4)  Those public or private institutions caring for children while the parents, legal guardians or custodians are attending services, meetings, classes, or otherwise engaging in that institution's activities to the extent such care and custody does not exceed four hours at any one time. 
(Prior Code, § 6-96; Code 1999, § 9-402)  
Sec. 9-403. - License required. 
No day care center may be operated in the city, regardless of zoning, without having the license of approval of the state department of human services, and operating such under their rules and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 6-97; Code 1999, § 9-403)  
Sec. 9-404. - Operation in residential structure other than residence of owner or operator prohibited. 
No day care center may be operated in the city in a residential structure unless that structure is actually the place of residence for the owner or operator of such child care facility. 
(Prior Code, § 6-98; Code 1999, § 9-404)  
Sec. 9-405. - Zoning restrictions. 
Any day care center can only be operated in accordance with the city zoning regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 6-99; Code 1999, § 9-405)  
Sec. 9-406. - Inspections. 
Any day care center shall be open to the inspection of the director of the health department, fire marshal and officials of the department of human services, or their designated representatives, so long as such inspections are made during reasonable hours of the establishment's operations. 
(Prior Code, § 6-100; Code 1999, § 9-406)  
Sec. 9-407. - Nonconforming continuation. 
Any licensed day care center or child care establishment in lawful operation on February 2, 1983, may continue in operation. 
(Prior Code, § 6-101; Code 1999, § 9-407)  
Sec. 9-408. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the code enforcement officer for the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-102; Code 1999, § 9-408)  
Sec. 9-409. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the foregoing provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. Each day's violation thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1999, § 9-409)  
CHAPTER 5. - DANCE HALLS 
 
Sec. 9-501. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public dance hall and dance hall mean and include places where the general public is admitted, for a stipulated price, for the purpose of dancing to music, recorded, reproduced, or otherwise provided by the operator of the premises, for private gain or profit. The terms "public dance hall" and "dance hall" shall not include private dances conducted for recreational purposes and not for profit, by bona fide lodges, posts, clubs, schools, fraternal, benevolent, or charitable organizations; provided, however, that a juvenile disco shall not be defined as a dance hall or public dance hall. 
(Prior Code, § 6-66; Code 1999, § 9-501)  
Sec. 9-502. - Permit required. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to operate any public dance hall within the city limits without first having procured a permit therefor as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 6-67; Code 1999, § 9-502)  
Sec. 9-503. - Issuance to persons holding liquor or beer license prohibited. 
Permits for public dance halls shall be issued by the city clerk and it shall be unlawful for any person to procure from the clerk a permit, or for the city clerk to issue a permit, to any person to operate or maintain a dance hall in any building or room in the city limits who holds a license or receipt issued by the United States or the state authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages or low-point beer or covering any premises occupied or used by any person holding a license or receipt issued for any such purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 6-68; Code 1999, § 9-503)  
Sec. 9-504. - Issuance for locations near churches prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to procure from the city clerk a permit, or for the city clerk to issue a permit to any person to operate or maintain a public dance hall in any building or room within the corporate limits which is situated within 1,000 feet of any church, or regular place of religious worship. 
(Prior Code, § 6-69; Code 1999, § 9-504)  
Sec. 9-505. - Parking prerequisite to issuance. 
Before any permit is issued to any person for the conduct of a public dance hall, as defined in this chapter, the applicant for such license shall exhibit to the city clerk the lease agreement or rental contract covering the period of time for which such license is to be issued, describing the premises leased or rented to the applicant, and revealing the number of square feet of floor area normally used for dancing purposes and the number of square feet leased or rented for parking facilities. No permit shall be issued unless it shall affirmatively appear to such clerk that the applicant can meet the city's off-street parking requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 6-70; Code 1999, § 9-505)  
Sec. 9-506. - Fee. 
Before a permit is issued to any person for the operation of a public dance hall, he shall pay to the city clerk a permit fee per year for each and every dance hall to be operated in the city. Such license shall begin and end with the fiscal year and shall expire at 12:00 midnight June 30 of each succeeding year and shall not be issued for less than one year and the payment of the fee thereof. No permit issued by virtue of the provisions of this chapter shall be assigned to any other person. 
(Prior Code, § 6-71; Code 1999, § 9-506)  
Sec. 9-507. - Juvenile discos, permit. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a juvenile disco within the city limits without first having procured a permit therefor as herein provided. 
(b)  Before a permit is issued to any person for the operation of a juvenile disco, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a permit fee per year for each and every juvenile disco to be operated in the city. Such license or permit shall begin and end with the fiscal year and shall expire at 12:00 midnight June 30 of each succeeding year. No permit or license shall be assigned and such license shall be revoked and canceled by the municipal judge upon conviction more than once of a violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter, except the age limitation of section 9-508, are applicable to, and are to be observed by, juvenile discos. It shall be a violation to not comply with the terms thereof. 
(d)  Juvenile discos shall operate only on Friday from 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight and on Saturday from 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(Code 1999, § 9-507)  
Sec. 9-508. - Persons under 16, presence restricted. 
It is unlawful for any person operating a dance hall in the city, who has been issued a permit as provided in this chapter, to permit any person under the age of 16 years to resort to, be in or dance in such place unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Prior Code, § 6-73; Code 1999, § 9-508)  
Sec. 9-509. - Intoxicated persons, liquor violations. 
It is unlawful for any person operating a dance hall in the city, who has been issued a permit as provided in this chapter to: 
(1)  Permit any intoxicated person to be in, or dance therein; 
(2)  Permit any person to violate any of the laws known as prohibitory liquor laws; 
(3)  Permit any person to violate any state or federal or city law or ordinance pertaining to the regulation, sale or disposition of nonintoxicating beverages; and 
(4)  Permit any person to bring on such premises operated as a dance hall alcoholic beverages or low-point beer, or drink or consume alcoholic beverages or low-point beer on or about such premises. 
(Prior Code, § 6-74; Code 1999, § 9-509)  
Sec. 9-510. - Time of operation. 
All persons operating dance halls within the corporate limits of the city shall close their place of business at 12:00 midnight and shall not reopen for business before 8:00 a.m., except Sundays, and on Sundays such business shall be closed at 12:00 midnight Saturday and remain closed until 8:00 a.m. on Monday following and shall not permit any dancing of any kind during the hours herein specified as closing hours. 
(Prior Code, § 6-75; Code 1999, § 9-510)  
Sec. 9-511. - Penalty. 
Any violation of this chapter is punishable as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 9-511)  
CHAPTER 6. - GARAGE AND RESIDENTIAL SALES AND FLEA MARKETS  
ARTICLE A. - RESIDENTIAL SALES 
 
Sec. 9-601. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Residential sale means any sale or what is held out to be or is commonly known as a garage, porch, room, backyard, front yard or patio sale or any other type of general sale conducted from or on any premises not located in a zoning district which permits such sales, where goods or articles of any type are held out for sale to the public. This definition shall not include a situation where specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale specifically names the items to be sold. 
(Prior Code, § 6-321; Code 1999, § 9-601)  
Sec. 9-602. - One license required per location; eligibility. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to hold, conduct, engage in or participate in any manner in a residential sale without first having obtained a license as provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  The issuance of a license under the provisions of this chapter shall not exempt such persons from the terms and provisions of other ordinances or laws. 
(c)  A separate license shall be required for each location at which a residential sale is to be held. 
(d)  No location shall be eligible for more than one license in any three-month period unless there has been a change in the lawful possession of such location. 
(e)  In the event of rain or other seriously inclement weather conditions, the applicant may return the garage sale license to the city for a rain check. A rain check shall be used within the 21-day period and following the dates initially scheduled for the garage sale and only one rain check will be allowed within a three-month period. 
(Prior Code, § 6-322; Code 1999, § 9-602; Ord. No. 487(89), 6-5-1989; Ord. No. 78(94), 3-7-1994)  
Sec. 9-603. - Application. 
An applicant for a license shall furnish the city clerk with the following information: 
(1)  Full name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location at which the proposed residential sale is to be held; and 
(3)  The dates upon which the sale is to be held. 
(Prior Code, § 6-323; Code 1999, § 9-603; Ord. No. 78(94), 3-7-1994)  
Sec. 9-604. - Issuance; term; investigation. 
(a)  The city clerk is hereby authorized to grant a license for a residential sale for a period not to exceed three consecutive days to any person applying who otherwise complies with the requirements of this article and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  If a residential sale is not held on the dates for which the license is issued or is terminated during the first day of the sale because of inclement weather conditions, and an affidavit by the license holder to this effect is submitted, the city clerk may issue another license to the applicant for a residential sale to be conducted at the same location within 21 days from the date when the first sale was to be held. 
(c)  Before issuing a residential sale license, the city clerk may conduct such investigation as may reasonably be necessary to determine if there is compliance with this article or city ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 6-325; Code 1999, § 9-604; Ord. No. 57(93), 7-6-1993; Ord. No. 78(94), 3-7-1994)  
Sec. 9-605. - Fee. 
For the purpose of helping to defray the cost of inspection and enforcement of this article, there is hereby levied a fee for residential sale licenses in the amount as set by the council by motion or resolution. 
(Code 1999, § 9-605; Ord. No. 487(89), 6-5-1989)  
Sec. 9-606. - Revocation or refusal. 
Any license issued under this article may be revoked or any application for issuance of a license may be refused by the city clerk if the application submitted by the applicant or license holder contains any false, fraudulent or misleading statement. 
(Prior Code, § 6-326; Code 1999, § 9-606)  
Sec. 9-607. - Interval between sales. 
No person shall hold, conduct or engage in or participate in any manner or allow a residential sale to be held or conducted on premises under his control or ownership more than one time in any three-month period, subject, however, to the exceptions allowed in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6-327; Code 1999, § 9-607; Ord. No. 78(94), 3-7-1994)  
Sec. 9-608. - Signs. 
(a)  Not more than five signs shall be used for the purpose of advertising, or otherwise calling attention to, a residential sale licensed under this article, and only signs as provided by the city, upon issuance of the residential sale permit, shall be allowed. One sign shall be located on the immediate premises where the sale is to be conducted. The remaining four signs may be located off the immediate premises where the sale is to be conducted. Such signs shall only be erected in accordance with the instructions issued by the city's building department. 
(b)  All signs advertising the residential sale must be removed within 48 hours after the residential sale license has expired. Failure to remove the signs within 48 hours will result in a fine as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 9-608; Ord. No. 487(89), 6-5-1989; Ord. No. 78(94), 3-7-1994)  
Sec. 9-609. - Display of goods. 
The sale area of any residential sale shall be confined to the premises for which the license has been issued. 
(Code 1999, § 9-609; Ord. No. 487(89), 6-5-1989)  
Sec. 9-610. - Persons exempt from article. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; or 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auction. 
(Prior Code, § 6-330; Code 1999, § 9-610)  
Sec. 9-611. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates this article shall be punished by fine as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 9-611)  
ARTICLE B. - FLEA MARKETS 
 
Sec. 9-621. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Flea market means a market, indoors or out of doors, where new or used items are sold from individual locations, with each location being operated independently from the other locations. Items sold include, but are not limited to, household items, antiques, rare items, decorations, used books and used magazines. 
Flea market seller means a person, firm or corporation selling items or offering items for sale at a flea market. 
Market means a place where goods are sold to the public. 
(Code 1999, § 9-621; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-622. - License provisions, requirements, and restrictions. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall operate the business of renting space or allocating space to flea market sellers without first obtaining a flea market operator's license therefor. Applications for licenses shall be made to the city clerk on forms provided by the city clerk. All flea market operator's license applications shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall be subject to background checks by the city police department and by the community development director for site approval. Each license shall be for a period of one year and no license issued pursuant to this section shall be transferred or assigned to any other person or firm. The fee for the license shall be that found in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  Each flea market operator required by this article to obtain a license shall keep accurate records of names, addresses, and drivers' license numbers, including state of issuance, for each flea market seller, together with a brief description of the types of merchandise offered for sale by that seller. These records shall be provided to the city on at least a monthly basis. 
(c)  No person, firm or corporation operating a secondhand store shall be required to obtain a license under this article for the same business location. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation renting or allocating space to flea market sellers in more than one place of business shall be required to obtain a license for each place of business, provided that one license shall be adequate for locations that are on the same lot. 
(Code 1999, § 9-622; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993; Ord. No. 48, 2-16-1993)  
Sec. 9-623. - Unlawful transactions. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale at any flea market any goods known to such person to be stolen. 
(Code 1999, § 9-623; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-624. - Sales tax permit. 
An individual vendor or seller shall be required to apply for and obtain any required sales tax permit from the state tax commission. The permit shall be displayed in a prominent place during all business hours. 
(Code 1999, § 9-624; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-625. - Zoning requirements. 
A flea market shall be permitted only in a district as provided in the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1999, § 9-625; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-626. - Site requirements. 
(a)  Flea market booths generally. Flea market booths or individual selling areas shall be located on individual stands and all outdoor displays shall be of a type that can easily be moved and stored out of sight. 
(b)  Site improvement requirements for outdoor flea markets. 
(1)  The condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable or sudden flooding or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards; 
(2)  For outdoor flea markets, exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every flea market shall be paved, or covered with stone screenings, or other solid materials; and 
(3)  For outdoor flea markets, the ground surface in all parts of every flea market shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner in order to eliminate water pockets, low areas or bogs. 
(c)  Setbacks, buffer strips and screening for outdoor flea markets. 
(1)  All outdoor flea markets shall be located at least 25 feet from any public street or highway right-of-way and at least 20 feet from the exterior property boundary lines; and 
(2)  All outdoor flea markets adjacent to residential uses shall be provided with screening of a well-maintained opaque fence along the boundary line separating the market and adjacent zoning and uses. Such screening shall be eight feet in height. 
(d)  Street and parking requirements for flea markets. 
(1)  All flea markets shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads or highways; 
(2)  Access to flea markets shall be designated to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets; 
(3)  Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all flea markets. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of 5½ spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross sales area. 
(e)  Walks, general requirements. All flea markets shall be provided safe, convenient, all-season, dust-free, pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided. 
(f)  Identification. Each booth or table shall be numbered. 
(Code 1999, § 9-626; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-627. - Water supply requirements. 
(a)  An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each flea market. Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made to it and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public water supply is not available, a private water supply system may be developed and used as approved by the state department of health in accordance with rules and regulations for water supply quality control. 
(b)  The water supply system of the flea market shall be constructed and connected in accordance with the plumbing code of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 9-627; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-628. - Restroom and sewage disposal. 
(a)  There shall be a minimum of one central restroom facility located on the premises. Within that central restroom there shall be separate facilities for men and women. 
(b)  Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory and sink; cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. 
(c)  Restrooms shall contain the minimum number of fixtures as required by the plumbing code of the city. 
(d)  An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided in all flea markets for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system and connection shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing code and sewer use ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 9-628; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-629. - Refuse control. 
There shall be enough trash cans, lined with plastic containers, to accommodate all the trash thrown away on the premises. All trash shall be removed at least at the end of each day during which the flea market is open. 
(Code 1999, § 9-629; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-630. - Insect and rodent control. 
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. 
(Code 1999, § 9-630; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-631. - Fire protection. 
(a)  Flea markets shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
(b)  Portable fire extinguishers shall be kept in all buildings and shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
(Code 1999, § 9-631; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-632. - Public address systems. 
Except for emergencies, the use of outdoor public address systems shall be prohibited nor shall there by any outdoor music or other forms of entertainment designed to entertain or attract the public in general. This provision is not intended to prohibit a vendor from the private listening of a radio or other music device, so long as the use of such device does not violate the city's noise ordinance. 
(Code 1999, § 9-632; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-633. - Sales after dark. 
There shall be no outdoor sales 30 minutes after sunset. The official times for sunset and sunrise maintained by the National Weather Service shall be used to determine sunset. 
(Code 1999, § 9-633; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-634. - Sales of animals, outdoor flea market. 
There shall be no selling or showing of animals of any kind on the outdoor premises of any flea market or from any outdoor booth. 
(Code 1999, § 9-634; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
Sec. 9-635. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be, upon conviction, subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-108. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1999, § 9-635; Ord. No. 46(93), 2-1-1993)  
CHAPTER 7. - ITINERANT VENDORS AND CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS  
ARTICLE A. - ITINERANT VENDORS 
 
Sec. 9-701. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means soliciting for a business purpose which is intended to be for profit and is not intended to be charitable, religious, not-for-profit or political. 
Itinerant means having no regular place of doing business or soliciting in the city and includes, but is not limited to, making regular delivery or providing goods over an established route through the city. 
Peddler means a person soliciting commercial orders for goods or services which are to be provided from stocks or goods carried with the peddler or which are services provided by the peddler at the time the order is made. 
Soliciting means and includes any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, food stuffs, or services, of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or 
(4)  Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project. 
Solicitor means a person soliciting and includes a person soliciting commercial orders for goods or services which are to be provided or shipped to the consumer at a later date. 
Vendor means any person engaged in a business or occupation selling or offering to sell any merchandise, product or service, and includes, but is not limited to, peddlers and solicitors. 
(Prior Code, § 6-431, in part; Code 1999, § 9-701) 
State Law reference— State peddlers licenses, 47 O.S. § 434; ex-servicemen exempted if certified by district court, 72 O.S. § 1.  
Sec. 9-702. - License required, blanket licenses. 
Any itinerant vendor, solicitor or peddler shall obtain a license from the city prior to any soliciting in the city, unless exempted herein, to cover each person who will be soliciting and each location or separate place of business. 
(Prior Code, § 6-441, in part; Code 1999, § 9-702)  
Sec. 9-703. - Fee. 
The fee for licenses herein required shall be as set by the city council by motion or resolution. The fees may be waived for educational, charitable, or religious groups, qualifying as 501(c)(3) organizations who make house to house solicitations. 
(Prior Code, § 6-444, in part; Code 1999, § 9-703)  
Sec. 9-704. - Application for license. 
Applicants for licenses shall file during regular business hours a written application signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all partners, if a partnership, and by a qualified corporate officer, if a corporation, with the licensing officer, on a form prescribed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer may require the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed to be carried on in the city; the location or address of such persons when engaged in such business; the permanent addresses of such persons; the capacity in which such persons will act; and the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any, and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated; 
(2)  The places in the city within the proper zoning classification where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business be conducted; 
(3)  Places, other than permanent place of business of the applicant, within the six months next preceding the date of the application, where the applicant has conducted a transient business; 
(4)  The nature of the goods or products being sold, that is whether they are seconds, rejects or first-line quality, and whether any warranty applies to the items being sold; if a warranty applies, the period of the warranty and the name and address of the warrantor and the procedures for filing for the adjustment of refund shall be specified; 
(5)  A statement that the applicant agrees to the requirement to pay all state and city sales taxes due on all items which are subject to sales taxes and recognizes that a copy of all applications will be provided to the local office of the state tax commission; 
(6)  Current state sales tax permit number; 
(7)  Current license or permit, if any, which may be required by state law or ordinances of the city for the particular activity or business; 
(8)  If a motor vehicle is to be used in the business, a description of the vehicle, together with motor vehicle registration number and the license number for the vehicle, and: 
a.  Proof of liability insurance required by state law; and 
b.  Proof or verification from the insurance carrier that the city clerk will be provided at least ten days' notice of any cancellation; and 
(9)  Proof of 501(c)(3) tax status if claiming exemption from the license fees. 
(Prior Code, §§ 6-442, 6-443, in part; Code 1999, § 9-704)  
Sec. 9-705. - Investigation, approval or disapproval. 
(a)  All applications for licensing or registration shall be immediately referred for investigation as to the truth thereof, which investigation shall be conducted within ten business days after the application and fee are deposited with the city. 
(b)  If the city finds no past history of the applicant indicating violations of this Code and that the application is properly made and truthful, a license shall be issued to the approved applicant upon payment of the fee therefor and the filing of the required bond. 
(c)  In all matters of denial of the license or registration, the applicant shall be forthwith advised thereof. The applicant shall be advised that an appeal of a denied license may be submitted to the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 9-705)  
Sec. 9-706. - Bond for license. 
(a)  Before any license as provided by this article shall be issued, such applicant shall file a bond running to the city. A person engaging in business as an itinerant vendor shall file a bond in the sum set forth in the bond schedule, secured by the applicant as principal and two sureties upon whom service of process may be made in the state. 
(b)  All such bonds shall be approved by the city attorney and conditioned that: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the sale of goods or wares and merchandise; and 
(2)  The applicant will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of the ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any persons for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deceptive practice by any person transacting such business with such applicant, whether such misrepresentation or deception were made or practiced by the owner or by their service, agents or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated with reference to the goods, wares and merchandise sold or any part thereof. Any action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use of the aggrieved person. 
(Prior Code, § 6-443, in part; Code 1999, § 9-706)  
Sec. 9-707. - Service of process. 
Before any license for an itinerant vendor, as herein provided, shall be issued, such applicant shall file with the city an instrument nominating and appointing the city clerk his true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transaction under the license and the bond given as required by this article, or for the performance of the conditions of the bond or for any breach thereof. The instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that the applicant for the license consents and agrees that service of any notices or process may be made upon the agent and when so made shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served on the persons applying for the license under this article, according to the laws of the state or any other state and waiving all claims or right of error by reason of such acknowledgement of service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of process upon the city clerk, as herein provided, the city clerk shall send to the licensee at his last-known address, by certified mail, a copy of the notice. 
(Code 1999, § 9-707)  
Sec. 9-708. - Sale of foods. 
(a)  All applicants for a license to sell foods and merchandise for human or animal consumption shall have their application for a license approved in accordance with the applicable state food establishment requirements before the licenses are issued. 
(b)  The sale of foods requires an individual license not covered by blanket licenses. 
(Code 1999, § 9-708)  
Sec. 9-709. - Identification tag or badge, display. 
At all times there shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon each: 
(1)  Licensee if an individual; 
(2)  Vehicle or booth used by a licensee; or 
(3)  Building or premises as appropriate for blanket licenses; 
a badge, tag or card issued by the city as proof of issuance of a license. The card, tag or badge shall state the name of the licensee and the date of expiration of the license. Blanket licenses shall be displayed and readily available for inspection by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 9-709)  
Sec. 9-710. - Hours. 
In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, no person may engage in soliciting from house to house in residential areas of the city between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Prior Code, § 6-432, in part; Code 1999, § 9-710)  
Sec. 9-711. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The following are exempt from the license requirements of this article: 
(1)  Sale or delivery of newspapers, or any news gathering activity performed by a news medium; 
(2)  Any regularly established business which uses vehicles from which to sell in front of or in the vicinity of its own permanent location; 
(3)  Bona fide auction sales; 
(4)  The sale of farm, dairy, garden or agricultural products by persons who produced and raised the products on lands owned or controlled by them; 
(5)  Trunk showings or temporary events by existing local merchants outside of their existing locations; 
(6)  Wholesalers selling to dealers or existing established local businesses; 
(7)  Solicitation of information for a legitimate citywide distributed telephone directory or similar book; or 
(8)  Solicitation conducted by public school children for the purposes of financing extracurricular, social, athletic, artistic, scientific, or cultural programs, which shall include, but shall not be restricted to, solicitation for band and athletic uniforms, scientific or artistic implements and literary matters; however, no such solicitation shall be immune from regulation under this article unless the solicitation shall have been approved by the principal of the school where the children are in attendance. 
(b)  Any person who desires to be exempt from the license fees levied under this article due to engaging in interstate commerce shall provide sufficient data on transactions and proof to the city to establish the interstate commerce nature of his business and transactions. If the city refuses to issue an interstate commerce exemption for the license fees to a commercial business activity, then the applicant is entitled to a hearing before the city judge. 
(Prior Code, §§ 6-19, 6-434, in part; Code 1999, § 9-711; Ord. No. 551, 4-1-1991)  
Sec. 9-712. - Provisions cumulative. 
The requirements of this article are cumulative to any provisions of state law or city ordinances regulating or governing any of the activities licensed herein. In the case of any conflict between the provisions of this article and those of any other city ordinance or state law, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Code 1999, § 9-712)  
Sec. 9-713. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 9-713)  
ARTICLE B. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 
 
Sec. 9-721. - Definition. 
In addition to the definitions contained in section 9-701, the term "charitable solicitations campaign" means any course of conduct whereby any person, organization, society, association, corporation or any agent, member or representative thereof, shall solicit property or financial assistance of any kind or sell or offer to sell any article, tag, service, emblem, publication, ticket, advertisement, subscription, or anything of value on the plea of representation that such sale or solicitation with the proceeds therefrom are for charitable, educational, patriotic or philanthropic purpose. 
(Code 1999, § 9-721; Ord. No. 551, 4-1-1991)  
Sec. 9-722. - Regulation of charitable solicitations campaign. 
(a)  It is unlawful to conduct any charitable solicitation campaign within the city on any street, highway, or roadway used for vehicular or pedestrian travel, unless waived upon proof that such activity does not present a danger to the solicitors and will not disrupt, obstruct, or affect the flow of traffic, or in any public place, or by house to house canvass, unless the person, organization, society, association or corporation conducting same and responsible therefor shall first have obtained a permit in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to any organization which solicits funds solely from its own members or from its own assemblies not using public streets or public places for such purposes. 
(Code 1999, § 9-722; Ord. No. 551, 4-1-1991; Ord. No. 527(06), 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 9-723. - Boxes and receptacles. 
It is unlawful for any person to solicit any charitable contribution by means of a box or receptacle in any public place without first filing with the city manager a notice of intention to do so. Each person so soliciting must in all other respects comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 9-723; Ord. No. 551, 4-1-1991)  
Sec. 9-724. - Application for permit. 
A permit to conduct a charitable solicitations campaign on the streets or in any public place or by house to house canvass in the city shall be granted only after submitting to the city manager not less than 14 days prior to the initiation of the proposed charitable solicitations campaign an application which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name of the organization applying for a permit and address of the headquarters in the city. If the organization is a chapter or other affiliate of an organization having its principal office outside the city, the name and address of the parent organization; 
(2)  The names and addresses of the officers and person who will be primarily in charge of conducting the solicitation campaign; 
(3)  The purposes for which the gross receipts derived from such solicitations or other activities are to be used; 
(4)  A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable, educational, patriotic, or philanthropic work done by the charitable organization during the last preceding year; 
(5)  An outline of the methods to be used in conducting the charitable solicitations campaign, including the duration of the campaign; 
(6)  Such other information that the city manager may deem appropriate and necessary to determine whether or not the organization is in fact a charitable organization whose primary purpose is to conduct charitable, educational, patriotic, or philanthropic purposes. 
(Code 1999, § 9-724; Ord. No. 551, 4-1-1991)  
Sec. 9-725. - Issuance of charitable solicitations permit. 
Upon receipt of the written application, the city manager or his designee shall review the application and if he finds that all information appears to be true and correct, and that the proceeds from the proposed solicitation meet the charitable, educational, patriotic, or philanthropic purpose authorized by this article, he shall cause the city clerk to issue a permit to the organization or person to conduct a charitable solicitations campaign for the period and manner determined by the city manager or his designee to be appropriate for the proposed campaign. However, the period of the campaign authorized hereunder shall not exceed three calendar months. Any extension of such period shall be granted only upon the filing of a new application and after the city manager has had opportunity to review the same. There shall be no fee for a charitable solicitations permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 9-725; Ord. No. 551, 4-1-1991)  
CHAPTER 8. - PAWNBROKERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Pawnshop Act, 59 O.S. § 1501 et seq.; municipal regulation of pawnshops, 59 O.S. § 1514. 
 
Sec. 9-801. - License required. 
No person shall operate as a pawnbroker or as a receiver of goods under chattel mortgage without first securing a license and making payment therefor as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 6-206; Code 1999, § 9-801)  
Sec. 9-802. - Fee. 
There is hereby levied a fee for the license required by this chapter, per year. 
(Prior Code, § 6-207; Code 1999, § 9-802)  
Sec. 9-803. - Forfeiture. 
Any pawnbroker or any other person who may be engaged in any calling or occupation requiring a license under this chapter, who shall be guilty of the violation of any provision of this chapter or who shall permit any employee in the course of employment to be guilty of the violation of any provision thereof, shall, upon conviction, in addition to the punishment otherwise provided as a penalty therefor, be deprived of the license, by order of the court. 
(Prior Code, § 6-208; Code 1999, § 9-803)  
Sec. 9-804. - Bond required. 
(a)  Every person applying for a license to engage in or carry on the business of pawnbroker shall, before the license is issued to him, enter into a bond with the city, with approved sureties, in the penal sum as set by the city, conditioned that the applicant will strictly observe all laws, regulations and requirements in relation to pawnbrokers or their business, and will pay all costs, fines and penalties incurred on account of his failure or neglect in that regard and will pay all damages to any person by reason of the pawnbroker wrongfully taking, purchasing or receiving in pledge or on deposit any stolen property, or the property of any minor. 
(b)  The bond shall be filed with the city clerk and may be sued upon by any person damaged as aforesaid in the name of the city for the benefit of such person, but in no event shall the city be liable for the costs of such suit. 
(Prior Code, § 6-209; Code 1999, § 9-804)  
Sec. 9-805. - Registration of property required, reports. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall keep at his place of business a register in which he shall enter in writing the following: 
(1)  A minute description of all property taken, purchased or received by him; 
(2)  Any number that may be in or upon any article; 
(3)  The time, name and place of residence (giving street and number if within the city) of the person leaving the property; and 
(4)  The amount loaned, the interest charged and the time when the loan falls due. 
(b)  The pawnbroker shall make such entry within one hour after the receipt or purchase of such property. Every entry shall be made in ink and shall not in any manner be obliterated or erased. 
(c)  The pawnbroker shall give a receipt to the person negotiating or leaving the property; the receipt shall be legible, and shall contain a full and perfect copy of all entries required by law to be kept in the register. No charge shall be made for the receipt. 
(d)  Every pawnbroker shall execute and deliver to the chief of police every day, before the hour of 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy from the register of all personal property or other valuable things received or deposited or purchased during the preceding day, together with the time when received or purchased and a description of the person by whom the property or valuables was left in pledge or from whom the same was purchased. 
(e)  No person shall be required to furnish a description of any property purchased from manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an established place of business or of any goods purchased at open sale or from any bankrupt stock, or from any other person having an established place of business. Such goods shall be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open and legitimate purchase; the bill shall be shown to any officer upon demand. 
(f)  Any pawnbroker shall make available a copy or report within two days of any buy or pawn transaction to the police department, provided merchandise bought on invoice from a manufacturer or wholesaler with an established place of business is exempt from this reporting requirement. However, such invoice shall be shown upon request to the administrator or his duly authorized representative or any authorized peace officer. The pawnbroker may provide the transaction report to the police department by either electronically reporting the information in the transaction report to an electronic database accessible only by law enforcement agencies or by reporting a physical copy of the transaction report directly to the law enforcement agency. The transaction report shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the pawnshop; 
(2)  The name, address, race, sex, weight, height, date of birth and either identification number of the seller or pledger as verified by either a state-issued identification card, driver's license or federal government-issued identification card or by readable fingerprint of right or left index finger on the back of the pawn or buy transaction copy to be retained for the pawnbroker's record; 
(3)  The transaction number for the buy or pawn transaction; 
(4)  The date and time of the transaction; 
(5)  The manufacturer of the item; 
(6)  A description of the item; and 
(7)  The serial number and model number, where available, and any other identifying markings. 
(g)  Items bought, except on invoice from a manufacturer or wholesaler with an established place of business, shall be held for ten days before being disposed of or sold. 
(h)  The pawnbroker shall obtain a written declaration of ownership from the seller or pledgor on all buy and pawn transactions, except refinance pawn transactions or merchandise bought from a manufacturer or wholesaler with an established place of business. The seller or pledgor shall be required to state how long he has owned the property described in the transaction. The declaration of ownership shall appear on the bill of sale or pawn ticket, to be completed by the seller or the pledgor at the time of the transaction. 
(Prior Code, § 6-210; Code 1999, § 9-805) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 59 O.S. § 1515.  
Sec. 9-806. - Business hours. 
No pawnbroker shall purchase, take or receive on deposit, or in any manner, any article or property from any person between the hours of 6:30 p.m. and 8:30 a.m. All pawnbrokers shall remain closed all day on Sunday unless the pawnbroker can show that he uniformly keeps another day of the week as holy time and does not labor on that date. Pawnbrokers may receive and purchase property up to 9:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Mondays. 
(Prior Code, § 6-212; Code 1999, § 9-807; Ord. No. 342(01), 12-3-2001)  
Sec. 9-807. - Entering into sales with certain persons prohibited. 
No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or any other person shall knowingly purchase, take or receive in pledge, or by any gift or on deposit, or accept possession of any article or property, of or from any of the following: 
(1)  Any person under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs; 
(2)  Any person who is a habitual user of drugs of any kind; or 
(3)  Any person who has previously been convicted of petty larceny. 
(Prior Code, § 6-213; Code 1999, § 9-808)  
Sec. 9-808. - Transactions with minors prohibited. 
No person in charge of any junk shop, secondhand store, pawnshop, or otherwise, shall knowingly purchase from or advance money to any minor upon articles of value, or have any dealing respecting the title of property in the possession of a minor, without the written consent of the parent or guardian of such minor. 
(Prior Code, § 6-214; Code 1999, § 9-809)  
Sec. 9-809. - Concealing lost property prohibited. 
No person shall attempt to conceal any estray, or lost goods, found or taken up by him, or shall efface any marks or brands thereon, or carry the same beyond the limits of the city or knowingly permit the same to be done, or willfully fail to cause the same to be advertised, sold or otherwise dealt with as provided by this Code in respect to lost goods. 
(Prior Code, § 6-215; Code 1999, § 9-810)  
Sec. 9-810. - Suspicious circumstances to prevent sale. 
(a)  Any suspicion or circumstance sufficient to put an ordinary prudent person upon his guard concerning the right of a person to dispose of an article shall be sufficient notice to any person to whom property shall be offered for gift, sale or pledge, to prohibit him from accepting it. 
(b)  The failure to exercise the precautions herein prescribed, and the accepting of a gift, sale, or pledge, of property prohibited herein, which is stolen, or is in the possession of one not entitled to, or competent to, sell, pledge, or give it away, shall be and constitute an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 6-216; Code 1999, § 9-811)  
Sec. 9-811. - Soliciting business on streets prohibited. 
No person shall solicit business for any pawnshop from any person on the streets or other public place, or call to or in any manner attract the attention of any person on the streets or other public place for the purpose of asking the person to patronize any pawnshop. 
(Prior Code, § 6-217; Code 1999, § 9-812)  
CHAPTER 9. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Licensing Act, 59 O.S. § 1521 et seq.; municipal regulation of precious metals dealers, 59 O.S. § 1527. 
 
Sec. 9-901. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Precious metals means any item containing in any degree, as part of its composition, gold, silver, platinum or pewter. 
Precious metal dealer or dealer means any person engaged in the business of buying precious metals, whether for cash or trade; and further, this definition shall include any dealer whose business is itinerant in nature, as well as any dealer who conducts his business at a permanent and fixed location within the city. As used herein, the term "dealer" shall include the employers and principals on whose behalf any purchase or trade is made and all employees or agents personally making such purchases or trades. 
(Prior Code, § 6-251; Code 1999, § 9-901)  
Sec. 9-902. - License required. 
No person shall carry on, operate or engage in the business of purchasing, whether for cash or trade, any precious metals within the city without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 6-266; Code 1999, § 9-902)  
Sec. 9-903. - Application. 
Any person desiring to obtain a license as a precious metal dealer shall file a written application with the city clerk, together with the amount of the license fee as hereinafter prescribed. The application form shall request the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the full name, birthdate, permanent residence address and telephone number; 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or other business entity, the full name, birthdate, permanent residence address and telephone number of each partner or each officer and director; 
(3)  If an individual applicant employed by another, the full name of the employer or principal, the permanent address and telephone number of the employer or principal and the name, address and telephone number of the employee's immediate supervisor; 
(4)  Listing of any trade names or aliases used by the applicant for the last five years; 
(5)  The names, birthdates, permanent address and telephone numbers of each person employed, or intended to be employed, in the business as of the time of the filing of the application; 
(6)  Exact address or location of the place within the city where the business of dealer will be carried on; 
(7)  If the applicant's business is itinerant, with no permanent location within the city, a listing of the last four locations, immediately preceding the date of the application, where the applicant conducted business as a precious metal dealer. 
(Prior Code, § 6-267; Code 1999, § 9-903)  
Sec. 9-904. - Fee. 
There is hereby levied a license fee, on a daily or annual basis as the applicant may elect, for issuance of a precious metal dealer's license, which shall be paid at the time an application is made. No part of the license fee shall be subject to refund or abatement. 
(Prior Code, § 6-268; Code 1999, § 9-904)  
Sec. 9-905. - Investigation, issuance or denial. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a license required by this chapter and the required fee, the city clerk shall refer the same to the chief of police for investigation of the applicant's moral character and business responsibility. Within five days from the receipt of the application, the chief of police shall return the same to the city clerk, accompanied by his recommendations to issue or deny the license. Grounds for denial shall include: 
(1)  The application contains a materially false or fraudulent statement; and 
(2)  The applicant, or an officer, partner or employee thereof, has been convicted of a felony within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the recommendation of the chief of police, the city clerk shall issue the license accordingly. If the license is denied, the grounds for denial shall be stated in writing and a copy supplied to the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 6-269; Code 1999, § 9-905)  
Sec. 9-906. - Transferability, display. 
The license issued under this chapter shall not be transferable to any other person. No person shall do business as a precious metal dealer, or attempt to do business, under a license transferred to him. The dealer shall at all times prominently display on the business premises a currently valid license. 
(Prior Code, § 6-270; Code 1999, § 9-906)  
Sec. 9-907. - Revocation. 
In addition to any other penalty, the dealer shall, upon a second conviction of a violation of this chapter, have his precious metal dealer license revoked by the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 6-271; Code 1999, § 9-907)  
Sec. 9-908. - Identification of sellers. 
All dealers shall require each person offering an item or article for sale or trade to produce personal identification. Dealers shall ascertain the name, permanent address and age of all sellers of precious metals. Dealers shall verify a seller's identity only by means of a driver's license, or some other form of identification issued by a governmental agency, which must contain thereon a picture or adequate physical description of the person identified. It shall be unlawful for a dealer to fail to request identification, or to accept inadequate identification, before transacting business with a seller of precious metals. 
(Prior Code, § 6-252; Code 1999, § 9-908)  
Sec. 9-909. - Records required. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep and maintain an adequate record of all transactions with sellers of precious metals. The record of the transactions shall be maintained in a running ledger book; or the dealer may maintain the original bill of sale, or other written receipt, issued at the time of the transaction. Entries on the record shall be legibly written in ink at the time the dealer acquires the article from the seller; and same shall not be obliterated or erased. The following shall be required to be maintained for each transaction with a seller of precious metals: 
(1)  The date and time of the sale or trade; 
(2)  Name, address and age of the seller of the items; 
(3)  The number appearing on the seller's driver's license or other governmental identification card; 
(4)  Physical description of the seller, including height, weight, race and sex; 
(5)  A concise and accurate description of the article acquired by the dealer, including any identifying marks, names, initials, serial numbers, brand names or other personalized features; and 
(6)  The amount paid for the articles by the dealer. 
(b)  The dealer shall maintain the information required by this section for a period of one year from the date of the acquisition of the article. 
(Prior Code, § 6-253; Code 1999, § 9-909)  
Sec. 9-910. - Report of transactions to police. 
Within 24 hours of the sale or trade of any precious metal to a dealer, the dealer shall deliver to the office of chief of police, or the front desk of the police department, a duplicate or photocopy of the record of transaction, required to be kept pursuant to the provision of section 9-909. In the event the delivery time falls on a weekend or holiday, the dealer shall deliver the required records by no later than 12:00 noon of the next regular work day. In lieu of furnishing a duplicate or copy of the records required under section 9-909, the dealer may supply written statement containing only the following information: 
(1)  Name of the dealer and name of the agent or employee dealing with the seller; 
(2)  Description of articles received by dealer, including any identifying marks, numbers, names or initials; and 
(3)  Name and address of the seller of each item. 
(Prior Code, § 6-254; Code 1999, § 9-910)  
Sec. 9-911. - Right to inspect records. 
Any police officer of the city, or any law enforcement officer of the county, state or federal government, during the dealer's regular business hours, shall have the right to enter the business premises of the dealer for the purpose of inspecting the records required to be maintained under this chapter or any item of precious metal regulated hereunder. The application for, and acceptance of, a license under this chapter shall be deemed conclusive consent of the dealer to such entry and inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 6-255; Code 1999, § 9-911)  
Sec. 9-912. - Duty to retain items. 
(a)  Every dealer must keep at the business location designated in the license application, all used articles made, in whole or in part, of precious metals or gems, for inspection by any law enforcement officer and the department of consumer credit at reasonable times for a period of ten days or until the articles have been released by written authorization of any law enforcement officer authorized by the law enforcement agency or its designee, except as provided for in 59 O.S. § 1525(C). During this period, the appearance of such articles shall not be altered in any way. A dealer is not prohibited from selling or arranging to sell such articles during the ten-day period as long as such articles remain in his possession as required by this subsection. 
(b)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that property in possession of a licensed dealer is stolen or embezzled, the police officer may place a written hold order on the property. The initial term of the written hold order shall not exceed 30 days. However, the holding period may be extended in successive 30-day increments upon written notification prior to the expiration of the initial holding period. If the holding period has expired and has not been extended, the hold order shall be considered expired and no longer in effect, and title shall vest in the dealer subject to any restrictions contained in a sale contract. The initial written hold order shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Signature of the dealer or designee; 
(2)  Name, title and identification number of the police officer placing the hold order; 
(3)  Name and address of the agency to which the police officer is attached and the offense number; 
(4)  Complete description of the property to be held, including model number, serial number and transaction number 
(5)  Name of agency reporting the property stolen or embezzled; 
(6)  Mailing address of the dealer where the property is held; 
(7)  Expiration date of the holding period. 
(c)  While a hold order is in effect, the dealer may consent to release, upon written receipt, the stolen or embezzled property to the custody of the police department. The consent to release the stolen or embezzled property to the custody of law enforcement is not a waiver or release of the dealer's property rights or interest in the property. Otherwise, the dealer shall not release or dispose of the property except pursuant to a court order or the expiration of the holding period, including all extensions. The district attorney's office shall notify the dealer in writing in cases where criminal charges have been filed that the property may be needed as evidence. The notice shall contain the case number, the style of the case and a description of the property. The dealer shall hold such property until receiving notice of the disposition of the case from the district attorney's office. The district attorney's office shall notify the dealer in writing within 15 days of the disposition of the case. Willful noncompliance of a dealer to a written hold order shall be cause for the dealer's license to either be suspended or revoked. A hold order may be released prior to the expiration of any 30-day holding period by written release from the agency placing the initial hold order. 
(Prior Code, § 6-256; Code 1999, § 9-912) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 59 O.S. § 1531.  
Sec. 9-913. - Purchase from minors prohibited. 
No dealer shall purchase or receive in trade any precious metal from any seller under the age of 18 years, unless the parents or guardian of such person shall consent to the transaction in writing. The written consent shall state that the transaction is fully approved by the parent or guardian, shall be signed by the same and must contain the address and telephone number of the parent or guardian. 
(Prior Code, § 6-257; Code 1999, § 9-913)  
Sec. 9-914. - Exemptions from provisions of chapter. 
(a)  Retail merchants having permanent and fixed business within the city shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter insofar, and only insofar, as they make purchases directly from manufacturers, suppliers and wholesalers of precious metals for their retail inventories. 
(b)  Upon obtaining the written approval of the chief of police, exhibitors at bona fide coin shows, art shows, antique shows, and exhibitions of a similar nature, where the same are sponsored by a local nonprofit, civic or cultural organization, shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 6-258; Code 1999, § 9-914)  
CHAPTER 10. - RECREATION CENTERS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES  
ARTICLE A. - FAMILY RECREATION CENTERS 
 
Sec. 9-1001. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Game room or arcade means any business location in which there are more than six coin-operated amusement devices, as defined in this section, available for use by members of the public or business invitees. 
Recreation center means those participant recreation and entertainment uses conducted within an enclosed building, where no alcoholic or nonintoxicating beverages, as defined by this Code, are served or permitted to be consumed. Typical uses include pool halls, billiard parlors, game rooms, arcades, including such entertainment as pinball, video games, foosball, etc., and family amusement centers. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1001; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990)  
Sec. 9-1002. - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a recreation center within the city limits without first having obtained a license therefor as provided by this article. The city clerk shall issue the license if the city community development director determines that the proposed use is in compliance with the requirements of the city ordinances. No recreation center license issued by virtue of this article shall be assigned to any other person. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1002; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990)  
Sec. 9-1003. - License fee. 
A fee as set by the city shall be paid to the city clerk before a license is issued for the operation of a recreation center. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1003; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990)  
Sec. 9-1004. - Zoning restrictions. 
Recreation centers shall be operated only in such districts as are in accordance with the city's zoning regulations, subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1004; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990)  
Sec. 9-1005. - Regulations. 
(a)  If 50 percent or more of the gross floor area of a building is devoted to the use of pool or billiard tables, then such business shall be considered a pool hall or billiard parlor and shall comply with the provisions of this article as well as the other applicable provisions of this Code. In the case of conflict between the provisions of this article and those elsewhere in this Code, the more restrictive provision shall prevail. 
(b)  A recreation center shall not open before 10:00 a.m. and shall not be open later than 1:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday and shall not be open later than 2:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings. 
(c)  A recreation center shall be required to have at least one on-site security guard who shall be certified by the state council on law enforcement education and training, on duty from 8:00 p.m. until closing on any day such business is open. 
(d)  Sight-proof screening which adequately screens such business from view of surrounding single-family residential areas or uses shall be required. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1005; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 187(97), 4-21-1997)  
Sec. 9-1006. - Revocation of license. 
Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended or revoked by the city if the applicant is convicted in municipal court of violating the provisions of this article or has made a false statement on the application for license, or if the use and operation of the business results in a conviction in municipal court for a violation of any ordinance of the city relating to a breach of the peace, health, safety, or general welfare of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1006; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990)  
Sec. 9-1007. - Penalty. 
A violation of this article is punishable as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1007; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990)  
ARTICLE B. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Coin-operated amusement devices, 68 O.S. § 1501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-1011. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Coin-operated amusement device means and includes any and all mechanical devices which, upon the payment or insertion of a coin, script, token, or similar object, cause or permit, or is incentive for, the propelling or motivating of any ball, marble, electronic simulation, or other gadget or object that produces or creates, or makes possible the production or creation of, a game of skill, amusement, entertainment, or test of strength, including, but not limited to, shuffle boards, coin-operated devices utilizing tables, boards, or cases of any size whatsoever, balls, sticks, cues, pegs or marbles; and whether or not any motivating force involved is furnished by the player or the device. 
Coin-operated music device means and includes any such music device which is operated, motivated, released or played by or upon the payment or insertion of a coin, script, token or similar object, whether there is one or more boxes or devices on the premises for the reception of such coin, script, tokens or similar objects; coin-operated radios or television receiving sets in hotels or motels shall not be included in such definition. 
Coin-operated pool, billiard or snooker tables are defined as coin-operated amusement devices, in accordance with this section. 
Pool, billiard or snooker table means any table specifically manufactured for the purpose of playing pool, billiards or snooker, if not coin-operated. 
(b)  Coin-operated music device and coin-operated amusement device as defined herein shall not include coin-operated machines operated by penny coins only; or coin-operated vending machines used exclusively for the purpose of selling tangible personal property, such as cold drinks, tobacco products, candies, postage stamps or other merchandise; or services, such as pay telephones, parking meters, gas and electric meters, or other distribution of needful service; or pool, billiard or snooker tables which are not coin operated. 
(Prior Code, § 6-116, in part; Code 1999, § 9-1021)  
Sec. 9-1012. - License fee for coin-operated devices. 
Every person who owns and has available to the public, or who permits to be operated by the public in or on his place of business, any coin-operated music device, coin-operated amusement device, or coin-operated pool, billiard or snooker table, shall obtain and pay for an annual license for each such device or table. There is hereby levied an annual license fee on such devices, as set by the city council by motion or resolution. 
(Prior Code, §§ 6-84, 6-117, in part; Code 1999, § 9-1022)  
Sec. 9-1013. - Application for license. 
Application for an annual license regulated by this chapter shall be made to the city. The application form shall contain the name of the applicant, a description of the device, location of the device and such other information deemed necessary by the licensing officer to identify the device. Any number of machines may be included in one application. Upon payment of the license fee and approval of the application, the license shall be issued. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1023)  
Sec. 9-1014. - Display of license. 
Before any coin-operated music device, coin-operated amusement device, or coin-operated pool, billiard or snooker table is put into operation or placed where the same may be operated by the public, and at all times when the same is being operated, or is available to the public for operation, the license issued by the city shall be firmly affixed to the device covered thereby, or displayed with other licenses or permits on a wallboard, and plainly visible to and readable by the public. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1024)  
Sec. 9-1015. - Prohibited devices not legalized. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to legalize any device that may be prohibited by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. The city may assume that any device described in any application, and for which a license fee is paid, is lawful. No claim for a refund of any license fee will be entertained based upon an owner's or operator's inability to operate such device because of any law of the state or city or for any other reason. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1025)  
Sec. 9-1016. - Gambling prohibited. 
If any person keeping, operating, maintaining, controlling or being in charge of any device as referred to and licensed under this article shall permit any gambling of any kind, by persons using and playing such machines and devices, he shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the ordinances of the city, and shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-108. 
(Prior Code, § 6-118; Code 1999, § 9-1026)  
Sec. 9-1017. - Penalties. 
Any owner of a coin-operated music device, coin-operated amusement device, or coin-operated pool, billiard or snooker table, who places such device in operation or in a place available to the public for operation, and any person who permits such a device to be in operation or accessible to the public for operation in his place of business without attaching and displaying the license provided for by this article, shall be guilty of an offense. Upon conviction of a violation of this article, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. Each unlicensed device shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1027)  
ARTICLE C. - AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT PARKS 
 
Sec. 9-1021. - Amusements generally, fees. 
A license in the sum as set forth in the fee schedule is hereby required on every person engaging in, exercising or pursuing any of the following: 
(1)  Bowling alley; 
(2)  Circus; 
(3)  Ferris wheel, merry-go-round, small car, or similar apparatus, when not under the auspices of a street fair, civic club, carnival or circus or amusement park; 
(4)  Itinerant show, exhibition or entertainment of any kind which charges admission (including all activities under its auspices); 
(5)  Shooting gallery, skill or strength game or game of chance; 
(6)  Skating rink; 
(7)  Street fair or carnival; or 
(8)  Wrestling matches, professional. 
(Prior Code, § 6-18, in part; Code 1999, § 9-1031)  
Sec. 9-1022. - Amusement park. 
An amusement park is defined as mechanical devices of all kinds, slides, shooting galleries, or other games produced, designed and calculated to be witnessed, attended, played or used by the public for entertainment and diversion at an outside and open location of a permanent nature. Games and exhibitions presented to any public or private elementary school, high school or kindergarten, pool or billiard hall or family amusement center, as defined in this Code, shall not be embraced within the meaning of amusement park as herein defined. 
(Prior Code, § 6-41; Code 1999, § 9-1032)  
Sec. 9-1023. - Permit or license required, state law compliance. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to engage in the operation of an amusement park without first obtaining a permit or license from the city clerk. Any amusement park or devices shall comply with any applicable state law and inspections approvals prior to operating in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-42; Code 1999, § 9-1033)  
Sec. 9-1024. - City clerk to issue, fee. 
The city clerk is hereby authorized to issue a license or permit to operate an amusement park pursuant to this article, which license or permit shall expire on the last day of the month of the year after which such license is issued. The city clerk shall charge the sum as set forth in the fee schedule for the license or permit for any amusement park. 
(Prior code, § 6-43; Code 1999, § 9-1034)  
Sec. 9-1025. - Authorized hours of business; fencing. 
(a)  An amusement park licensed by the terms of this article shall be authorized to be open for business from the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on each day of the week; however, any amusement devices which are completely enclosed shall be allowed to remain open until 2:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday morning only of each week. 
(b)  An amusement park shall have a chainlink or sight-proof fence of at least six feet in height entirely enclosing such amusement park. 
(Prior Code, § 6-44; Code 1999, § 9-1035)  
Sec. 9-1026. - Exemption from other occupational license requirements. 
Any person obtaining a license or permit as required by this article shall not be required to secure licenses, permits or pay fees as set out in article A of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 6-45; Code 1999, § 9-1036)  
CHAPTER 11. - WRECKERS AND TOWING SERVICE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Towing motor vehicles, 47 O.S. § 951 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-1101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Wrecker and towing service shall be defined as meaning any motor vehicle of three-fourths-ton or more rated capacity, capable of pulling or towing any wrecked, damaged or disabled motor vehicle otherwise incapable of self-propulsion. 
(Prior Code, § 24-51; Code 1999, § 9-1201)  
Sec. 9-1102. - License required. 
No person shall, within the city, operate a wrecker or towing service without first having obtained from the city clerk a license therefor and without having complied with all other provisions of this chapter, and the provisions of 47 O.S. 951 et seq. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1202)  
Sec. 9-1103. - Fee. 
The fee for the license required by section 9-1102 to perform a wrecker or towing service operation shall be the sum as set by the city. Licenses procured under this chapter shall expire on April 30 following their issuance and the full license fee must be paid for any part of such year. 
(Prior Code, § 24-53; Code 1999, § 9-1203)  
Sec. 9-1104. - Vehicle list. 
All wrecker and towing services licensed to do business shall furnish to the police department by 12:00 noon each day an itemized written list of all cars stored by such wrecker service on the preceding day, giving in such list the make and model of such cars, the registration or license tag numbers, the manner in which such cars came into their storage facilities, specifically providing the places the cars were towed from and at whose direction, and the names of the owners of such automobiles, if known to the wrecker storage service. 
(Prior Code, § 24-54; Code 1999, § 9-1204)  
Sec. 9-1105. - Storage yard. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no license shall be issued to any wrecker service with its storage yard located outside the limits of the city unless such prospective licensee contracts with an individual, company or other organization who maintains a storage yard within the city; and the license of any current licensee whose storage yard is located outside the limits of the city shall be subject to revocation or suspension for failure to abide by this requirement within 120 days after April 17, 1989. 
(Prior Code, § 24-55; Code 1999, § 9-1205; Ord. No. 481(89), 4-17-1989)  
Sec. 9-1106. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the licensing, supervision, administration and control of wrecker vehicles, and wrecker and towing services within the city. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1206; Ord. No. 279(00), 5-1-2000)  
Sec. 9-1107. - Rotation log. 
Each licensee shall be placed on a list maintained by the police department for the purpose of referrals. Referrals shall be directed only to the licensees appearing on said list. Referrals shall be rotated among the licensees. The list shall contain no more than seven licensees at any one time, but in no way does this compel the city to maintain seven licensees on the list. The list may be maintained by the city with any number of licensees up to and including seven. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1207; Ord. No. 279(00), 5-1-2000; Ord. No. 669(10), 4-5-2010)  
Sec. 9-1108. - Restrictions for storage facility. 
All wrecker operators, who in conjunction with or as part of a licensed wrecker operation, store, park or maintain possession of a towed vehicle shall store such vehicles in a secured facility meeting the following minimum physical requirements: 
(1)  Storage lots shall be designed to be adequate in size for the individual wrecker services need for storing vehicles. Construction material for fencing shall be of wood or metal design, which should allow the facility to remain sight-proof. The fence must not be less than six feet high or higher. All lots shall have a least one gate of the same quality material as the fence. 
(2)  A minimum of one primary storage facility shall be located within a two-mile radius of the business address as reflected on the wrecker license. A secondary storage lot may be located outside the two-mile radius, provided an office is maintained at each lot. Each vehicle must be initially stored and held at the primary lot. After 30 days from the date of initial storage, vehicles may be moved to a secondary lot. No vehicle shall be stored in an area, which has not been inspected and approved by the police department. 
(3)  In lieu of or in addition to the primary storage facility and the secondary storage lot described in this section, a wrecker operator that tows a vehicle pursuant to a contract with the city may store such vehicle in a facility meeting the requirements set forth in such contract, provided that: 
a.  A copy of the proposed contract is furnished to the department, along with documentation that requirements specified in this section will be or have been met. 
b.  Only vehicles towed at the request of the city shall be stored in such facilities unless such facility meets all the requirements of this section. 
c.  The wrecker operator shall have assumed full responsibility with respect to the owner of such towed vehicle for any damages or loss of contents occurring during such time as the towed vehicle is stored in the facility. 
d.  If the storage facility is not owned by the licensee, the owner/operator of such storage facility shall also assume joint responsibility for damages or loss of contents occurring during such time as the towed vehicle is stored in the facility. 
e.  Such storage facility must meet or exceed the requirements of this section, as well as the department of public safety regulations. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1208; Ord. No. 279(00), 5-1-2000)  
Sec. 9-1109. - Referrals. 
Referrals shall be made according to the following procedures: 
(1)  The police department dispatcher shall notify the wrecker service currently at the top of the rotation list. 
(2)  All wrecker services should have an employee available for call, 24-hours a day. 
(3)  All employees of the wrecker service working with city calls and storage should be listed with the police department, and background checks completed on each, prior to them working with city calls/vehicles. 
(4)  The wrecker service shall deny the call if not able to respond immediately, or call the police department, if not going to make it to the scene within 30 minutes, and explain. The next wrecker listed on the rotation log shall then be called. 
(5)  Officers should call for next wrecker on the list if the owner has no preference, or if for impoundment. 
(6)  The chief of police may remove the wrecker service from rotation for noncompliance. 
(7)  Dispatch should keep a log of rotation, including times, and owner request. 
(8)  A custodial inventory should be completed jointly, by the impounding police officer and wrecker service. 
(9)  A copy of the police officer's and wrecker service paperwork shall be turned in to the police dispatcher. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1209; Ord. No. 279(00), 5-1-2000)  
Sec. 9-1110. - Parking. 
It is unlawful for any wrecker listed on the city's rotation log to be parked or stored on public or private property within an area zoned for residential use. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1210; Ord. No. 279(00), 5-1-2000)  
Sec. 9-1111. - Required services. 
It is unlawful for any wrecker service listed on the city's rotation log to offer or provide free services for any individual employed by the city in exchange for future considerations or services. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1211; Ord. No. 279(00), 5-1-2000)  
Sec. 9-1112. - Removal from department log. 
A violation of any of the provisions of sections 9-1106 through 9-1110 may result in the following manner: 
(1)  It shall be in the discretion of the chief of police to disallow an employee of a wrecker service to participate in the towing of vehicles upon the failure of any background check revealing felony convictions or crimes of moral turpitude or felony convictions or crimes of moral turpitude committed after the passing of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  A wrecker service may be removed from the rotation log by the chief of police for allowing an employee who has been disqualified to participate in the wrecker services on the rotation log. 
(3)  A wrecker service may be removed from the rotation log for noncompliance of the department of public safety's regulations. 
(4)  A wrecker service may be removed from the rotation log by the chief of police for noncompliance of city regulations. 
(5)  A wrecker service being suspended from the rotation log will be notified in writing by the chief of police. 
(6)  Any wrecker service suspended from the rotation log shall be entitled to a hearing upon written request made within ten days of the notice of suspension. The request shall be made to the chief of police who shall then notify the wrecker service of the date for the hearing. The hearing shall be had not less than seven days nor more than 14 days from the date of the request. The hearing shall be held before a panel comprised of the chief of police, the community development director and the building inspector of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1212; Ord. No. 279(00), 5-1-2000)  
CHAPTER 12. - MASSAGE PARLORS AND HEALTH SPAS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Massage Therapy Practice Act, 59 O.S. § 4200.1 et seq.; local regulation of massage therapy preempted, 59 O.S. § 4200.10. 
 
ARTICLE A. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-1201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means any person at least 18 years of age, other than a massage therapist, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation, from the manager of the business or patrons, but has no physical contact with the customer. 
Licensee means the person to whom a license or permit has been issued to own, operate or manage a massage establishment or to engage in massaging. 
Manager means the person owning, controlling, conducting, operating or managing a massage establishment, but shall not include the massage therapist, as defined in this section. 
Massage means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointment, mud, paraffins, salts or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or any gratuity therefor. The term "massage" shall include seated massage. 
Massage establishment means any establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage as defined in this section and which has a fixed place of business where any person engages in or carries on any of the activities as defined in the definition of the term "massage" provided in this section. 
Massage therapist means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section. 
Off-site massage service means any business, the functioning of which is to engage in or carry on massages as defined in this section at a location designated by the patron or at a location other than at a massage establishment. Off-site massage service may include seated massage. 
Patron means any person, client or customer at least 18 years of age, or if under 18 years of age with written parental or legal guardian consent, who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he will pay money or give any other consideration therefor. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
Seated massage means any massage of the neck, arms, shoulders and back area above the waist where the client is fully clothed, sitting in a special chair designed for upper body massage and done without the use of supplementary aids, such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, mud, paraffins, salts, or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage. Seated massage may be performed either at a massage establishment or off-site. 
Sexual misconduct means any criminal conviction, either misdemeanor or felony, within the city, the state or any other state for the crime of rape, child molestation, prostitution, acts of lewdness or any crime where the convicted person is required to register as a sex offender under the statutes of the state. 
Sexual or genital areas means the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1301; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1202. - Inspections authorized. 
Any department of the city or its designee may inspect any location where massages are conducted. The chief of police or his authorized representatives may from time to time make inspection of any massage location for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are fully complied with. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or hinder such officer in any manner. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1302; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1203. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following while they are engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state; 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state; 
(3)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and hair; or manicurists or pedicurists and shall apply solely to the massaging of the hands or feet of the patron for cosmetic or beautifying purposes; 
(4)  The giving of massages by a licensee or students currently enrolled in an educational course or program, the purpose of which is to obtain a degree or certification to perform massages, offered by an employer for the benefit of its employees, including, but not limited to, an employer's health benefit or wellness program when offered to employees only, and only during the duration of the employer sanctioned event; and 
(5)  Students practicing internships at a state licensed massage school under the direct supervision of a qualified instructor. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1303; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 678(10), 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1204. - Penalty. 
Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this chapter, whether acting as an individual manager, employee of the manager, massage therapist or employee of the massage therapist, or whether acting as a mere agent or independent contractor for the manager, employee or massage therapist, or acting as a participant or worker in any way directly or indirectly who gives massages or operates a massage establishment or any of the services defined in this chapter without first obtaining a license or permit and paying a fee to do so from the city or shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1304; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
ARTICLE B. - LICENSES AND PERMITS  
Division 1. - Generally 
 
Sec. 9-1211. - Term. 
Every license or permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked. Said license or permit shall be renewed annually pursuant to the same standards and requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1311; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Division 2. - Massage Establishment License 
 
Sec. 9-1221. - Required. 
No person shall own, control, lease, act as agent for, conduct, operate, or manage an establishment for massaging any person without first securing a license and paying the fee therefor. A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1312; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1222. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a license for a massage establishment shall file a written application with the city clerk, license and permit division. The applicant shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The type of ownership of the business (i.e., whether individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise); 
(2)  The name, style, and designation under which the business or practice is to be conducted; 
(3)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted; 
(4)  A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all massage therapists and employees in the business and the name and residence address of the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business; 
(5)  The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business: 
a.  Name, complete residence address and residence telephone numbers; 
b.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
c.  Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
d.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex; 
e.  Two front-face-portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size; 
f.  The massage or similar business history and experience ten years prior to the date of application, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation; 
g.  All criminal convictions, except misdemeanor traffic violations; and 
h.  A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the police chief or his authorized representatives; 
(6)  Such other information and identification of the applicant as shall be deemed necessary by the police chief to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application; 
(7)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the licenses; 
(8)  The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county who will serve as character references. These references must be persons other than relatives and business associates; and 
(9)  A written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the application is true and correct, the declaration being duly dated and signed in the city. 
(b)  Along with the written application, the applicant shall provide to the chief of police or his designee, for each employee, licensee, manager and massage therapist: 
(1)  Two forms of state or federal issued identification, at least one must have a picture of the applicant; 
(2)  A state criminal history report from the state bureau of investigation dated no more than 30 days prior to the date the application was submitted. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1313; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1223. - Inspection of premises. 
To ensure compliance with this division, before a license is granted for any massage establishment the city shall cause an inspection to be made of the location of the establishment, the equipment and facilities, and the sanitary conditions. The city's inspector shall make a report thereof in writing, which shall be filed with and become a part of the application. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1314; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1224. - Facilities necessary for license. 
(a)  No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued if an inspection by the city or its designee reveals that the facilities do not comply with each of the following requirements: 
(1)  If the establishment provides tubs, steam baths and showers, said facilities shall be made waterproof with approved waterproofing materials and shall be installed in accordance with the building and plumbing codes of the city; 
(2)  If the establishment provides steam rooms and shower compartments, said facilities shall have waterproof floors, walls and ceilings approved by the city or its designee; 
(3)  If the establishment provides wet and dry heat rooms, the floors shall be adequately pitched to one or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer, provided that dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains; 
(4)  A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning; 
(5)  The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron; 
(6)  Protected cabinets shall be provided and used for storage clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas; 
(7)  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations and shall comply with all building and plumbing codes of the city; 
(8)  Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels; 
(9)  All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the city's electrical ordinances; and 
(10)  The establishment shall have adequate equipment such as massage tables and/or chairs for administering massage. Said equipment shall be of a washable material and kept clean and in good repair. 
(b)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of premises nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof, whenever such inspection is deemed necessary by the police or city's license and permit division. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1315; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 39(92), 11-16-1992; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1225. - Issuance. 
If the city's inspector find no violations or compliance problems, he shall cause such approval to be delivered to the license and permit division, who shall issue the license unless it finds: 
(1)  The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check or bank draft, not honored with payment upon presentation. 
(2)  The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building, zoning and health ordinances. 
(3)  The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, have been convicted of any of the following offenses: 
a.  An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony; 
b.  An offense involving sexual misconduct as defined in section 9-1201; or 
c.  An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons that amounts to a felony. 
The city may issue a license to any person convicted of any of the crimes described above if such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for any such crime mentioned above. 
(4)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith. 
(5)  The applicant has had a massage establishment, massage therapist or other similar permit or license denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application. 
(6)  The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not at least 18 years of age; and 
(7)  The applicant's facility has not met the requirements of section 9-1224. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1316; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1226. - Fee. 
A person who is required by the provisions of this article to obtain a license shall pay to the city the fee established by ordinance or appropriate resolution. Copies of such ordinance or resolution will be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1317; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1227. - Transfer prohibited. 
A license for the operation of a massage establishment at a particular location shall never be transferred. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1318; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1228. - Use of false names or improper location. 
No person granted a license pursuant to this division shall operate the massage establishment under a name not specified in his license, nor shall he conduct business under any designation or location not specified in his license. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1319; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1229. - Display. 
Every person licensed under this division shall display such license in a prominent place on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1320; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1230. - Revocation or suspension. 
Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the city after notice and hearing upon not less than ten days' notice, by certified mail to the last-known address of the licensee, or personal service on the licensee. Such notice shall be calculated from the date of mailing or in the case of personal service, from the date of service upon the licensee. A license or permit issued under this division may be revoked or suspended by the license or permit division, for good cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this division are violated or where any employee of the licensee, including a massage therapist, is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the state or local laws or ordinances and the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence, or upon a finding by the county health department, that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard to proper sanitation and hygiene. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1321; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1231. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any applicant or licensee whose license has been denied, revoked or suspended shall have the right to appeal the decision of the licensing officer to the city council. The city council shall have the power to sustain, reverse or modify the decision of the licensing officer. 
(b)  Any person appealing a decision of the licensing officer shall give written notice of appeal to the city clerk not more than ten days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and city holidays, after the date of the decision of the licensing officer. Such notice shall set forth the reason for the appeal and the specific points on which the licensing officer allegedly erred. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay any decision of the licensing officer which would require the discontinuance of an existing licensed activity. 
(d)  A hearing before the city council shall be scheduled within 30 days from the date the notice of appeal is filed. Notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the person appealing and all other interested parties of record, not less than five days prior to such hearing. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1322; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Division 3. - Massage Therapist License 
 
Sec. 9-1241. - Required. 
Every person engaged in massaging, including seated massage, shall be required to obtain a license from the supervisor of licenses before engaging in the practice of massaging. No such license shall be issued unless the applicant also is licensed under The Massage Therapy Practice Act (59 O.S. § 4200.1 et seq.). 
(Code 1999, § 9-1331; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1242. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring the permit required by the provisions of this division shall file a written application with the city clerk, license and permit division. The applicant shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the massage is to be practiced. 
(2)  The following personal information concerning the applicant: 
a.  Name, complete residence address and residence telephone numbers; 
b.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
c.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex; 
d.  Two front-face-portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of application and at least two inches by two inches in size; 
e.  The massage or similar business history and experience ten years prior to the date of application, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person in previously has been operating in this or another city or state under a license or permit and whether such license or permit, been denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension, or revocation; 
f.  A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the police chief or his authorized representatives; and 
g.  A copy of a current and valid massage therapist license issued by the State Board of Cosmetology and Barbering issued under the Massage Therapy Practice Act (59 O.S. § 4200.1 et seq.). 
(3)  Such other information and identification of the person deemed necessary by the police chief in order to discover the truth of the matters required above. 
(4)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
(5)  A written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the application is true and correct, the declaration being duly dated and signed in the city. 
(6)  A statement showing the name and address of the person by whom the massage therapist is employed, if applicable, and such massage therapist shall file successive statements if a change is made in the employment of the massage therapist during the existence of the permit. 
(b)  Along with the written application, the applicant shall provide to the chief of police or his designee: 
(1)  Two forms of state or federal issued identification, at least one must have a picture of the applicant; and 
(2)  A state criminal history report from the state bureau of investigation dated no more than 30 days prior to the date the application was submitted. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1332; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 901(19) , 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 9-1243. - Issuance standards. 
No license shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this division if: 
(1)  The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check or bank draft, not honored with payment upon presentation. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted or an offense without the state that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state: 
a.  An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony; 
b.  An offense involving sexual misconduct as defined in section 9-1201; or 
c.  An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons that amounts to a felony. 
The city may issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described above if it finds that such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for any such crime mentioned above. 
(3)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith. 
(4)  The applicant has had a massage establishment, massage therapists, or other similar permit or license denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application. 
(5)  The applicant is not at least 18 years of age. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1333; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1244. - Fee. 
A person who is required by the provisions of this division to obtain a permit shall pay to the city the fee established by ordinances or appropriate resolution. Copies of such ordinance or resolution shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1334; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1245. - Posting. 
Every massage therapist or manager shall post the permit required by this division in his work area. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1335; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1246. - Revocation or suspension. 
Any license issued for a manager or massage therapist may be revoked or suspended by the city pursuant to the provision of sections 9-1230 and 9-1231. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1336; Ord. No. 552(91), 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Division 4. - Off-Site Massage License 
 
Sec. 9-1251. - License required. 
No person shall engage in off-site services as defined in section 9-1201 without first securing a license from the city clerk, license and permit division, and paying the fee therefor. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1341; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1252. - Requirements necessary for a license. 
No license to conduct off-site services shall be issued unless the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The applicant must have a valid massage therapist license issued by the city; 
(2)  The applicant shall have adequate means, such as germicide or alcohol, for disinfecting and sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron; 
(3)  The applicant shall have adequate means of disinfecting hands prior to administering a massage; 
(4)  The applicant shall have adequate means of separating linens from any chemicals, oils, or other wet items; and 
(5)  The applicant shall have adequate equipment, such as a table or massage chair, for administering massages. Said equipment shall be of a washable material and kept clean and in good repair. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1342; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1253. - Fee. 
A person who is required by the provisions of this division to obtain a permit shall pay to the city the fee established by ordinances or appropriate resolution. Copies of such ordinance or resolution shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1343; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Division 5. - Seated Massage License 
 
Sec. 9-1261. - License required. 
No person shall engage in seated massage services as defined in section 9-1201 without first securing a massage therapist license from the city clerk, license and permit division, and paying the fee therefor. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1351; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1262. - Requirements necessary for a license. 
Seated massage, as defined in section 9-1201 may be performed at a massage establishment or off-site, provided it meets the following conditions: 
(1)  Seated massage shall only be offered at a commercial or industrial place of business and only for employees and/or patrons of that business. 
(2)  Seated massage shall be offered in a public area only, to which all patrons or employees are provided free access. 
(3)  Chairs/seats used for seated massage shall be constructed of non-porous, easily cleanable materials and shall be cleaned and sanitized after each use. Any openings, splits or tears shall be repaired before the next use. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1352; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
ARTICLE C. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 9-1271. - Sanitation generally. 
Every place where a massage is being conducted, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1361; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1272. - Posting of prices. 
Price rates for massage services, including seated massage and off-site services, shall be prominently displayed in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1362; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1273. - Employee register. 
The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time as massage therapists and their permit numbers. Such register shall be posted at the massage establishment at all times. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1363; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1274. - Records required. 
Every massage establishment, manager or permittee or licensee administering a massage shall maintain an appointment book in which shall be entered the name of each and every patron, the time, date and place of service and the service provided. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1364; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1275. - Employment of massage therapists. 
No person shall employ as an operator a massage therapist any person unless the employee has obtained and has in effect a permit license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1365; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1276. - Contagious diseases. 
Except as otherwise provided, no manager of any massage establishment shall employ or permit any massage therapist to work and no massage therapist shall work in any establishment or location which is affected with any infectious, contagious or communicable disease or any disease which may, by law, be required to be reported to the health department of the city or of the state. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1366; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1277. - Required dress. 
All employees of a massage establishment, and all massage therapists, shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital areas. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1367; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1278. - Sheets and towels. 
All places where massage is being conducted shall have clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1368; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1279. - Operating hours. 
No massage establishment or off-site service shall be kept open or provide massaging between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1369; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1280. - Advertising. 
No massage establishment or massage therapist shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertisement, picture, or statement which is known, or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known, to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional massage services. Any advertisement of a massage establishment or massage therapist shall contain the license number of said establishment or therapist. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1370; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1281. - Persons under 18 prohibited on premises. 
No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or remain on the premises of any massage establishment as a massage therapist, employee, patron, or in any other capacity without parental/legal guardian presence or written consent, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1371; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1282. - Alcoholic beverages and low-point beer. 
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage as defined in 37 O.S. § 506, or low-point beer as defined in 37 O.S. § 163.2, on the premises of any massage establishment or place where massaging is being conducted. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1372; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1283. - Indecent conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, conducting a massage, to place his hands upon, to touch with any part of his body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital part area of any other person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment conducting a massage, to expose his sexual or genital areas, or any portion thereof, to any other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person, conducting a massage, to expose the sexual or genital areas, or any portions thereof, of any other person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other person conducting a massage, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering, the sexual or genital areas of his body. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage establishment, knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage establishment, any agent, employee, or any other person under his control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1373; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1284. - Requirements for cubicles, booths, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any massage to be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof, whenever such inspection is deemed necessary by the police or county health departments. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1374; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 9-1285. - Treatment of diseased persons. 
No person affected with any contagious disease or with any disease of the skin shall be treated with a massage. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1375; Ord. No. 704(11), 9-6-2011)  
CHAPTER 13. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 9-1301. - Penalty. 
A violation of any of the provisions of this part is punishable as provided in section 1-108. A violation of this part may also result in revocation or suspension of a license issued hereunder, in addition to other penalties or remedies authorized by law. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1501)  
CHAPTER 14. - TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING AND MEDICAL MICROPIGMENTATION[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Body piercing and tattooing, 21 O.S. § 842.1 et seq.; local regulation of body piercing and tattooing, 21 O.S. § 842.3. 
 
ARTICLE A. - TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING, MEDICAL MICROPIGMENTATION 
 
Sec. 9-1401. - Tattooing, body piercing, medical micropigmentation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or offer to perform body piercing or tattooing on a child under 18 years of age unless the parent or legal guardian of such child gives written consent for the procedure and the parent or legal guardian of the child is present during the procedure. No person under 18 years of age shall be allowed to receive a tattoo. No person under 18 years of age shall be allowed to receive a body piercing procedure unless the parent or legal guardian of such child gives written consent for the procedure, and the parent or legal guardian of the child is present during the procedure. No person shall be allowed to purchase or possess tattoo equipment or supplies without being licensed either as a state medical micropigmentologist or as a state tattoo artist. 
(b)  Tattooing shall not be performed upon a person impaired by drugs or alcohol. A person impaired by drugs or alcohol is considered incapable of consenting to tattooing and incapable of understanding tattooing procedures and aftercare suggestions. 
(c)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apprentice means any person who is training under the supervision of a licensed tattoo artist. That person cannot independently perform the work of tattooing. The term "apprentice" also means any person who is training under the supervision of a licensed body artist. That person cannot independently perform the work of body piercing. 
Artist means the person who actually performs the body piercing or tattooing procedure. 
Body piercing means a procedure in which an opening is created in a human body solely for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration; provided, however, the term does not include ear piercing. 
Body piercing operator means any person who owns, controls, operates, conducts, or manages any permanent body piercing establishment whether actually performing the work of body piercing or not. A mobile unit, including, but not limited to, a mobile home, recreational vehicle, or any other nonpermanent facility, shall not be used as a body piercing establishment. 
Tattooing means the practice of producing an indelible mark or figure on the human body by scarring or inserting a pigment under the skin using needles, scalpels, or other related equipment, provided that medical micropigmentation, performed pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Medical Micropigmentation Regulation Act, shall not be construed to be tattooing. 
Tattoo operator means any person who owns, controls, operates, conducts, or manages any permanent tattooing establishment whether performing the work of tattooing or not, or a temporary location that is a fixed location at which an individual tattoo operator performs tattooing for a specified period of not more than seven days in conjunction with a single event or celebration, where the primary function of the event or celebration is tattooing. 
(d)  This chapter shall not apply to any act of a licensed practitioner of the healing arts performed in the course of such practitioner's practice of the practitioner. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1600; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 9-1402. - Requirements. 
(a)  All body piercing operators, tattoo operators and artists shall be prohibited from performing body piercing or tattooing unless licensed in the appropriate category by the state department of health. 
(b)  The city shall not grant or issue a license to a body piercing or tattoo operator if the place of business of the body piercing or tattoo operator is within 1,000 feet of a church, school, or playground. 
(1)  The provisions of this subsection (b) shall not apply to the renewal of licenses or to new applications for locations where body piercing or tattoo operators are licensed at the time the application is filed with the department. 
(2)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (b), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Church means an establishment, other than a private dwelling, where religious services are usually conducted. 
Playground means a place, other than grounds at a private dwelling, that is provided by the public or members of a community for recreation. 
School means an establishment, other than a private dwelling, where the usual processes of education are usually conducted. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1601; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
ARTICLE B. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 
 
Sec. 9-1411. - Term. 
Every license or permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1602; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 9-1412. - Required. 
No body piercing operator, tattooing operator or artist shall own, control, lease, act as agent for, conduct, operate, or manage an establishment for tattooing or body piercing without first securing a license and paying the fee therefor. A separate license shall be required for each office or place of business. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1603; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 9-1413. - Application. 
Any body piercing operator, tattooing operator, or artist desiring a license for tattooing or body piercing shall file a written application with the city clerk, license and permit division. The applicant shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  A state department of health license issued in the appropriate category; 
(2)  A copy of the state required surety bond approved by the attorney general and filed with in the office of the secretary of state; 
(3)  The type of ownership of the business (i.e., whether individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise); 
(4)  The name, style, and designation under which the business or practice is to be conducted; 
(5)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted; 
(6)  A complete list of the names and residence address of all operators and employees in the business and the name and residence address of the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation; 
(7)  The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the business or the equipment used therein; and concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business: 
a.  Name, complete residence address and residence telephone numbers; 
b.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
c.  Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
d.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex; 
e.  Two front-face-portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size; 
f.  All criminal convictions, except misdemeanor traffic violations; and 
g.  A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the police chief or his authorized representatives; 
(8)  Such other information, identification, and physical examination of the applicant as shall be deemed necessary by the police chief to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application; 
(9)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1604; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 9-1414. - Issuance. 
If the city's inspectors find no violations or compliance problems, the inspector shall cause such approval to be delivered to the license and permit division who shall issue the license unless it finds: 
(1)  The current license fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check or bank draft, not honored with payment upon presentation. 
(2)  The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building, zoning and health ordinances. 
(3)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the application or in any document therewith. 
(4)  The applicant has attached copies of all state certificates and surety bonds approved by the state attorney general and filed in the office of the secretary of state. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1605; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 9-1415. - Fee. 
A person who is required by the provisions of this article to obtain a license shall pay to the city the fee established by ordinance or appropriate resolution. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1606; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 9-1416. - Transfer prohibited. 
A license for the operation of a tattoo or body piercing establishment at a particular location shall never be transferred. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1607; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 9-1417. - Use of false names or improper location. 
No person granted a license pursuant to this article shall operate the tattoo or body piercing establishment under a name not specified in his license, nor shall he conduct business under any designation or location not specified in his license. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1608; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 9-1418. - Display. 
Every person licensed under this article shall display such license in a prominent place on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1609; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 9-1419. - Revocation or suspension. 
Any license issued for tattoo or body piercing may be revoked or suspended by the city after notice and hearing upon not less than ten days' notice, by certified mail to the last-known address of the licensee, or personal service on the licensee. Such notice shall be calculated from the date of mailing or in the case of personal service, from the date of service upon the license. A license or permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by the license or permit division, for good cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated or where any employee of the manager licensee, including an operator, is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the state or local laws or ordinances at the licensee's place of business and the manager licensee has actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence, or upon a finding by the county health department, that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard to proper sanitation and hygiene. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1610; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 9-1420. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any applicant or licensee whose license has been denied, revoked or suspended shall have the right to appeal the decision of the licensing officer to the city council. The city council shall have the power to sustain, reverse or modify the decision of the licensing officer. 
(b)  Any person appealing a decision of the licensing officer shall give written notice of appeal to the city clerk not more than ten days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and city holidays, after the date of the decision of the licensing officer. Such notice shall set forth the reason for the appeal and the specific points on which the licensing officer allegedly erred. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay any decision of the licensing officer which would require the discontinuance of an existing licensed activity. 
(d)  A hearing before the city council shall be scheduled within 30 days from the date the notice of appeal is filed. Notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the person appealing and all other interested parties of record, not less than five days prior to such hearing. 
(Code 1999, § 9-1611; Ord. No. 555(06), 9-18-2006)  
Part 10 - OFFENSES AND CRIMES  
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Attempts to commit an offense. 
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the city, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense, but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted offense itself. 
(Prior Code, § 16-1; Code 1999, § 10-101) 
State Law reference— Attempts to commit crimes, 21 O.S. § 41 et seq.  
Sec. 10-102. - Aiding in an offense. 
When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender. 
(Prior Code, § 16-2; Code 1999, § 10-102)  
Sec. 10-103. - "Offense" defined. 
The term "offense," whenever used in this Code or in any part, chapter, article or ordinance of the city, means the unlawful act of doing, or failing to do, some particular act or thing construed therein to be detrimental to the general welfare, morals, peace, health or safety of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 10-103)  
Sec. 10-104. - "Violation" defined. 
The doing of any of the acts or things prohibited, or failing to do any of the acts or things commanded to be done, as more fully specified and set forth by any provision of this Code or any part, chapter or article hereof, or future ordinances of the city, is hereby declared to be an offense against the good order, public peace, morals, health, proper government and welfare of the city and unlawful. 
(Code 1999, § 10-104)  
Sec. 10-105. - Penalty not to excuse offense. 
The imposition of one penalty for an offense shall not excuse it or permit it to continue, nor prevent the imposition of further penalties, should the offenses be continued or permitted to continue. 
(Code 1999, § 10-105)  
Sec. 10-106. - Capacity to commit offense. 
All persons are capable of committing an offense as herein provided, except those belonging to the classes following: 
(1)  Children under the age of seven years; 
(2)  Children over the age of seven years, but under the age of 14 years, in the absence of proof that at the time of committing the act or neglect charged against them they knew its wrongfulness; 
(3)  Persons who are impaired by reason of mental retardation upon proof that at the time of committing the act charged against them they were incapable of knowing its wrongfulness; 
(4)  Mentally ill persons, and all persons of unsound mind, including persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, upon proof that at the time of committing the act charged against them they were incapable of knowing its wrongfulness; 
(5)  Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, under an ignorance or mistake of fact which disproves any criminal intent. But ignorance of the law does not excuse from punishment for its violation; 
(6)  Persons who committed the act charged without being conscious thereof; and 
(7)  Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, while under involuntary subjection to the power of superiors. 
(Code 1999, § 10-106) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 152.  
Sec. 10-107. - Intoxication, no defense. 
No act committed by any person while in a state of intoxication, whether from liquor or drugs, shall be deemed less an offense by reason of his being in such condition. 
(Code 1999, § 10-107) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 153.  
Sec. 10-108. - Witness, self-incrimination. 
No person otherwise competent as a witness shall be incapacitated, excused or disqualified from testifying concerning the offense mentioned in any section, division, article, chapter or part of this Code, or any ordinances hereafter enacted on the ground that his testimony might incriminate him, but the testimony which may be given by such witness shall in no case be used against him. 
(Code 1999, § 10-108)  
Sec. 10-109. - Nuisances. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to permit, maintain, aid, abet, or sanction a nuisance on or about any premises owned by him or under his control at any place within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 10-109) 
State Law reference— Nuisances, 21 O.S. § 1 et seq.  
Sec. 10-110. - Conspiracy. 
Any two or more persons assembled or who shall assemble with the intent to mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence and shall make any movement therefor against the property of the city or the person or property of another person shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1999, § 10-110) 
State Law reference— Conspiracy, 21 O.S. § 421 et seq.  
Sec. 10-111. - Limitations of actions. 
The time within which a charge may be filed under the provisions of this chapter shall be one year from the date of the commission or omission or in cases involving fraud, deception or deceit, one year from the discovery of the fraud, deception or deceit, unless otherwise provided by the statutes of the state. 
(Code 1999, § 10-111)  
Sec. 10-112. - Lawful use of force. 
(a)  To use or to attempt to offer to use force upon or toward the person of another is not unlawful in the city in the following cases: 
(1)  When necessarily committed by a public officer in the performance of any legal duty, or by any other person assisting him or acting by his direction; 
(2)  When necessarily committed by any person in arresting one who has committed any felony, and delivering him to a public officer competent to receive him in custody; 
(3)  When committed either by the party about to be injured, or by any other person in his aid or defense, in preventing or attempting to prevent an offense against his person, or any trespass or other unlawful interference with real or personal property in his lawful possession, provided the force used is not more than sufficient to prevent such offense, and that the same shall be necessary for the self-defense of his person or property; 
(4)  When committed by a parent or authorized agent of any parent, or by any guardian, master or teacher, in the exercise of a lawful authority to restrain or correct his child, ward, apprentice or scholar, provided restraint or correction has been rendered necessary by the misconduct of such child, ward, apprentice or scholar, or by his refusal to obey the lawful command of such parent or authorized agent or guardian, master or teacher, and the force used is reasonable in manner and moderate in degree; 
(5)  When committed by a carrier of passengers, or the authorized agents or servants of such carrier, or by any person assisting them at their request, in expelling from any carriage, interurban car, vessel or other vehicle, any passenger who refuses to obey a lawful and reasonable regulation prescribed for the conduct of passengers, if such vehicle has first been stopped and the force used is not more than is sufficient to expel the offending passenger, with a reasonable regard to his personal safety; 
(6)  When committed by any person in preventing an idiot, lunatic, insane person or other person of unsound mind, including persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, from committing an act dangerous to himself or to another, or enforcing such restraint as is necessary for the protection of his person or for his restoration to health, during such period only as shall be necessary to obtain legal authority for the restraint or custody of such person; 
(7)  In preventing or interrupting an intrusion upon the lawful possession of property; and 
(8)  To preserve the peace or prevent the commission of an offense. 
(b)  Where force is permitted to effect a lawful purpose only that degree of force necessary to effect such purpose shall be used. 
(Code 1999, § 10-112) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 643.  
CHAPTER 2. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 
 
Sec. 10-201. - Assault and battery. 
No person shall commit an assault or battery, or both, upon the person of another. 
(Prior Code, § 16-76; Code 1999, § 10-201) 
State Law reference— Assault and battery generally, 21 O.S. § 641 et seq.; city's power to prevent, 11 O.S. § 22-110.  
Sec. 10-202. - "Assault" defined. 
An assault is any willful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence to do corporal hurt to another. 
(Prior Code, § 16-76; Code 1999, § 10-202) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 641.  
Sec. 10-203. - "Battery" defined. 
A battery is any willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another. 
(Prior Code, § 16-76; Code 1999, § 10-203) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 642.  
Sec. 10-204. - Reckless conduct. 
(a)  Reckless conduct, as used in this section, consists of an act which creates a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great bodily harm to another and which demonstrates a conscious disregard for the safety of another. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to endanger another's safety by reckless conduct in the operation or handling of any weapon or instrument, including a pistol, revolver or other firearm. 
(Prior Code, § 16-77; Code 1999, § 10-204) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1289.11.  
CHAPTER 3. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 10-301. - Petit larceny, and larceny of lost property. 
(a)  No person shall steal, take and carry away by fraud or stealth, with intent to deprive another thereof, any personal property under the value of $1,000.00 or such other amount constituting a misdemeanor under statute or embezzle any money, personal property or effects of another under the value of $1,000.00 or less or such other amount constituting a misdemeanor under statute. This subsection does not apply to taking property from the person of another. 
(b)  One who finds lost property of the value of $1,000.00 or less or such other amount constituting a misdemeanor under statute, under circumstances which gives him knowledge or means of inquiry as to the true owner, and who appropriates such property to his own use, or to the use of another person who is not entitled thereto, without having first made such effort as the circumstances render reasonable and just to find the owner and restore the property to him, is guilty of a petit larceny. 
(Prior Code, §§ 16-91, 16-93; Code 1999, § 10-301; Ord. No. 778(14), 7-7-2014) 
State Law reference— Larceny, 21 O.S. § 1701 et seq.; embezzlement, 21 O.S. § 1451 et seq.  
Sec. 10-302. - Larceny by false pretense. 
No person shall induce, or attempt to induce, any person to give up or pay over any money or other thing of value which money or value does not exceed $1,000.00 or less or such other amount constituting a misdemeanor under statute, by any false representation or pretense, or in exchange for any false or bogus coin or check, draft or other false evidence of value, or in consideration of refraining from a lawful or unlawful arrest or in consideration of refraining from reporting any unlawful act to any public official. 
(Prior Code, §§ 16-105, 16-107, in part; Code 1999, § 10-302; Ord. No. 791(15), § 10-302, 6-1-2015) 
State Law reference— False pretenses, 21 O.S. § 1541.1 et seq.  
Sec. 10-303. - Altering keys. 
No person shall make or alter or attempt to make or alter any key or other instrument that will open the lock of a building unless requested to do so by some person having the right and authority to make such request. 
(Code 1999, § 10-303)  
Sec. 10-304. - Possession of stolen property. 
No person shall keep in his possession, or dispose of, or conceal any stolen property, or fail promptly to inform some proper official of the possession thereof, under circumstances indicating that such property had been stolen or the possession thereof obtained unlawfully. This section applies only if the property has a value of less than $1,000.00 or such greater amount constituting a misdemeanor under state law. 
(Prior Code, § 16-97; Code 1999, § 10-304) 
State Law reference— Receiving stolen property, 21 O.S. § 1713.  
Sec. 10-305. - Defrauding public accommodations; proof; exception. 
(a)  No person shall obtain food, lodging or other accommodation in any hotel, motel, inn, boardinghouse, eatinghouse or roominghouse or place, or any other lodging place, with the intent to defraud the owner or keeper. 
(b)  Proof that lodging, food and other accommodations were obtained by false pretense or fictitious show of any package or other property or that the person gave a check or negotiable paper on which payment was refused or that the person left the hotel, motel, inn, boardinghouse, eatinghouse or roominghouse or place, or other lodging place, without paying or offering to pay for the food, lodging or other accommodation or that the person surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove the package or property, or that the person registered under a fictitious name shall be prima facie proof of attempt to defraud. 
(c)  No person shall refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this section after having hired the same, and no person shall hire any vehicle with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
(d)  This section shall not apply where there has been an agreement in writing for delay in payment. This section applies only if the property does not exceed a value of less than $1,000.00 or such greater amount constituting a misdemeanor under state law. 
(Prior Code, § 16-105; Code 1999, § 10-305) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1503.  
Sec. 10-306. - Concealing unpurchased merchandise, merchant's authority to detain. 
Any person concealing unpurchased merchandise of any establishment, either on the premises or outside the premises of the establishment, shall be presumed to have so concealed the merchandise with the intention of committing a wrongful taking of such merchandise. Such concealment or the finding of such unpurchased merchandise concealed upon the person or among the belongings of such person shall be conclusive evidence of reasonable grounds and probable cause for the detention in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time of such person by a merchant, his agent or employee; any such reasonable detention shall not be deemed to be unlawful nor render any such merchant, his agent or employee, criminally or civilly liable. 
(Prior Code, § 16-96; Code 1999, § 10-306)  
Sec. 10-307. - Failure to pay fare for public conveyance. 
No person shall use or accept the use and services of any street car, taxi cab, omnibus, automobile or any other means of public conveyance or passengers, operating under the Code, ordinance, franchise, permit or license of the city or state, and refuse or fail to pay to the operator of the conveyance the usual, customary, regulation or legal charge, or price as fare immediately upon the performance of the service. 
(Code 1999, § 10-307; Ord. No. 518, 4-2-1990)  
Sec. 10-308. - False or bogus checks. 
It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain or attempt to obtain from any person any money, property or valuable thing of a value less than $1,000.00 or such greater amount constituting a misdemeanor under state law by means of any false or bogus check or by any other written or printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin. The term "false or bogus check" shall include checks or orders given for money or property which are not honored on account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, as against the maker or drawer thereof. The making, drawing, issuing or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository. Such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with the protest fees, and the check or order shall be presented for payment within 30 days after same is delivered and accepted. 
(Prior Code, §§ 16-92, 16-106, in part; Code 1999, § 10-308; Ord. No. 683(10), 11-15-2010) 
State Law reference— Bad checks, 21 O.S. § 1541.1 et seq.  
Sec. 10-309. - Harmful deception. 
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by impersonation, misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver. 
(Prior Code, § 16-33; Code 1999, § 10-309)  
Sec. 10-310. - Defacing building, damaging property. 
(a)  No person shall purposely deface or damage any public or private building or appurtenances thereof, or any fence, street, bridge, sidewalk, driveway, street, or public work. 
(b)  No person shall: 
(1)  Destroy, injure, deface, damage or molest any structure, building, work or other property, real or personal, belonging to another; 
(2)  Use such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use; or 
(3)  Interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or any other person entitled to its use. 
(c)  This section applies only if the loss is less than $1,000.00 or such greater amount constituting a misdemeanor under state law. 
(Prior Code, § 16-99; Code 1999, § 10-310) 
State Law reference— Destroying property generally, 21 O.S. § 1760.  
Sec. 10-311. - Removing or breaking private property. 
No person shall willfully, unlawfully or maliciously take and carry or cause to be taken and carried away any part of a house, barn, fence, gate or other structure, or maliciously break, tear down or destroy any part of a house, barn or other structure not his own. This section applies only if the loss is less than $1,000.00 or such greater amount constituting a misdemeanor under state law. 
(Code 1999, § 10-311) 
State Law reference— Destroying property generally, 21 O.S. § 1760.  
Sec. 10-312. - Damaging private property. 
No person shall willfully and wantonly damage or destroy the personal property of another. This section applies only if the loss is less than $1,000.00 or such greater amount constituting a misdemeanor under state law. 
(Code 1999, § 10-312) 
State Law reference— Destroying property generally, 21 O.S. § 1760.  
Sec. 10-313. - Public works under construction. 
(a)  Any person who removes, destroys, disturbs, or in any manner injures any grade stake, stone or other mark or monument set by or under authority of the city to designate or mark grades, lines, corners or bench marks on any public work in the city prior to the completion and acceptance of the contract for which such stakes or monuments are set, without lawful authority, is guilty of an offense. 
(b)  Any contractor or other person constructing any public work in the city shall protect such work by barriers or obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to cross the barriers or to remove them until the work has been completed and opened by authority of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 10-313) 
State Law reference— Destroying property generally, 21 O.S. § 1760.  
Sec. 10-314. - Damaging or tampering with motor vehicle. 
(a)  No person, other than a peace officer in the performance of his official duties, shall, with intent and without right to do so, injure or tamper with any vehicle or in any other manner damage any part or portion of the vehicle or any accessories, appurtenances or attachments thereto. This subsection applies only if the loss is less than $1,000.00 or such greater amount constituting a misdemeanor under state law. 
(b)  No person, other than a peace officer in the performance of his official duties, shall, without right to do so and with intent to commit a crime, climb into or upon a vehicle, whether it is in motion or at rest, attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting mechanism, brakes or other mechanism or device of the vehicle while the vehicle is at rest and unattended, or set in motion any vehicle while the vehicle is at rest and unattended. 
(Prior Code, § 16-98; Code 1999, § 10-314) 
State Law reference— Damaging motor vehicles, 21 O.S. §§ 1787, 1788.  
Sec. 10-315. - Tampering with or damaging of utilities. 
(a)  No person shall alter, remove, tamper with, molest, damage or injure any wires, cable, appurtenance, structure, pipes or equipment of any utility of the city, or any public utility, or connect or tamper with the wires, cables or pipes of any electric, water, sewer, cable television or gas utility or of the city without consent of the utility or city having been first obtained. This subsection applies only if the loss is less than $1,000.00 or such greater amount constituting a misdemeanor under state law. 
(b)  It is unlawful to open up any manhole or opening to a sewer unless authorized by the city, or to leave a manhole or other opening so opened without replacing the fixture or appliances thereto in their proper place and position. 
(c)  No person except a member of the fire department or a person acting on lawful order or permit issued by the city shall open or use water from any fire hydrant or take off the caps or damage the same. No person may block the approach or access to a fire hydrant or attach, fasten, stand or brace anything against or on the hydrant. 
(d)  No person shall in any manner whatsoever: 
(1)  Cut into, attach to or intercept the wires, cables or pipes of any electric, water, cable television or gas utility or of the city for the purpose of fraudulently taking therefrom electric current, water, transmissions or gas; 
(2)  Cut into, attach to or intercept the wires, cables or pipes for the purpose of conducting around any meter electric current, water or gas in order to prevent the current, water or gas from being measured by the meter, or in such other manner so as to consume or use the utility or cable service so as to evade payment therefor, with the unlawful intent to defraud the company or city out of the value of the service; or 
(3)  By any device or manipulation whatsoever to cause current, transmissions, water or gas used upon any premises to be fraudulently conveyed upon any premises for the purposes of use thereof, and with the intent to defraud and cheat the utility or city from payment thereof. 
(e)  Each day that any person maintains any such fraudulent connection with any wires, cables or pipes, or fraudulently takes from any such wires, cables or pipes either electric current, transmissions, water or gas shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 16-102; Code 1999, § 10-315)  
Sec. 10-316. - Destroying trees and shrubbery. 
(a)  No person shall willfully, maliciously and without lawful authority cut down, root up, sever, injure or destroy any fruit tree, shade or ornamental tree, cultivated root or plant, grape or strawberry vine, shrub or plant whatever standing on or attached to the land of another, or pick, destroy, carry away therefrom, or in any way interfere therewith, any of the fruit thereof. 
(b)  No person shall willfully or without lawful authority cut down, destroy, root up or in any manner injure any fruit, shade or ornamental tree, shrub or vine planted or growing on any street, land, avenue, alley or other public ground of the city. 
(c)  This section applies only if the loss is less than $1,000.00 or such greater amount constituting a misdemeanor under state law. 
(Code 1999, § 10-316) 
State Law reference— Destroying property generally, 21 O.S. § 1760.  
Sec. 10-317. - Trespassing prohibited, notice, soliciting. 
(a)  It is unlawful and an offense for any person to commit a trespass within the city upon either public or private property. 
(b)  Trespass shall include each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. Trespass shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession after having been told to leave the premises by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises. Trespass shall also mean the act of entering upon or remaining on private property when such is plainly forbidden by signs, markings, or otherwise, by verbal command of the owner, his agent, or employee, of after having been directed to do so by a police officer, although this sentence shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon the premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such premises. Trespass shall also include the act of returning to private property after having been directed to vacate the premises by the owner, his agent, employee or police officer under the terms of this section. 
(c)  Any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed a violation of this section: 
(1)  The doing of an injury or misfeasance to the person of another; 
(2)  The doing of any injury or misfeasance to the property of another when done with force and violence, either actual or implied; 
(3)  Each and every actual entry upon the premises of another owner or person in possession of real property, whether the property is public or private, without the owner's or occupant's consent, express or implied; 
(4)  An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another in violation of a notice exhibited thereon prohibiting entry at specified times; 
(5)  An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or other lawful occupant thereof; 
(6)  An entry upon any public property, including parks or parking areas, in violation of a notice exhibited there prohibiting entry at specified times; 
(7)  An entry upon any public property in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by a city official; 
(8)  If on the property of another, or upon public property lawfully, a failure or refusal to depart in case of being requested to so depart orally or written, by any owner, lawful occupant, or by a city official; 
(9)  An entry upon any portion of a public park, where the entry involves the use of any vehicle, equipment or device where such use is specifically prohibited; 
(10)  An entry of any public building except for the purpose of dispatching business with the public corporation or consent is obtained from the city council or other public official which is lawfully authorized to give consent; or 
(11)  Remaining on public or private property at any time other than during posted hours of business operation after having been directed to vacate such premises by a police officer. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such premises; nor shall the provisions of this subsection apply unless hours of business operation are posted upon such premises. Trespass also includes the act of returning to private property before the posted time of opening for business operation on the next business day after having been directed to vacate such premises under the terms of this subsection. 
(d)  For purposes of constituting a violation of this section, the exhibited notice required under subsections (c)(4) through (7) of this section shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The notice shall be plainly posted in a place conspicuous to those who would enter the property; 
(2)  The notice shall be legible so as to afford reasonable warning prior to the commission of a trespass; and 
(3)  If upon property to which the public is invited at least some part of the day, the notice shall clearly specify the days and times of day entry is prohibited, and further specify that entry at such times constitutes a punishable offense under this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 10-317; Ord. No. 501, 12-18-1989, in part) 
State Law reference— Trespass, 21 O.S. § 1835 et seq.  
Sec. 10-318. - Congregating, parking on-premises after hours. 
(a)  No person shall stand, walk, sit, lie, congregate or otherwise occupy or remain upon the premises of any place or business within the city after business hours without consent of the lawful owner, occupant, lessee or employee thereof. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand, park, leave, or place any motor vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon any public or private property without the consent of the owner, occupant, lessee or employee thereof, except where such property is provided for public parking and the use for such parking is not restricted by proper notice. In addition to fine or other punishment for a violation of this subsection, the vehicle so parked, left or placed shall be subject to impoundment upon complaint of the property owner or lawful occupant. The person violating this subsection shall be wholly responsible for payment of towage and storage charges. 
(c)  No person may be charged under this section unless the premises in question is posted with a conspicuous sign which states, substantially, that the premises are posted, and that any person congregating, occupying or remaining upon the premises or parking or leaving a motor vehicle thereon is subject to prosecution pursuant to this Code. 
(d)  When used in this section, the term "after business hours" shall mean that the doors of the business which are open to the public during business hours are closed and locked and that the business is no longer admitting customers. The term "after business hours" applies to places of business which are vacant or permanently or temporarily closed or otherwise unoccupied. The term "place of business" means any private property upon which a building, house or other structure is used for commercial or public purposes (e.g., without limitation, restaurants, gas stations, shopping malls or centers, theaters, convenience stores, grocery stores, drug stores or pharmacies, recreational facilities, wholesale or retail sales activities, offices, banks or other financial institutions, manufacturing, and professional services (medical, legal, accounting, insurance, consulting)). 
(e)  There is a rebuttable presumption that any person or motor vehicle upon the premises of a place of business that is properly posted pursuant to this section after such time as the front door or other such door that admits members of the public is closed and locked is on the premises of such business unlawfully under this section; however, this presumption shall not be applied within 30 minutes of any opening or closing times posted by such place of business. This presumption may only be rebutted by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that any person held by the municipal judge to be subject to this rebuttable presumption was on the premises in question with permission of the lawful owner, occupant, lessee or employee thereof. 
(f)  If a motor vehicle is alleged to be unlawfully parked or left under this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the person in whose name the motor vehicle was last registered was the person who parked or left the motor vehicle. 
(g)  The parking or leaving of a motor vehicle as set forth herein shall constitute the offense of unlawful parking or leaving a motor vehicle after business hours, punishable as provided in section 1-108. 
(h)  If a person violates subsection (a) of this section, it shall constitute the offense of unlawful presence on property after business hours or congregating after business hours and is punishable as provided in section 1-108. 
(i)  The provisions of this section are cumulative of other applicable offenses enacted in this Code or state law. 
(Code 1999, § 10-318; Ord. No. 456, 8-1-1988)  
Sec. 10-319. - Unlawful intrusion on land. 
(a)  No person shall intrude or remain upon any lot or piece of land, or in any building within the city without license or authority from the owner thereof, or erect or occupy thereon any structure whatever without such license or authority. 
(b)  No person shall place, erect or occupy within the bounds of any street, alley or avenue of the city any structure whatever unless such person is granted a license by the city to do so. 
(Code 1999, § 10-319) 
State Law reference— Trespass, 21 O.S. § 1835 et seq.  
Sec. 10-320. - Throwing or shooting at persons or property. 
No person shall throw or shoot any object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he is likely to hit another person wrongfully, or injure property, or to throw any object at any person, vehicle, structure, or property of another, whether public or private, except where such is done in defense of oneself or another person or property. 
(Prior Code, § 16-101; Code 1999, § 10-320)  
Sec. 10-321. - Throwing out lighted substances or debris prohibited. 
No person shall throw, drop, deposit or otherwise place in, upon or within the limits of any street, avenue, public ground, public waterway or city-owned property or waterway any lighted cigarette, cigar or other flaming or glowing substances, or any substance or thing which may cause a fire. 
(Code 1999, § 10-321)  
Sec. 10-322. - Littering, deposits unlawful. 
It is unlawful to throw, deposit or discharge any item or waste material, liquid or solid, on any street or public place in the city or upon the property of another without express authority to do so. 
(Code 1999, § 10-322) 
State Law reference— Littering, 21 O.S. § 1753.3 et seq.  
Sec. 10-323. - Posting advertising, other matter on building of another. 
(a)  No person shall place upon any building any advertising or other matter of any kind, nor print or exhibit printing on a building or any part thereof, in words, signs or characters, except with the express consent of the owner, lessee or authorized agent of the owner of the building. 
(b)  No person shall place, post, paint, mark, write, print or put any sign, poster, picture, announcement, writing, device, advertisement or other marking upon any public or private building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, post, automobile or vehicle or property of another without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 16-100; Code 1999, § 10-323)  
Sec. 10-324. - Posting advertising, other matter on utility poles or on or over streets and sidewalks. 
It is unlawful for any person to place any advertising or other matter of any kind on any utility pole, or to place any advertising on the streets or sidewalks of the city or to place any advertising on any signs or banners stretched over the streets or sidewalks of the city. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any permanently located commercial or business establishment in the city from erecting and maintaining business or commercial signs in accordance with the ordinances of the city, nor to prohibit the granting of permission by the city to religious, charitable, patriotic or civic bodies to use banners across the streets of the city in such places as may be designated by the city manager for the observance of holidays, charitable drives and the commemoration and celebration of other public or civic occasions. 
(Code 1999, § 10-324)  
Sec. 10-325. - False weights. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell any commodity or article of merchandise and in the sale thereof knowingly make or give a false or short weight therefor or for any person owning or keeping or having in charge any scale used in weighing any animal, commodity or article to knowingly and willfully report any false or untrue weight whereby another person shall be defrauded or damaged. 
(Prior Code, § 16-108; Code 1999, § 10-326) 
State Law reference— False weights and measures, 21 O.S. § 1551 et seq.  
Sec. 10-326. - Electric fences prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to erect, install or maintain any electrically charged fence within the city, except that the building official may issue a permit for an electrically-charged fence to retain animals upon proof that the fence will not be hazardous to life, and upon proof that the electric charge is regulated by a controlling device. 
(Code 1999, § 10-327; Ord. No. 520, 5-21-1990)  
Sec. 10-327. - Unlawful use of another's garbage or refuse container. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to dispose of garbage, refuse, rubbish or waste into any refuse container, dumpster or other receptacle for the deposit of same belonging to or leased by another, whether by rental agreement, lease or agreement with the city or a public or private trash, garbage or refuse hauling service, without the permission of the owner, lessee or other person entitled to the possession or use thereof. 
(Code 1999, § 10-328; Ord. No. 458, 8-1-1988)  
Sec. 10-328. - Fireworks prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "fireworks" shall have the same meaning as in state law, 68 O.S. § 1621 et seq. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, display, possess, use or sell fireworks within the city except as provided in this section. 
(c)  Pyrotechnic or fireworks displays may be authorized in accordance with the city fire code when under proper control and the time, place and manner of the display is permitted by the city. 
(Prior Code, §§ 9-96, 9-97; Code 1999, § 10-329) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of fireworks, 11 O.S. § 22-110.  
CHAPTER 4. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 10-401. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a)  It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by doing any of the acts set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such a manner as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or others: 
(1)  Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening, violent or insulting language or conduct; 
(2)  Appearing in an intoxicated condition; 
(3)  Engaging in a fistic encounter; 
(4)  Lewdly exposing one's person, or private parts thereof, in any public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby; 
(5)  Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon whether loaded or not at any other persons either in anger or otherwise; 
(6)  Holding an unlawful assembly of two or more persons, including being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously; 
(7)  Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing distance thereof; 
(8)  Obstructing the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles on a street, right-of-way or sidewalk, or other public place; 
(9)  Obstructing, molesting or interfering with any person lawfully in a public place; 
(10)  Making noises that a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities would find unnecessarily loud or offensive; 
(11)  Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or 
(12)  Committing any other act in such a manner calculated as to unreasonably disturb, interfere or alarm the public or the comfort and repose of any person. 
(c)  Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment, decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, he may, if he deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order that person to leave that place; and any who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to peaceful picketing, public speaking or other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(Prior Code, §§ 16-57—16-59, 16-61; Code 1999, § 10-401)  
Sec. 10-402. - Disturbing funerals. 
No person shall willfully disturb, interrupt or disquiet any assemblage of people who have met for the purpose of any funeral, or obstruct or detain any person engaged in accompanying any funeral to a place of burial. 
(Code 1999, § 10-402)  
Sec. 10-403. - Disorderly conduct. 
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance, alarm or recklessly creating the risk thereof, he: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Endangers the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct; 
(4)  Jostles or crowds or pushes any person in any public place; 
(5)  Uses "fighting words" directed toward any person and thus creates a turmoil; 
(6)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; or 
(7)  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(Code 1999, § 10-403) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct generally, 21 O.S. § 1361 et seq.; power of city relating to disorderly conduct, 11 O.S. § 22-110.  
Sec. 10-404. - Parades, public assemblies, and special events. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "parade" means any parade, march, ceremony, show, demonstration, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
(b)  No person shall use any street, alley, public way, park or other property owned or controlled by the city, except those places specifically designed and intended for such use, for the purpose of holding, conducting, causing or participating in any parade, street fair, street dance, carnival, assemblage or activity of any nature which may cause the disturbance or interference of the normal and ordinary use of the property by other persons, without first having obtained a permit for such purpose. The permits may be granted by the city manager under such conditions as deemed appropriate. 
(c)  Permits shall not be required under this section in the case of construction or repairs to or within any such street or property, provided all other requirements of this Code are complied with. 
(d)  Not less than two weeks prior to the closing or use of a street or property for a parade, an application shall be submitted by the party to the city. The time requirements may be waived by the city manager at his discretion if sufficient time exists for the proper review of the application as herein provided. The application shall be submitted upon a form prescribed by the city. The application shall provide such other information as requested. 
(e)  The city manager shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; and 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(f)  The city manager, in such cases as shall be determined in his discretion, may require as a condition to the issuance of a permit herein such insurance or bond holding the city harmless from any and all liability for injury or damage of any kind whatsoever occurring during such activity covered by the permit. 
(g)  Without regard to the above provision of this section, the city manager, from his consideration of available, appropriate and necessary information, shall deny the application for a permit provided for by this section when, from this information, he has reason to believe that any contemplated advocacy at the proposed event will be directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and will likely incite or produce such action. 
(h)  The city manager, in denying an application for a parade permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall so indicate within five days after notice of the action of the city manager. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this section. 
(i)  As used in this section, the term "special event" means any activity which occurs upon private or public property that will affect the ordinary use of public streets, rights-of-way or sidewalks. This includes, but is not limited to, fairs, festivals, foot races, bike races, block parties, grand opening celebrations, and other temporary assemblages of people. 
(1)  No person, organization, business or corporation shall conduct a special event that affects the ordinary use of public streets, rights-of-way or sidewalks without a permit from the city. 
(2)  An application for a special event shall be submitted to the city no later than five business days prior to the proposed event. Applicants may file application as early as desired by the applicant. 
(3)  Reasons for denial of a special events permit include, but are not limited to, the event will disrupt traffic within the city beyond practical solution; will interfere with access to fire stations and the fire hydrants; the location of the special event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or residents; the event would require the diversion of so many city, public safety and/or and public works employees that allowing the event would unreasonably deny service to the remainder of the city; and the application contains incomplete or false information. 
(4)  This section shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or its officials or employees any liability or responsibility for any injury or damages to any person in any way connected to the use for which permits have been issued. The city and its officials and employees shall not be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reasons of inspections performed, the issuance of any permit or the approval of any use of the right-of-way. 
(5)  A special event permit may be issued only after adequate waste disposal facilities and toilet facilities as necessary have been identified and obtained by the permittee. The permittee will clean their property, city property and any adjacent properties of trash, rubbish, or debris generated by the special event, returning it to its pre-event condition within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event. If the permittee fails to clean up such refuse, such clean up shall be as required by law or other sections of this Code and the costs charged to the permittee. 
(6)  The permittee shall obtain other permits that may be required from other jurisdictions for this special event. 
(Code 1999, § 10-404; Ord. No. 629(08), 9-2-2008) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to regulate assemblies, 47 O.S. 15-102.  
Sec. 10-405. - Firearms and carrying certain weapons prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall transport a loaded firearm except in compliance with state law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry upon or about his or her person, or in a purse or other container belonging to the person, any pistol, revolver, shotgun or rifle whether loaded or unloaded or any blackjack, loaded cane, hand chain, metal knuckles, or any other offensive weapon, whether such weapon be concealed or unconcealed, except as may be authorized by law. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, air rifle or BB gun within the city except as may be authorized by law. 
(d)  Any person violating this provision shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum penalty established by state law. 
(Ord. No. 898(19) , 3-4-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 898(19) , adopted March 4, 2019, repealed the former § 10-405, and enacted a new § 10-405 as set out herein. The former § 10-405 pertained firearms and derived from the 2018 recodification of this Code. 
State Law reference— Carrying firearms, 21 O.S. § 1289.6; firearms definitions, 21 O.S. § 1289.1 et seq.  
Sec. 10-406. - Begging and soliciting alms. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon property in his immediate possession. 
Ask, beg or solicit means and includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)  In any public transportation vehicle, or in any bus or subway station, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxi stand; 
(6)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)  From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility; or 
(8)  Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value by accosting another or by forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(Prior Code, § 16-34; Code 1999, § 10-408)  
ARTICLE B. - NOISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City's power to restrain and prohibit unnecessary noise, 11 O.S. § 22-110. 
 
Sec. 10-411. - Findings of fact. 
It is found and declared that: 
(1)  The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary noise within the city is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noise is increasing; 
(2)  The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noise, prolonged in time, place and use, affects and is a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the city; 
(3)  A substantial body of scientific and technological knowledge and expertise exists by which noise is recognized as sound which is excessive and thereby unwanted and rejectable, and may be substantially abated; 
(4)  The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the peace and quiet for the greater assurance of public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1999, § 10-421; Ord. No. 544, 2-4-1991; Ord. No. 90(94), 9-6-1994)  
Sec. 10-412. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambient sound pressure level is the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far, statistically equivalent to L90; the percentile noise level exceeded 90 percent of the time based on any measurement period of not less than ten minutes or more than 30 minutes. 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighing network. The level so read is designated as dB(A) or dBA. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, excluding demolition, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Continuous sound means any sound, essentially without interruption, which exists for a period of six minutes or more. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter), denoted as dB. 
Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
Device means any mechanical object or piece intended to produce, or which produces, the resultant effect objectively sought when operated or used. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire, police and highway patrol departments and legally authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles of state departments. 
Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating physical traumas or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Excessive sound means that sound level which elicits complaints, usually independent of each other in the estimate of the sound's being acceptable or unacceptable. 
Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating (GCWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used. 
Impulsive sound means sound pulses of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
L1 percentile level means the time-averaged sound pressure level, A-weighted, that is exceeded in any time measurement period one percent of that time. 
L10 percentile level means the time-averaged sound pressure level, A-weighted, that is exceeded in any time measurement period ten percent of that time. 
L90 percentile level means the time-averaged sound pressure level, A-weighted, that is exceeded in any time measurement period 90 percent of that time. 
Measurement period means that total amount of time used in the measurement of sound levels for a given incident not including time intervals, or their total time, between intervals of actual sound measurement time. Limits are as stated herein, not less than ten minutes and not more than 30 minutes. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle self-propelled on land and every vehicle propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails; provided, however, the definition of the term "motor vehicle" shall not include implements of husbandry. 
Muffler means a device for abating the sound of escaping gases of any internal combustion engine. 
Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Noise disturbance means any plainly audible sound which: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the safety or health of a human; 
(2)  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or 
(3)  Endangers or injures personal or real property. 
For the purpose of this definition, the term "plainly audible" means where the listener clearly can hear the content of the sound produced by the noise source. Sounds which may be clearly or plainly audible include, but are not limited to, musical rhythms, spoken words, vocal sounds and engine noises. 
Person means any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the state or any political subdivision of the state. 
Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
RMS sound pressure means the square root of the time average square of the sound pressure, denoted Prms. 
Sound means temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes progressively alternate compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant points and can evoke an auditory sensation. 
Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and weighing networks used to measure sound pressure levels. 
Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound energy. 
Sound pressure level means 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals (20 x 10 - 6) n/m2). The sound pressure level is denoted Lp or SPL and is expressed in decibels (dB). 
(b)  All defined terminology used in this article which is not defined in subsection (a) of this section or in Part 1 of this Code shall be in conformance with applicable publication of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. 
(Code 1999, § 10-422; Ord. No. 544, 2-4-1991; Ord. No. 90(94), 9-6-1994)  
Sec. 10-413. - Prohibitions generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise disturbance, any excessive, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable people of ordinary sensibilities, within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 10-423; Ord. No. 544, 2-4-1991)  
Sec. 10-414. - Specific prohibitions. 
The following acts, among others and not to exclude other such acts, are declared to be excessive or unusual noises in violation of this article, except and unless in the urgent interest of public health, welfare and safety, a permit has been issued by the city manager for continuance or performance over such time periods as may be so stated: 
(1)  Owning, maintaining or harboring for hire any animal or bird, which, by frequent or prolonged noise-making, cause or tend to cause excessive sound levels, whether originating from public or private facilities, except publicly-owned or publicly-operated zoos. Police dogs may be exempted from the prohibitions of this section under such terms and conditions as the city manager or council may establish; 
(2)  Performance of construction, demolition or repair work at or on any structural or roadway project or undertaking whether by manual or mechanical means, such as to produce a noise disturbance; 
(3)  Discharge into the open air of the sound-laden exhaust from, or escape of excessive sound from, working parts of the transmission or conveyance of fluids or solids through piping, conduit, or by way of other mechanical transport, stationary, portable or mobile engine or motorized vehicle, such as to produce a noise disturbance; 
(4)  Sounding of horns, whistles, sirens, firearms or other such alarm or announcement device, whether manual or power-operated, or the detonation of fireworks or explosives, except as required as warning of fire, natural disaster or other impending or incidental danger, or which may be required as a part of law enforcement, by emergency, or as excepted by the exemptions to this article; 
(5)  Operating or permitting the use or operation of any device designed for sound production, amplification or reproduction, including, but not limited to, any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, equipment, electronic audio equipment, television set, tape recorder, loud speaker, or other similar device: 
a.  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day so as to be plainly audible within any dwelling unit which is not the source of the sound; or 
b.  On public property or on a public right-of-way so as to be plainly audible 50 feet or more from such device, except as authorized by permit; 
(6)  Shouting, carousing, singing, boisterous, belligerent or clamorous noise-making or other prolonged noise-making such as to cause or tend to cause excessive sound pressure levels; 
(7)  Operation of any motorized surface boat or underwater vehicle, whether on land, water impoundment, lake, stream, diversion channel, or astride a conveyance, such as to produce a noise disturbance; 
(8)  Operation of powered models or toys such as to produce a noise disturbance; 
(9)  Running, testing or otherwise operating aircraft engines on the ground or operating an airport facility in such a manner as to cause or tend to cause noise disturbance. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit, restrict, penalize or enjoin or in any manner regulate the movement of aircraft which are, in all respects, conducted in accordance with or pursuant to applicable federal laws and regulations, or air traffic control instructions; 
(10)  Operating or permitting to be operated in any place of public entertainment during any hour of operation when patrons or customers may be expected to be present, any loudspeaker or sound amplifier which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound, or which produces a noise disturbance at a point normally to be occupied by a patron or customer, unless a conspicuous legible sign is posted at or within five feet of each public entrance and not more than five feet above the level of the ground, floor, or other entrance threshold, readable by a person with 20/20 vision at a distance not less than ten feet from the loudspeaker or amplifier, which sign shall state: 
"WARNING: SOUND LEVELS WITHIN MAY CAUSE PERMANENT HEARING IMPAIRMENT" 
This provision shall not be construed to allow the operation of a loudspeaker or sound amplifier in such manner as to violate subsection (11) of this section; 
(11)  Creating noise disturbance within 500 feet of any school or other such institution of learning, church, hospital, convalescent hospital or mass-care home, or court of law from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., provided conspicuous, legible signs are serviceably displayed at such distance from the aforementioned institutions, or any of them, that such potential violation may be avoided; 
(12)  No property owner, lessor or lessee shall knowingly allow any automobile, motorcycle, minibike or other vehicle which creates a noise disturbance to be driven across his property. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prohibit the arrest of the operators of such vehicles as may be provided by this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 10-424; Ord. No. 544, 2-4-1991; Ord. No. 90(94), 9-6-1994)  
Sec. 10-415. - Exemptions. 
The following sources of potentially excessive sound shall be exempt from noise control regulation: 
(1)  Safety signals and alarm devices; only storm warning sirens or horns that are owned, operated, authorized, and required by the city and the authorized testing of such equipment, emergency vehicle sirens or horns used when responding to an emergency, and emergency pressure relief valves; 
(2)  Noise created or to be created as the result of provisions of section 10-414 such that a permit shall be issued beforehand by the city manager, and such event shall be conducted in accordance with provisions of such permit; 
(3)  Disaster or other emergency, or, as result of such disaster, demanding the immediate undertaking by operators or mechanical devices for relief of stress thus created; 
(4)  Organized sporting event; 
(5)  Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right-of-way; and 
(6)  Interstate railway locomotives and trains en route, and not engaged in switching operations within residential land use classifications between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1999, § 10-427; Ord. No. 544, 2-4-1991; Ord. No. 90(94), 9-6-1994; Ord. No. 758(13), 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 10-416. - Permit. 
(a)  Application for a permit for relief from noise restrictions designated in this article, on the basis of undue hardship, may be made to the city manager or his authorized representative. Any such application shall set out clearly the conditions describing the undue hardship so alleged. 
(b)  A permit may be granted only upon sufficient and reliable showing in the application that such conditions indicate one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to comply with this article; 
(2)  The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary duration, and cannot be performed in a manner that would comply with other sections of this article; and 
(3)  No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
(c)  A permit may be granted only for an effective time period of three days or less, except in the case of construction or demolition, the effective time period of such permit shall not exceed 45 days continuous time lapse. A permit may be renewed while the urgent necessity continues for three days or less, except in the case of construction or demolition, the renewal shall not exceed 45 days. Any such permit thus granted shall state all conditions upon which it may be granted, including, but not limited to, effective date, time of day, location, limitations for personnel or equipment involved, and any other conditions or requirements the city manager may deem necessary to minimize the adverse effects upon the community or surrounding neighborhood. 
(Code 1999, § 10-428; Ord. No. 544, 2-4-1991; Ord. No. 90(94), 9-6-1994)  
Sec. 10-417. - Duties and responsibilities of city departments. 
(a)  All departments and agencies of the city shall, to the fullest extent consistent with other ordinances, carry out their programs in such a manner as to further the policy of this article and in cooperation with the enforcement of it. 
(b)  All departments whose duty it is to review and approve new projects or changes to existing projects that result, or may result, in the production of excessive sound levels shall consult with the agent of enforcement prior to any such approval. 
(Code 1999, § 10-429; Ord. No. 544, 2-4-1991; Ord. No. 90(94), 9-6-1994)  
Sec. 10-418. - Penalty and injunctive relief. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)  Each day of violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a single offense if the disturbance is continuous. If the disturbance is not continuous, each violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense, although committed on the same day. 
(c)  As an additional remedy, any activity, conduct or the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery which is continuing in nature and in violation of any ordinance provision, and which causes discomfort or annoyance, or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area, or which produces a noise disturbance shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. An injunction or restraining order may be issued pursuant to the statutes of the state. 
(Code 1999, § 10-430; Ord. No. 544, 2-4-1991; Ord. No. 90(94), 9-6-1994)  
CHAPTER 5. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC 
 
Sec. 10-501. - Public intoxication. 
No person shall be in any public place in a state of intoxication. A state of intoxication means the condition in which a person is under the influence of drugs, intoxicating liquors or nonintoxicating beverage to such an extent as to deprive the person of his full mental or physical power or be unable to exercise care for his own safety or the safety of others. 
(Code 1999, § 10-501) 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Alcohol and Drug Abuse Services Act, 43A O.S. § 3-401 et seq.; intoxication in a public place or at a public gathering, 37 O.S. § 8.  
Sec. 10-502. - Marijuana prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or other public place while under the influence of marijuana; 
(2)  Possess marijuana in any place within the city; unless that person is in possession of an appropriate license issued by the Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority of the State of Oklahoma. No person shall possess a quantity of medical marijuana in excess of the amounts proscribed by state law as established for each category of license; possession of up to one and one half ounces of marijuana by a person who can state a medical condition, but not be in possession of a state issued medical marijuana license shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $400.00 or maximum allowed by state law. 
(3)  Use marijuana in any place within the city except as legally prescribed by a physician licensed to practice in the state; or to use smokable, vaporized, vapable and e-cigarettes medical marijuana and medical marijuana products smoked by a patient license holder at locations that would violate 63 O.S. § 1-1521 et seq., commonly referred to as the "Smoking in Public Places and Indoor Workplace Act" and part 8, chapter 7 sections 8-701 through 8-704 of this Code; or 
(4)  Be about a place where marijuana is sold or furnished illegally. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "marijuana" means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fibre produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except resin extracted therefrom), fibre, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
(Prior Code, § 16-63, in part; Code 1999, § 10-502; Ord. No. 895(18) , 12-3-2018) 
State Law reference— Controlled dangerous substances, 63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.  
Sec. 10-503. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Oklahoma Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act (63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.), hereinafter referred to as "the Act," and adopted by reference herein. The term "drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances; 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana; 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; and 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Roach clips; meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chillums; 
l.  Bongs; or 
m.  Ice pipes or chiller. 
(b)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance; 
(3)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the Act; 
(4)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
(5)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object: 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intended to use the object to facilitate a violation of the Act; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Act shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia; 
(7)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
(8)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
(9)  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(11)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(12)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(13)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and 
(14)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Act. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Act. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(f)  The term drug paraphernalia shall not include equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body medical marijuana where the possession of such items is authorized by an appropriate license issued by the State of Oklahoma, Medical Marijuana Authority. 
(Code 1999, § 10-503; Ord. No. 894(18) , 12-3-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 63 O.S. §§ 2-101.1, 2-405.  
Sec. 10-504. - Sniffing glue, paint and other substances. 
No person shall sniff or inhale paint, glue, gasoline or other volatile substances for purposes of intoxication. 
(Code 1999, § 10-504) 
State Law reference— Glue sniffing, 63 O.S. § 465.20.  
Sec. 10-505. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Minor means any person under the age of 18. 
Parent means any person having legal custody of a minor as a: 
(1)  Natural or adoptive parent; 
(2)  Legal guardian; 
(3)  Person who stands in loco parentis; or 
(4)  Person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court. 
Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of the above. 
Remain means to stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home. 
Street means a way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal right-of-way, including, but not limited to, the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. 
Time of night referred to here is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, generally observed at that hour by the public. 
Year of age continues from one birthday, such as the 17th to (but not including the day of) the next, such as the 18th birthday, making it clear that 17 or less years of age is herein treated as equivalent to the phrase "under 18 years of age." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person 17 or less years of age (under 18) to be or remain in or upon the streets or public places within the city at night during the period ending 5:00 a.m. and beginning: 
(1)  At 11:00 p.m. for minors on Sunday through Thursday; and 
(2)  At 1:00 a.m. on Saturday morning and Sunday morning for minors. 
(c)  In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a city street or in a public place during the nocturnal hours for which this section is intended to provide the maximum limits of regulation does not constitute a violation of the curfew regulations: 
(1)  When accompanied by a parent of such minor; 
(2)  When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take the parent's place accompanying the minor for a designated period of time, date and purpose within a specified area. The authorized adult shall possess a written communication signed by the minor and countersigned by the parent/legal guardian of such minor which includes their home address and telephone number. The authorized adult shall have this communication from the minor's parent/guardian in his possession; 
(3)  When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona fides of such exercise by possessing a written communication, signed by such minor and countersigned by a parent or legal guardian of such minor with their home address and telephone number, specifying times and dates when, and where, and in what manner the minor will be on the streets and other public places at night (during hours when the curfew regulations are otherwise applicable to the minor) in the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such communication; 
(4)  The minor is on an errand, specific business or activity of an emergency nature directed or permitted by his parent; 
(5)  If the minor has in the minor's possession a written communication signed by the minor and countersigned by a parent or legal guardian of such minor evidencing their home address and telephone number, and establishing such reason relating to a direct route for a designated time for a described purpose including points of origin and destination. Each communication will also note the date and time limits the reason will encompass; 
(6)  When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides, or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor not communicating an objection to the police officer; 
(7)  When returning home, by a direct route, from (and within 45 minutes of the termination of) a school activity, or an activity of a religious or the voluntary association, provided the minor has a written communication in the minor's possession, countersigned by the parent or legal guardian indicating the home address and telephone number, the purpose for the event, and when, where and in what manner the minor will be on the streets at night; 
(8)  Upon being petitioned, the city council may authorize by regulation a relaxation of the curfew in other matters of reasonable necessity and is determined to be consistent with the public interest and the purposes of these curfew regulations. Normally, such regulation by the city council permitting use of the streets or public places should be issued sufficiently in advance to permit appropriate notification of agencies, such as the schools, and the media when appropriate. The regulation shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the streets or public places permitted, and the period of time involved, not to extend more than 45 minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity; 
(9)  When the minor is within the scope of his employment and carries a certified card or some other form indicating employment, briefly identifying the minor, the addresses and telephone numbers of his home and his place of employment and his hours of employment or carries a valid proof of employment; or 
(10)  Whenever the minor is engaged in interstate or intrastate vehicular travel with consent of his parent or legal guardian. This contemplates normal travel and clearly exempts bona fide interstate movement through the city, particularly on normal routes. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a parent, or other person, having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit, or by inefficient control to allow, such a minor to be or remain upon any city street or public place under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, the curfew regulations. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent, or legal guardian, should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's or person's legal custody. It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents or legal guardians up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor. 
(e)  A police officer of the city, upon finding or having attention called to any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of the curfew regulations, normally shall take the minor to the city police station, or other place designated by the chief of police, where a parent, or legal guardian, shall immediately be notified to come for such minor, whereupon they may be questioned about the necessary facts constituting a violation of these regulations. In the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a police officer on the street shall in the first instance use his best judgment in determining age. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the municipal court shall cause to be personally delivered or, by certified mail, sent to a parent, or legal guardian, written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew regulations, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties. 
(f)  If, after the warning notice pursuant to subsection (e) of this section of a first violation by a minor, a parent or legal guardian violates the section (in connection with a second violation by the minor), this shall be treated as an offense by the parent or legal guardian. The penalty, upon a plea of guilty, nolo contendere, or finding of guilt, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108, or a term of community service. 
(Code 1999, § 10-505; Ord. No. 85(94), 6-6-1994)  
Sec. 10-506. - False representation as blind, crippled or physically defective to obtain money, aid. 
No person shall falsely represent himself as blind, deaf, dumb, crippled or physically defective for the purpose of obtaining money or other things of value, or to secure aid or assistance on account of such false representation. 
(Code 1999, § 10-506)  
Sec. 10-507. - Prowling on premises. 
No person shall be upon the property or premises of another with the intent to peer or peep into the window or door of the dwelling. 
(Code 1999, § 10-507) 
State Law reference— Peeping toms generally, 21 O.S. § 1171.  
Sec. 10-508. - Misrepresenting age by false documents. 
No person shall, for the purpose of violating any statutes of the state or any ordinances of the city, willfully and knowingly misrepresent his age by presenting a false document purporting to state his true age or by presenting a document not his own. 
(Code 1999, § 10-508) 
State Law reference— Misrepresentation of age by false documents, 21 O.S. § 1518 et seq.  
Sec. 10-509. - Obscene, threatening or harassing telecommunication or other electronic communications. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person who, by means of a telecommunication or other electronic communication device, willfully: 
(1)  Makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent; 
(2)  Makes a telecommunication or other electronic communication with intent to terrify, intimidate or harass, or threaten to inflict injury or physical harm to any person or property of that person; 
(3)  Makes a telecommunication or other electronic communication, whether or not conversation ensues, with intent to put the party called in fear of physical harm or death; 
(4)  Makes a telecommunication or other electronic communication, whether or not conversation ensues, without disclosing the identity of the person making the call or communication and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass any person at the called number; 
(5)  Knowingly permits any telecommunication or other electronic communication under the control of the person to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section; and 
(6)  In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, makes repeated calls or electronic communications or simultaneous calls or electronic communications solely to harass any person at the called numbers. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "telecommunication" and "electronic communication" mean any type of telephonic, electronic or radio communications, or transmission of signs, signals, data, writings, images and sounds or intelligence of any nature by telephone, including cellular telephones, wire, cable, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectronic or photo-optical system or the creation, display, management, storage, processing, transmission or distribution of images, text, voice, video or data by wire, cable or wireless means, including the Internet. The term "telecommunication" includes: 
(1)  A communication initiated by electronic mail, instant message, network call, or facsimile machine; and 
(2)  A communication made to a pager. 
(c)  Use of a telephone or other electronic communications facility under this section shall include all use made of such a facility between the points of origin and reception. Any offense under this section is a continuing offense and shall be deemed to have been committed at either the place of origin or the place of reception. 
(d)  Any person who is convicted of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be punished pursuant to section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 10-509; Ord. No. 612(08), 1-22-2008) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1172.  
Sec. 10-510. - Disorderly house. 
(a)  A disorderly house means any structure or vehicle by which the peace, comfort, health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of the people therein committing or resorting to any of the following acts: 
(1)  The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession or use of which is declared unlawful by state statute; 
(2)  The violation of any of the ordinances of the city or statutes of the state regulating the sale, distribution, possession or use of alcoholic and nonintoxicating beverages as defined by law; 
(3)  The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state statute or city ordinance, including, but not limited to, soliciting for purposes of prostitution; or 
(4)  The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting gambling. 
(b)  No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist in keeping and maintaining a disorderly house. 
(c)  No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership or corporation having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease or otherwise permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house; and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly house, no persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to grant permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house. 
(d)  No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into, or remain in a disorderly house. In any prosecution for violation of this section, the city shall have the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not by circumstantial evidence. This section shall not apply to physicians or officers in the discharge of their professional or official duties. 
(Code 1999, § 10-510) 
State Law reference— Municipal power to regulate disorderly houses and indecencies, 11 O.S. § 22-109.  
Sec. 10-511. - Nudity, improper dress and indecent exposure. 
It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent or lewd dress; or 
(3)  Make an indecent public exposure of his person. 
(Prior Code, § 16-37; Code 1999, § 10-511) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1021.  
Sec. 10-512. - Gambling and gambling devices. 
(a)  Any person who plays or carries on, or opens or causes to be opened, or who conducts, either as owner or employee, roulette, craps, or any banking or percentage game, played with dice, cards or any other device, for money, checks, credit or any representative of value, or any other gambling game, is guilty of an offense. 
(b)  Any person who bets on or plays at any of the prohibited games mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, or otherwise gambles, is guilty of an offense. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to exhibit or expose to view in any building, or in any part of or room in any building, any table, cards, dice, roulette wheel or other article or apparatus designed for or used for gambling purposes. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to keep, own, operate, use, conduct or cause to be kept, operated, used or conducted, either as owner, manager, dealer, clerk or employee, and whether for hire or not, any punch board, machine, cards, game, parlay card or any other device or paraphernalia, wherein or whereby any money or property or any representative of either, or other valuable thing, may be played, bet, staked, wagered or hazarded, won, lost or obtained upon any change, combination of numbers, emblems or any uncertain or contingent event or condition, or football or baseball contest. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to play any prohibited game described in this section. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person to bar or barricade any building, or any part of or room in any building, in order to render the same difficult of access or ingress to the police officers of the city, in which building, or any part of or room in any such building, any table, cards, dice, roulette wheel or other article or apparatus designed for or being used for gambling purposes are exhibited or exposed to view. 
(g)  The apparatus and paraphernalia used in the conduct of any of the gambling games prohibited by this section are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and subject to seizure and suppression by any officer, and shall be abated, forfeited and destroyed upon the order and decree of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(h)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly be about in the immediate vicinity where a person is gambling, whether by playing games, operating a slot machine or other device, or otherwise. 
(i)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the sponsoring and operation of bingo games by nonprofit religious, fraternal, charitable or educational organizations, provided the organizations are properly licensed and operated in accordance with law. 
(Prior Code, §§ 16-31, 16-32; Code 1999, § 10-512) 
State Law reference— Gambling generally, 21 O.S. § 941 et seq.; search and seizure of equipment used for gambling, 22 O.S. § 1261 et seq.  
Sec. 10-513. - Prostitution prohibited. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "prostitution" means and includes the getting or receiving of the body for sexual intercourse for hire and includes the giving or receiving of the body for indiscriminate sexual intercourse without hire. 
(b)  It is unlawful: 
(1)  To engage in prostitution, lewdness or assignation; 
(2)  To solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit an act of lewdness, assignation or prostitution; or 
(3)  To aid, abet or participate in the doing of any of the acts herein prohibited. 
(c)  No person shall in any way or manner whatever, keep, harbor or house any prostitute. 
(d)  No person shall entice or attempt to entice any female into a house of prostitution, or have illicit sexual intercourse with any female under 18 years of age. 
(e)  No person shall keep or maintain a house of prostitution or house of assignation. 
(f)  No person shall lease, let or furnish any building, room, tent or structure of any kind, or any conveyance used or to be used as a place of prostitution or assignation within the city, or knowingly permit the same to be so used. 
(g)  No person shall knowingly accept, receive, levy or appropriate any money or other thing of value without consideration from a prostitute or from the proceeds of any women engaged in prostitution. 
(h)  No person shall offer, or offer to secure another for the purpose of prostitution, or for any other lewd or indecent act. 
(i)  No person shall direct, take or transport, or offer or agree to take or transport or aid or assist in transporting, any person to any house, place, building or other structure, vehicle, trailer or other conveyance, or to any other person with knowledge or having reasonable cause to believe that the purpose of such directing, taking or transporting is prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
(Prior Code, § 16-36; Code 1999, § 10-513) 
State Law reference— Definition of prostitution, 21 O.S. § 1030; soliciting, 21 O.S. § 1029; pimping, 21 O.S. § 1081.  
Sec. 10-514. - Offenses near schools. 
No person shall engage in any of the conduct or acts hereinafter set forth around, in or near any school or school grounds or streets and alleys adjacent to any school: 
(1)  Any conduct that would disturb the orderly conduct of the school; 
(2)  Annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school; 
(3)  Lewd or wanton conduct in, near or around any of the schools or school grounds or streets and alleys adjacent to the schools; 
(4)  Moving or parking any vehicle in the vicinity of any school for the purpose of annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school; or 
(5)  Any other act or conduct calculated to or likely to annoy or molest any student or employee of such school. 
(Code 1999, § 10-514)  
Sec. 10-515. - Sleeping in places, property. 
It is unlawful for any person, without lawful reason, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and sunrise, to sleep on any street, in any other public place, or on any property of another without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge of such place. 
(Code 1999, § 10-515)  
Sec. 10-516. - Contributing to delinquency of a minor. 
(a)  The term "any person," as used in this section, means any human being, without regard to the legal or natural relationship to a minor, as well as legal or corporate entities. The term "minor" means any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  Any person who shall knowingly or willfully cause, aid, abet or encourage a minor to be, to remain, or to become a delinquent child, as defined by state law, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 16-16; Code 1999, § 10-516) 
State Law reference— Contributing to delinquency of minors, 21 O.S. § 856 et seq.  
Sec. 10-517. - Prevention of youth access to tobacco. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust, or association, however formed. 
Proof of age means a driver's license, license for identification only, or other generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as 18 years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness of the individual and appears on its face to be valid. 
Sample means a tobacco product or vapor product distributed to members of the public at no cost for the purpose of promoting the product. 
Tobacco product means any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption. 
Transaction scan means the process by which a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the validity of a driver's license or other government-issued photo identification. 
Transaction scan device means any commercial device or combination of devices used at a point of sale or entry that is capable of deciphering in an electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or bar code of a driver's license or other government-issued photo identification. 
Vapor products means noncombustible products, that may or may not contain nicotine, that employ a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce a vapor in a solution or other form. The term "vapor products" shall include any vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any vapor cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo or electronic device. The term "vapor products" do not include any products regulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration under chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
(b)  Furnishing or sale of tobacco products to minors. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to sell, give, or furnish in any manner any tobacco product or vapor product to another person who is under 18 years of age or to purchase in any manner a tobacco product or vapor product on behalf of any such person. It shall not be unlawful for an employee under 18 years of age to handle tobacco products or vapor product when required in the performance of the employee's duties. 
(2)  Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products or vapor products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser may be under 18 years of age. If an individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products or vapor products has demanded and was shown proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient who is not under 18 years of age, the failure to subsequently require proof of age shall not constitute a violation of this subsection. 
(3)  If the sale of a tobacco product or vapor product to a minor is made by an employee of the owner of a store at which tobacco products are sold at retail, the employee shall be guilty of the violation and shall be subject to the fine. If employees of the owner of the store at which tobacco products or vapor products are sold at retail are found to be in violation of this section, the owner of the store, if the owner knew of the employee's previous violations, shall also be found to be in violation and shall be subject to an identical fine. An owner of a store licensed to sell tobacco products or vapor products shall not be deemed in violation of the provisions of subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section for any acts constituting a violation by an employee of the store owner, if the violation occurred prior to actual employment of the person by the store owner, or the violation occurred at a location other than the owner's store. 
(4)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in the amount of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(5)  Record to be sent to the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement commission. Upon conviction for violating the provisions of subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section, a report of the conviction of the person shall be forwarded by the municipal court clerk of the city to the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement ("ABLE") commission for possible administrative action. 
(6)  Defenses. Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon proof of age shall be a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section. A person cited for violation of this section shall be deemed to have reasonably relied upon proof of age, and such person shall not be found guilty of such violation, if such person proves that: 
a.  The individual who purchased or received the tobacco product presented a driver's license or other government-issued photo identification purporting to establish that such individual was 18 years of age or older; and 
b.  The person cited for the violation confirmed the validity of the driver's license or other government-issued photo identification presented by such individual by performing a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device; 
provided that this defense shall not relieve from liability any person cited for a violation of this section if such person failed to exercise reasonable diligence to determine whether the physical description and picture appearing on the driver's license or other government-issued photo identification was that of the individual who presented it. The availability of the defense described in this subsection (6) does not affect the availability of any other defense under any other provision of law. 
(7)  Notice to be sent to the department of public safety. Upon failure of the employee to pay the fine within 90 days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the clerk of the municipal court shall notify the department of public safety and the department shall suspend or not issue a driver's license to the employee until proof of payment has been furnished to the department of public safety. Upon failure of a store owner to pay the fine within 90 days of the assessment of such fine, the clerk of the municipal court shall notify the state tax commission and the state tax commission shall suspend the store's license to sell tobacco products until proof of payment has been furnished to the state tax commission. 
(8)  For purposes of determining the liability of a person controlling franchises or business operations in multiple locations for any violation of subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section, each individual franchise or business location shall be deemed a separate entity. 
(c)  Receipt of tobacco products or vapor products by minors. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person who is under 18 years of age to purchase, receive, or have in their possession a tobacco product or vapor product, or to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age which is false or fraudulent for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco product. It shall not be unlawful for an employee under age 18 years of age to handle tobacco products when required in the performance of the employee's duties. 
(2)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of: 
a.  Not more than $100.00, excluding costs, fees, and assessments, for a first offense; and 
b.  Not more than $200.00, excluding costs, fees, and assessments, for a second or subsequent offense within a one year period following the first offense. 
Upon failure of the individual to pay any fine within 90 days of the day of assessment of such fine, the clerk of the municipal court shall notify the department of public safety and the department shall suspend or not issue a driver's license to the individual until proof of payment has been furnished to the department of public safety. 
(3)  The city shall establish rules to provide for notification to a parent or guardian of any minor cited for a violation of this section. 
(d)  Distribution of tobacco product or vapor product samples. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to distribute tobacco product samples or vapor product samples to any person under 18 years of age. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (d)(1) of this section, no person shall distribute tobacco product samples or vapor product samples in or on any public street, sidewalk, or park that is within 300 feet of any playground, school, or other facility when the facility is being used primarily by persons under 18 years of age. 
(3)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of subsection (d)(1) or (2) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in the amount of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(4)  Notice to be sent to the department of public safety. Upon failure of an individual to pay any fine within 90 days of the assessment of such fine, the clerk of the municipal court shall notify the department of public safety, and the department shall suspend or not issue a driver's license to the individual until proof of payment has been furnished to the department of public safety. 
(e)  Sale of tobacco products except in original sealed package. 
(1)  It is unlawful and an offense for any person to sell cigarettes except in the original, sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer. 
(2)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (e)(1) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00, excluding costs, fees and assessments, for each offense. 
(f)  Signs in retail establishments required. 
(1)  Every person who sells or displays tobacco products at retail shall post conspicuously and keep so posted at the place of business a sign, as specified by the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement (ABLE) commission, stating the following: 
"IT'S THE LAW, WE DO NOT SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR VAPOR PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE." 
The sign shall also provide the toll-free number operated by the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement (ABLE) commission for the purpose of reporting violations of the Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco Act. 
(2)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (f)(1) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50.00, excluding costs, fees and assessments, for each day a violation occurs. Each day a violation is continuing shall constitute a separate offense. The notice required by subsection (f)(1) of this section shall be the only notice required to be posted or maintained in any store that sells tobacco products at retail. 
(g)  Notice to retail employees. 
(1)  Every person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products at retail shall notify each individual employed by that person as a retail sales clerk that state law: 
a.  Prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco products or vapor products to any person under 18 years of age and the purchase or receipt of tobacco products by any person under 18 years of age; and 
b.  Requires that proof of age be demanded from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser or recipient may be under 18 years of age. 
(2)  This notice shall be provided before the individual commences work as a retail sales clerk. The individual shall signify that he has received the notice required by this section by signing a form stating as follows: 
"I understand that state law prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco products or vapor products to persons under 18 years of age and out-of-package sales, and requires proof of age of purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser or recipient may be under 18 years of age. I promise, as a condition of my employment, to obey the law. I understand that violations by me may be punishable by fines, suspension, or non-issuance of my driver's license. In addition, I understand that violations by me may subject the store owner to fines or license suspension." 
(h)  Vending machine sales restricted. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell tobacco products or vapor products through a vending machine unless the vending machine is located: 
a.  In areas of factories, businesses, offices, or other places that are not open to the public; or 
b.  In places that are open to the public, but to which persons under 18 years of age are not admitted. 
(2)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (h)(1) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00, excluding costs, fees and assessments, for each offense. 
(i)  Display or sale of tobacco products. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person or retail store to display or offer for sale tobacco products or vapor products in any manner that allows public access to the tobacco product without assistance from the person displaying the tobacco product or vapor product or an employee or the owner of the store. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to retail stores which do not admit into the store persons under 18 years of age. 
(2)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (i)(1) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00, excluding costs, fees and assessments, for each offense. 
(j)  Prohibiting possession or sale of tobacco use device or material. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person who is under 18 years of age to possess any material or device used in the smoking, chewing, or other method of consumption of tobacco, including cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials or all types, and other items designed primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish in any manner to another person who is under 18 years of age any material or device used in the smoking, chewing, or other method of consumption of tobacco or vapor products, including cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials or all types, and other items designed primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products. 
(3)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (j)(1) or (2) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00, excluding costs, fees and assessments, for each offense. 
(k)  Restrictions on manner of enforcement. 
(1)  Any conviction for a violation of subsections (b) through (i) of this section and compliance checks conducted by the city pursuant to subsection (k)(b) of this section shall be reported in writing to the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement (ABLE) commission within 30 days of the conviction or compliance check. Such reports shall be compiled in the manner prescribed by the ABLE commission. 
(2)  Persons under 18 years of age may be enlisted by the city to assist in enforcement of subsections (b) through (i) of this section, provided such persons may be used to test compliance only if written parental consent has been provided and the testing is conducted under the direct supervision of the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement (ABLE) commission or conducted by another law enforcement agency if such agency has given written notice to the ABLE commission in the manner prescribed by the ABLE commission. The city may conduct, pursuant to rules of the ABLE commission, compliance checks without prior notification to the ABLE commission and shall be exempt from the written notice requirement of this subsection. This subsection shall not apply to the use of persons under 18 years of age to test compliance if the compliance test is being conducted by or on behalf of a retailer of cigarettes, as defined in 68 O.S. § 301, at any location the retailer of cigarettes is authorized to sell cigarettes. 
(Prior Code, § 16-17; Code 1999, § 10-517; Ord. No. 336(01), 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 582(07), 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 842(16), § 10-517, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 600.1 et seq.  
Sec. 10-518. - Display of material harmful to minors. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A reasonable bona fide attempt means an attempt to ascertain the true age of the minor by requiring production of a driver's license, marriage license, birth certificate or other governmental or educational identification card or paper and not relying solely on the oral allegations or apparent age of the minor. 
Harmful to minors means that quality of any description, exhibition, presentation or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse when the material or performance, taken as a whole, has the following characteristics: 
(1)  The average person 18 years of age or older applying contemporary community standards would find that the material or performance has a predominant tendency to appeal to a prurient interest in sex to minors; 
(2)  The average person 18 years of age or older applying contemporary community standards would find that the material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse in a manner that is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community with respect to what is suitable for minors; and 
(3)  The material or performance lacks serious literary, scientific, artistic, or political value for minors. 
Knowingly means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both: 
(1)  The character and content of any material or performance which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant; and 
(2)  The age of the minor. However, a honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability pursuant to this subsection if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor. 
Material means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, record, recording tape, or video tape, whether in its original form or any digital format. 
Minor means any unmarried person under the age of 18 years. 
Nudity means the: 
(1)  Showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering; 
(2)  Showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion of the female breast below the top of the nipple; or 
(3)  Depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Performance means any motion picture, film, video tape, played record, phonograph or tape, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance or other exhibition performed or presented to or before an audience of one or more, with or without consideration. 
Person means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or other legal entity of any kind. 
Sexual conduct means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is a female, breast. 
Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
Sadomasochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed or naked. 
(b)  No person having custody, control or supervision of any commercial establishment shall knowingly: 
(1)  Display material which is harmful to minors in such a way that minors, as a part of the invited general public, will be exposed to view such material; provided, however, a person shall be deemed not to have displayed material harmful to minors if the material is kept behind devices commonly known as "binder racks" so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view; 
(2)  Sell, furnish, present, distribute, allow to view, or otherwise disseminate to a minor, with or without consideration, any material which is harmful to minors; or 
(3)  Present to a minor or participate in presenting to a minor, with or without consideration, any performance which is harmful to a minor. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating any provision of subsection (b) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as set forth in section 1-108. Each day that a violation of subsection (b) of this section occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate violation. Every act or transaction prohibited by subsection (b) of this section shall constitute a separate offense as to each item, issue or title involved and shall be punishable as such. For the purpose of this section, multiple copies of the same identical title, monthly issue, volume and number issue or other such identical material shall constitute a single offense. 
(Code 1999, § 10-518; Ord. No. 36(92), 10-19-1992; Ord. No. 842(16), § 10-518, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Material harmful to minors, 21 O.S. § 1040.76 et seq.  
Sec. 10-519. - Spray paint restrictions for minors. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Minor means any individual under the age of 18 years of age. 
Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation, selling or offering for sale any item prohibited by this section. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  No person shall sell to any minor any aerosol container of paint (spray paint) capable of defacing property unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or a guardian; 
(2)  Any person selling or offering for sale any aerosol container of paint shall require bona fide evidence of majority and identity. Bona fide evidence of majority and identity shall be established only by a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal Selective Service Act or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces; 
(3)  Proof that the defendant, or his employee or agent, demanded, was shown and acted in reliance upon such bona fide evidence in any sale transaction forbidden hereby shall be a defense to any criminal prosecution therefor. 
(c)  Any person who owns, manages or operates a place of business wherein aerosol containers of paint capable of defacing property are sold shall conspicuously post at the place of display of the containers for sale and at the place of sale (cash register) a sign in letters at least one-half inch in height, "Spray Paint Shall Not Be Sold To Minors." 
(d)  Any person who has reached the age of majority who shall give, trade, or otherwise provide to any minor any aerosol container of paint used in the actual application of graffiti or defacement of property shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed. 
(e)  Any person convicted for an offense in violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 10-519; Ord. No. 72(94), 1-3-1994)  
CHAPTER 6. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 10-601. - Escaping custody. 
No person lawfully in custody or confined in the city jail, before or after conviction for any violation of the ordinances of the city, or held in custody going to the city jail, or working upon the streets or other public grounds of the city or in custody of any officer of the city, shall break or attempt to break such city jail or custody, and escape or attempt to escape therefrom. 
(Prior Code, § 16-125; Code 1999, § 10-601; Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990) 
State Law reference— Escapes, 21 O.S. § 444.  
Sec. 10-602. - Conveying instruments to assist escape. 
No person shall convey into the city jail any disguised instrument or any thing proper or useful to facilitate the escape of any prisoner lawfully committed to or detained in the city jail for any violation of the city ordinances, for any criminal offense, or lawfully detained or imprisoned therein, whether such escape is effected or attempted or not. 
(Code 1999, § 10-602) 
State Law reference— Conveying instruments to assist escape, 21 O.S. § 438.  
Sec. 10-603. - Assisting prisoner to escape. 
No person shall in any way aid, remove or assist any person to resist or escape from custody of any police officer or from any lawful confinement in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 16-124; Code 1999, § 10-603; Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990) 
State Law reference— Assisting prisoner to escape, 21 O.S. §§ 437, 441.  
Sec. 10-604. - Delivery of articles to person in confinement. 
No person shall deliver any article or thing to any person under arrest without the consent of the officer having charge and custody of the prisoner. 
(Code 1999, § 10-604; Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990)  
Sec. 10-605. - Assaulting city officer. 
No person shall knowingly assault, batter, or assault and batter any city officer or official while in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1999, § 10-605; Ord. No. 505, 2-5-1990) 
State Law reference— Assaulting law officer, 21 O.S. §§ 649, 650.  
Sec. 10-606. - Resisting a police officer. 
(a)  It is unlawful to resist, oppose or assault, prevent, fail to cooperate with or in any way interfere with a police officer or any person duly authorized to act as such, while the officer or person is discharging or attempting to discharge his official duties within the limits of the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to assist such other person to flee, escape or evade an officer seeking to make an arrest or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of or in front of an approaching officer. 
(c)  Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or obstruction of, an individual acting in his official capacity, and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his official capacity. 
(d)  The term "obstruction of" shall, in addition to their common meaning, include: 
(1)  Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest; 
(2)  Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he is under arrest; or 
(3)  Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity known to the arresting officer. 
(Prior Code, § 16-122; Code 1999, § 10-606; Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990)  
Sec. 10-607. - Obedience to orders of police and firefighter. 
No person shall fail to heed a reasonable order of a police officer or firefighter while such officer is in the discharge of an official duty in maintaining the public safety or welfare. 
(Code 1999, § 10-608)  
Sec. 10-608. - Eluding police officer by motor vehicle. 
No operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual or audible signal, a red light or a siren from a police officer driving a motor vehicle, showing the same to be an official police, sheriff or highway patrol car directing the operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, shall willfully increase his speed or extinguish his lights to elude or attempt to elude such police officer, or attempt in any other manner to elude the police officer. 
(Code 1999, § 10-609) 
State Law reference— Eluding police officer, 21 O.S. § 540A.  
Sec. 10-609. - Use of siren or whistle. 
(a)  No person shall use any police whistle or any other instrument used by a police officer to give signals to each other, or imitate any signal given by one police officer to another or any special signal used by police officers, for the purpose of improperly or causelessly attracting the attention of the police. 
(b)  No person, except members of police department, fire department or ambulance services, shall ring, use or otherwise sound any siren or any other device for making similar noise. 
(Code 1999, § 10-610)  
Sec. 10-610. - Impersonating a police officer or any city officer. 
(a)  No person, other than police officers of the city, shall wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or any other insignia of office like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the police officers of the city. 
(b)  No person shall do or attempt any act to impersonate a police officer. 
(c)  It is unlawful to falsely impersonate any officer or employee of the city, or falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the city, by any kind of representation, pretense, insignia, sound, clothing or conduct, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an officer or employee of the city without being authorized to do so. 
(Prior Code, § 16-126; Code 1999, § 10-611; Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990) 
State Law reference— Impersonating public officers, 21 O.S. §§ 263, 264, 1533.  
Sec. 10-611. - False statements, reports or complaints. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly make or file or cause to be made or filed a false or misleading report or misrepresentation, allegation or complaint with the police department or any officer or employee of the city, or on any official application or to commit perjury before any tribunal of the city. 
(b)  No person shall willfully and without probable cause make a false report to any person of any crime, violation of the city's ordinances, or circumstances indicating the possibility of crime or violation having been committed, including, but not limited to, the unlawful taking of personal property, which report causes or encourages the exercise of police or other official action or investigation. 
(Code 1999, § 10-612)  
Sec. 10-612. - False alarms. 
It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in any manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the fire department, police department or any other emergency personnel, or summon any officer or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, accident or other emergency or knowingly to cause the fire department or police department or its officers or employees to make a useless or unnecessary run to any part of the city or outside the city. 
(Prior Code, § 9-1; Code 1999, § 10-613; Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990) 
State Law reference— False fire alarms, 21 O.S. § 1851.  
Sec. 10-613. - Removal of barricades. 
It is unlawful for any person, except by proper authority, to remove any barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area. 
(Code 1999, § 10-614; Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990)  
Sec. 10-614. - Resisting public officials. 
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to: 
(1)  Resist, oppose or obstruct the chief of police, any other police officer, the municipal judge, or any other officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his official duties; 
(2)  Obstruct, threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any officer or employee from the discharge of his official duties; or 
(3)  Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, or use abusive or indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties. 
(Code 1999, § 10-615; Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990, in part)  
Sec. 10-615. - Duties of the public at fires, emergencies. 
(a)  All persons at fires or other emergencies or accidents shall conduct themselves in an orderly and lawful manner and to assist in maintaining law and order. 
(b)  No person at or near any fire or emergency shall conduct himself in a disorderly manner or neglect or refuse to promptly obey any order of the fire chief or his assistants relative to such fire; and no person shall resist, obstruct, hinder or abuse any officer of the fire department or any firefighter in the proper discharge of his duty. 
(c)  Every police officer present at a fire shall keep back all persons who are in the way or impeding the work of the fire department, and so far as possible protect all property from loss or injury, and cooperate with and assist the fire department in every way possible while at the fire. The fire chief or an assistant fire chief or any police officer shall have the power to designate persons to guard any goods. 
(d)  No person shall follow or block the way of any emergency vehicle engaged in emergency run, or knowingly interfere with officers at the location of any fire or emergency. 
(Code 1999, § 10-616; Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990, in part) 
State Law reference— Interfering with firefighters, 21 O.S. § 1217.  
Sec. 10-616. - Tampering with signs, equipment. 
It is unlawful for any person to tamper with any signs, signal equipment or other device placed, operated and maintained by the city in connection with the administration of its code provisions, ordinances, regulations, services, functions or performance of duties thereto. 
(Code 1999, § 10-617; Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990)  
Sec. 10-617. - Interfering with police dog in performing functions or duties. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to interfere with, tease, meddle with, throw objects at or toward, torture, torment, injure, beat, strike, kick, mutilate, disable or kill any dog used by the police department of the city, or any member thereof, in the performance of the functions or duties of the department. 
(Prior Code, § 16-131; Code 1999, § 10-618) 
State Law reference— Crimes against police dogs, 21 O.S. § 649.2.  
Sec. 10-618. - Destroying, tampering with evidence. 
It is unlawful to destroy, alter, conceal or disguise physical evidence, plant false evidence or furnish false information to an officer which impedes that or another officer in the performance of his duties, or which is intended to prevent the apprehension or to obstruct the prosecution or defense of any person. 
(Code 1999, § 10-619; Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990)  
CHAPTER 7. - GANG-RELATED ACTIVITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Gang-related offenses, 21 O.S. § 856.3. 
 
Sec. 10-701. - Prohibition of gang-related criminal activity. 
The city declares that the city is in the early stages of a crisis, which has been caused by violent street gangs whose members threaten, terrorize and commit a multitude of crimes against the peaceful citizens of this community. These criminal activities, both individually and collectively, present a clear and present danger to public order and safety and are not constitutionally protected activities. It is the intent of the city council to prohibit, reduce, and eradicate criminal activity by street gangs by focusing upon patterns of criminal activity and upon the organized nature of street gangs, which together are the chief source of terror created by street gangs. 
(Code 1999, § 10-701; Ord. No. 7(91), 12-16-1991)  
Sec. 10-702. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Criminal street gang means any ongoing organization, association, or group of three or more persons, whether formal or informal, which has as one of its primary activities the commission of one or more of the criminal acts enumerated in this section as part of the definition for the term "pattern of criminal street gang activity" or which has a common name or common identifying sign, color or symbol, whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity. 
" Pattern of criminal street gang activity " of two or more of the commission, attempted commission, or solicitation, provided at least one of the offenses occurred after the enactment of this chapter and at least one offense occurred following Code offenses by any members of a criminal gang, on separate occasions within a three-year period, for the purpose of furthering gang activity: 
Offense 	Relevant Code Provision 
Assault and battery 	10-201 
Reckless conduct 	10-204(B) 
Petit larceny 	10-301 
Possession of stolen property 	10-304 
Defacing building, damaging property 	10-310 
Damaging private property 	10-312 
Damaging or tampering with motor vehicle 	10-314 
Throwing or shooting at persons or property 	10-320 
Possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia 	10-502 and 10-503 
Disorderly house 	10-510 
Prostitution 	10-513 
Offenses near schools 	10-514 
 
Youthful and street gang member means a person who engages in a pattern of youth and street gang activity and meets two or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Admits to gang membership; 
(2)  Is a youth under the age of 21 years who is identified as a gang member by a parent or guardian; 
(3)  Is identified as a gang member by a documented reliable informant; 
(4)  Resides in or frequents a particular gang's area and adopts their style of dress, their use of hand signs, or their tattoos, and associates with known gang members; 
(5)  Is identified as a gang member by an informant of previously untested reliability and such identification is corroborated by independent information; 
(6)  Has been arrested more than once in the company of identified gang members for offenses which are consistent with usual gang activity; 
(7)  Is identified as a gang member by physical evidence, such as photographs or other documentation; and 
(8)  Has been stopped in the company of known gang members four or more times. 
(Code 1999, § 10-702; Ord. No. 7(91), 12-16-1991)  
Sec. 10-703. - Offense. 
Any criminal street gang member or youth street gang member convicted of the foregoing violations while in furtherance of a pattern of criminal gang activity shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 10-703; Ord. No. 7(91), 12-16-1991)  
Sec. 10-704. - Buildings or place used by gang members as nuisance. 
Every building or place used by members of a criminal street gang or youth street gang for the purpose of the commission of the offenses listed in section 10-702 or any offense involving dangerous or deadly weapons, burglary, rape or narcotic trafficking and every building or place wherein or upon which that criminal conduct by gang members takes place is a nuisance which shall be enjoined, abated, and prevented as provided in part 8, chapter 1, whether it is a public or private nuisance. Injunctions requested pursuant to this provision shall be limited to those necessary to protest the health and safety of the residents or the public or those necessary to prevent further criminal activity. No nonprofit or charitable organization which is conducting its affairs with ordinary care and skill, and no governmental entity, shall be abated pursuant to this section. Nothing in this chapter or in part 8, chapter 1 shall preclude any aggrieved person from seeking any other remedy provided by law. 
(Code 1999, § 10-704; Ord. No. 7(91), 12-16-1991)  
CHAPTER 8. - JUVENILE OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 10-801. - Jurisdiction of juvenile offenders. 
The city municipal court may assume jurisdiction of juvenile offenders, unless otherwise excepted from the jurisdiction of the municipal court, who have been charged with a violation of a municipal ordinance, and which relate to at least one of the following offenses: 
Assault 	10-202 
Battery 	10-203 
Curfew violation 	10-505 
Disorderly conduct 	10-403 
Petty larceny and larceny of lost property 	10-301 
Damaging private property 	10-312 
Disturbing the peace 	10-401 
Public intoxication 	10-501 
Possession of marijuana 	10-502 
Possession of drug paraphernalia 	10-503 
Transportation of low-point beer in a moving vehicle 	3-210 
Minors in possession of low-point beer, prohibited while in public 	3-211 
Minors in possession of intoxicating beverages in public prohibited 	3-109 
Possession of tobacco products 	10-517 
Graffiti 	8-1001 to 8-1008 
Failure to appear 	6-115 
Attempt to commit an offense 	10-101 
Trespassing prohibited 	10-317 
Noise 	10-411 to 10-416 
Offenses near schools 	10-514 
Assaulting city officer 	10-605 
Resisting a police officer 	10-606 
Fireworks prohibited 	10-328 
Littering prohibited 	10-322 
Skateboarding prohibited 	10-807 
Attempting to elude a police officer 	10-608 
Mandatory school attendance 	10-806 
Harmful deception 	10-309 
Harassing phone calls 	10-509 
 
(Code 1999, § 10-800; Ord. No. 337(01), 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 381(02), 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 444(04), 2-1-2004)  
Sec. 10-802. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The municipal court for the city will decline jurisdiction of offenders, known to the court, who are presently under the supervision or treatment of the district court system and/or have charges pending there or elsewhere in the state. 
(b)  The municipal court of the city, to the best of its knowledge, will decline jurisdiction of offenders who have previously been certified as an adult for any purpose, pursuant to 10A O.S. § 2-5-205. 
(Code 1999, § 10-801; Ord. No. 337(01), 10-15-2001)  
Sec. 10-803. - Failure to comply with written promise to appear with juvenile. 
Any person who fails to voluntarily appear before the court with a juvenile defendant on the appointed date and time, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the citation was originally issued to the juvenile defendant, after having such juvenile defendant released to his care and control and pursuant to a signed promise to appear with the juvenile shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1999, § 10-802; Ord. No. 337(01), 10-15-2001)  
Sec. 10-804. - Parental responsibility for juvenile court fines. 
Any person who is a parent, legal guardian, or legal custodian of a juvenile defendant shall assure the municipal court that any fines assessed against the juvenile shall be promptly paid. If fines assessed against a juvenile in juvenile court remain unpaid after 90 days, the fines, along with administrative fees and court costs, shall be assessed against the parent, legal guardian, or legal custodian. Any person who fails to remit the assessed amount within 15 days from issuance of a summons shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1999, § 10-803; Ord. No. 337(01), 10-15-2001)  
Sec. 10-805. - General and specific penalties. 
(a)  Any juvenile convicted of violating the ordinances enumerated in section 10-800, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, shall be punished pursuant to section 1-108. 
(b)  Any juvenile convicted of violating section 10-517 shall be punished by a fine for a first offense, not exceeding $50.00, and for a second and subsequent offense by a fine not exceeding $100.00. 
(c)  The following specific offenses, unless otherwise provided in this Code, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(1)  Possession of marijuana or other controlled substance; possession of drug paraphernalia 
(2)  Graffiti. 
(3)  Battery of an officer. 
(4)  Eluding a police officer. 
(Code 1999, § 10-806; Ord. No. 377(02), 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 819(16), § 10-806, 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-806. - Truancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian, or other person having custody of a child who is over the age of five years and under the age of 18 years to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such child to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private or other school. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any child who is over the age of 12 and under the age of 18 years, and who has not finished four years of high school work, to neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private or other school, or receive an education by other means for the full term the schools of the district are in session, provided that this section shall not apply if any such child: 
(1)  Is prevented from attending school by reason of mental or physical ability, to be determined by the board of education of the district upon a certificate of the school physician or public health physician or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and practicing physician; 
(2)  Is excused from attendance at school, due to an emergency, by the principal teacher of the school in which the child is enrolled, at the request of the parent, guardian, custodian or other person having control of such child; 
(3)  Who has attained his 16th birthday is excused from attending school by the school administrator of the school district where the child attends school, and the parent, guardian or custodian of the child, provided that no such child shall be excused from attending school by such joint agreement between a school administrator and the parent, guardian or custodian of the child unless and until it has been determined that such action is for the best interest of the child and/or the community, and that such child shall thereafter be under the supervision of the parent, guardian or custodian until the child has reached the age of 18 years. 
(c)  Any parent, guardian, custodian, child or other person violating any of the provision of this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding that allowed by law. Each day the child remains out of school after the oral and documented or written warning has been given to the parent, guardian, custodian, child or other person or the child has been ordered to school by the juvenile court, may constitute a separate offense. At the trial of any person charged with violating the provisions of this section, the attendance records of the child, or ward, may be presented in court by any authorized employee of the school or the school resource officer. 
(Code 1999, § 10-807; Ord. No. 379(02)-B, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 437(03), 12-15-2003)  
Sec. 10-807. - Skateboarding prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person riding in or on, or by means of any skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, coaster, or similar device to go in or on the following prohibited areas: 
(1)  Any private property open to the public which is specifically hereinafter listed, provided the area is clearly and conspicuously posted with signs stating "Skating and Skateboarding Prohibited (Moore Code Section 10-807)." 
a.  On walls, steps, or railings of a shopping center, business, or nonprofit establishment. 
b.  Parking lots of a shopping center, business, or nonprofit establishment. 
c.  Driveways of a shopping center, business, or nonprofit establishment. 
d.  Sidewalks and pedestrian ways within a shopping center, business, or nonprofit establishment. 
(2)  Walls, steps, railings, driveways, or parking lots on public property (public schools), provided the area is clearly and conspicuously posted with signs stating "Skating and Skateboarding Prohibited (Moore Code Section 10-807)." 
(Code 1999, § 10-808; Ord. No. 380(02), 10-7-2002)  
Sec. 10-808. - Runaway prohibited. 
(a)  A runaway shall be defined as any unemancipated minor who has been reported to law enforcement as being voluntarily absent from the home without a compelling reason, without the consent of a custodial parent or other custodial adult and without the parent or other custodial adult's knowledge as to the child's whereabouts. 
(b)  Compelling reason means imminent danger from incest, a life-threatening situation, or equally traumatizing circumstance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and an offense to be a runaway. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the custodial parent or other custodial adult to notify the appropriate law enforcement agency of the runaway status. 
(e)  If the court deems it to be in the best interest of the child, a minor cited as a runaway shall be referred to social services for counseling. 
(Code 1999, § 10-809; Ord. No. 472(04), § 1, 8-16-2004)  
Part 11 - PARKS, RECREATION AND CEMETERY  
CHAPTER 1. - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Parks and recreation, 11 O.S. § 33-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 11-101. - Park board created. 
(a)  A park board consisting of seven members shall be appointed by the city council for three-year terms, with at least one member appointed from each ward. In the initial creation of the board, two members shall be appointed for one year; two members shall be appointed for two years; and three members shall be appointed for three years. The city manager or his designee shall be an ex officio member of the board, shall advise and consult with the board, but shall have no vote on matters coming before the board. 
(b)  Vacancies in the park board shall be filled as in the original instance by the city council for the unexpired term. If a member ceases to be a resident of the city, his term shall automatically terminate. 
(c)  The office of any member of the park board who shall not attend meetings of the board of three successive meetings after having been notified in writing thereof, without reason satisfactory to the city council, shall be declared by the city council to be vacant. 
(Prior Code, § 17-16; Code 1999, § 11-101; Ord. No. 52(93), 3-1993; Ord. No. 171(96), 10-7-1994)  
Sec. 11-102. - Organization and procedures. 
The park board shall elect from its membership a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary for terms of one year. Such elections shall be held at the time of the board's annual meeting each year, which shall be in November. The board shall adopt and modify from time to time as needed rules, bylaws and administrative procedures for the orderly transaction of its business. Such rules, bylaws or procedures shall be filed with the city clerk. The park board shall establish the time, place and frequency of its meetings for the following calendar year at the annual meeting and cause same to be filed in compliance with the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act. 
(Prior Code, § 17-16; Code 1999, § 11-102; Ord. No. 52(93), 3-1993; Ord. No. 171(96), 10-7-1994; Ord. No. 840(16), 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 11-103. - Power and duties. 
(a)  The park board shall act as an advisory board to the city council with reference to city parks and recreation facilities within the city. The board shall make recommendations with reference to the operation of the city parks and recreation facilities and recommendations as to rules and regulations concerning the use of the parks and recreation facilities by the public. The board shall also make recommendations to the city council with reference to the beautification and improvement of the parks and recreation facilities. 
(b)  The board shall make recommendations to the city council with regard to planning for future development of the parks, and the safety of the public in general in enjoying and using the parks and recreation facilities as it deems necessary. 
(c)  The park board shall make recommendations, as it deems appropriate, for the overall physical development and improvement of the parks and recreation facilities of the city. It may consult any and all civic organizations, clubs or associations desiring to contribute to or make improvements to the parks and recreation facilities of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 17-16; Code 1999, § 11-103; Ord. No. 52(93), 3-1993; Ord. No. 171(96), 10-7-1994; Ord. No. 840(16), 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 11-104. - Compensation. 
The park board shall serve without pay. The necessary expenses incurred by such board shall be paid from the city treasury as other legal expenses of city government. No expenses shall be incurred by the board without prior approval of the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 17-16; Code 1999, § 11-104; Ord. No. 52(93), 3-1993; Ord. No. 171(96), 10-7-1994; Ord. No. 840(16), 12-19-2016)  
ARTICLE B. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 11-111. - Motorized vehicles. 
No motorized vehicle shall be permitted in any park except: 
(1)  Vehicles operated by the city or under contract to the city; 
(2)  Vehicles entering, exiting or being parked or stored, where part is designed and maintained for entrance, exit, parking or storage of motorized vehicles. 
(Prior Code, § 17-1; Code 1999, § 11-112; Ord. No. 840(16), 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 11-112. - Closing hours for parks. 
(a)  All city parks shall be closed to the public at 12:01 a.m. and remained closed until 6:00 a.m. each day unless otherwise designated; provided, however, that for programs or events sponsored or approved by the city, or for which a city permit has been issued, the hours of peroration may be extended during any such program or event and for a period of 60 minutes following the conclusion of such program or event. 
(b)  Little River Park shall be closed to the public at 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. each day. The grounds of Central Park shall be closed to the public at 12:00 midnight until 5:00 a.m. each day. 
(c)  Signs stating park hours will be posted prominently in each park. 
(d)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-108. 
(Prior Code, § 17-2; Code 1999, § 11-113; Ord. No. 87(94), 7-18-1994; Ord. No. 840(16), 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 11-113. - Glass containers prohibited. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to take or carry glass bottles, jars or containers into any city park. With the exception of the Fourth of July celebration where wine tasting and sales are permitted by proper licensing. 
(Code 1999, § 11-114; Ord. No. 411, 8-4-1986; Ord. No. 840(16), 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 11-114. - Penalty. 
It is unlawful of many person to use any recreational facilities owned or operated by the city without having complied with the rules and regulations promulgated by the city in connection therewith. Any violation of rules and regulations, or failure to comply with such, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 17-3; Code 1999, § 11-115; Ord. No. 840(16), 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 11-115. - Prohibiting animals from city parks. 
(a)  Subject to 7 O.S. § 19.1: 
(1)  No animals shall be permitted within posted areas of any and all athletic fields owned by the city during times of competition. Times of competition shall include a reasonable time prior to and following completion of any competition. 
(2)  Animals shall not be permitted within the Buck Thomas Park during the time scheduled for the annual Fourth of July celebration, unless the animal is the main attraction of any booth or amusement ride, including, but not limited to, pony rides. 
(3)  In addition, animals shall not be permitted within Buck Thomas Park, or any other park, in any area and time as designated and posted by the parks and recreation department, with the exception of the any area of a park designated as a dog park. 
(b)  Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be punished as authorized by section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 11-116; Ord. No. 515(05), 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 840(16), 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 11-116. - Swimming prohibited in city park, property owned or maintained by city. 
(a)  No person shall be allowed to swim, bath, dive or wade in any of the following areas owned or maintained by the city: city park, pond, retention pond, creek, stream, brook or drainage ditch, except in city-operated municipal swimming pools or unless specifically authorized by special permit approved by the city manager. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a parent of a child (under 18 years of age) or the guardian of a ward to knowingly permit, or by inefficient control to allow, such child to violate subsection (a) of this section under circumstances not constituting an exception. 
(c)  The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent, or legal guardian, should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a child in that parent's or person's custody. 
(d)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 11-117; Ord. No. 588(07), 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 840(16), 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 2. - LIBRARY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal libraries, 11 O.S. § 31-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-201. - Library board created. 
There is hereby created a library board which shall be composed of five members, to be appointed by the council to serve without compensation for staggered terms of three years. The city manager shall be an ex-officio member of the board, shall advise and consult with the board, but shall have no vote on matters coming before the board. 
(Prior Code, § 13-16; Code 1999, § 11-201)  
Sec. 11-202. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the library board shall be those set out and contained in 11 O.S. §§ 31-101, 31-102, 31-104—31-108, and as may be further established from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 13-17; Code 1999, § 11-202)  
Sec. 11-203. - Rules and regulations. 
The library board shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary from among their members to serve for terms of one year, and shall make rules for the regulation of business of the board. A copy of such rules shall be filed with the city clerk and shall govern, among other thing, the time, place and frequency of meetings and any matter not inconsistent with any provision of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 13-18; Code 1999, § 11-203)  
CHAPTER 3. - CEMETERY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal cemeteries, 11 O.S. § 26-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-301. - Cemeteries established. 
All cemeteries under the ownership and control of the city are established as city cemeteries. The city manager shall appoint all officers and employees necessary for the proper control and management of the cemetery. 
(Prior Code, § 7-35, in part; Code 1991, § 11-301; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 11-302. - Cemetery care fund. 
There is hereby established a cemetery perpetual care fund for maintenance and improvement of the city cemeteries, to be operated in accordance with state law. Financing and investment of the fund shall be as permitted by the city and state law. 
(Prior Code, §§ 7-31—7-35; Code 1991, § 11-302; Ord. No. 606(07), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 11-303. - Expenditure and control. 
No obligation incurring the expenditure of any money on account of a city cemetery shall be valid or binding upon the city unless the same shall first have been appropriated by the council and approved by the city manager. 
(Prior Code, § 7-35; Code 1991, § 11-303; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 11-304. - Prices of lots. 
The city council by motion or resolution shall fix the price for which lots shall be sold. Any payment installment plan approved by the city council for purchase of a lot shall provide for full payment, or one-fifth down payment and one payment annually, within a maximum of four years. 
(Prior Code, § 7-35; Code 1991, § 11-304; Ord. No. 607(07), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 11-305. - Deeds to lots. 
All cemetery deeds shall be signed by the mayor and the city clerk upon final payment. The clerk or his designee shall keep a complete record of all sales and burials. 
(Prior Code, § 7-37; Code 1991, § 11-305; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 11-306. - Fees for setting monuments and grave staking. 
Monument set and/or grave staking paperwork will need to be filled out and paid in full prior to the city marking for either. The fee therefor shall be established by motion or resolution of the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 7-39; Code 1991, § 11-307; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 11-307. - No action to be taken until fee is paid. 
No deed for any lot shall be issued, no grave marked, and no monument or marker shall be set, located or placed until the fee or charge has been paid in full, except as may be otherwise allowed by the city herein. 
(Prior Code, § 7-40; Code 1991, § 11-308; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 11-308. - Erection of monuments and improvements. 
The erection of monuments, filling of graves or needed improvements, or the marking thereof, by private parties in a cemetery of the city shall be done under the supervision of the city and not otherwise. Only one monument per lot shall be allowed at the head of the grave, with the exception of a veteran's marker at the foot of the grave. 
(Prior Code, § 7-41; Code 1991, § 11-312; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 11-309. - Defacing property. 
Every person who shall willfully or with malicious intent destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument, or other structure placed in any city cemetery, or any fence, railing, or other work for the protection of any such cemetery or place of burial of any human being, or tomb, monument, memorial or other structure, or any lot within a cemetery, or who shall willfully or with malicious intent destroy, cut, break or injure any tree, shrub or plant within the limits of a cemetery, shall be deemed guilty of violating this section. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Prior Code, § 7-36; Code 1991, § 11-313; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 11-310. - Removal of flowers. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to remove flowers from a vase attached to the monument other than by the persons placing such flowers or by a designated city employee. The city will remove all flowers the first week of February and August. 
(b)  Flowers can remain in vases attached to the monument. Saddles with flowers, attached to the top of the monument, are allowed. Items on the ground or around the monument base will be removed. 
(Prior Code, § 7-42; Code 1991, § 11-314; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 11-311. - Motorized vehicles. 
No motorized vehicle shall be permitted in any cemetery except: 
(1)  Vehicles operated by the city or under contract to the city; 
(2)  Vehicles entering, exiting, or being parked where part or a portion of the cemetery is designated and maintained for entrance, exit or parking. 
(Prior Code, § 7-44; Code 1991, § 11-315; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 11-312. - Council may adopt rules. 
The council by motion or resolution may adopt rules and regulations relating to the city cemeteries. 
(Prior Code, § 7-45; Code 1991, § 11-316; Ord. No. 787(15), 6-15-2015)  
Part 12 - PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Building, zoning and planning, 11 O.S. § 41-101 et seq. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
 
Sec. 12-101. - Land development code adopted. 
The City of Moore Land Development Code, as published by Municipal Code Corporation, and as amended from time to time, containing, among other things, regulations governing zoning, subdivisions, signs, mobile homes, flood plain and oil and gas, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. Any violation of the city's land development code is punishable as provided in section 1-108. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1999, § 12-100)  
Part 13 - PUBLIC SAFETY  
CHAPTER 1. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Adoption of the 2015 International Fire Code, as amended and modified by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion that certain code known as the 2015 International Fire Code, as amended and modified by the state uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23, the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended; of which code not less than one copy has been and is filed in the office of the city clerk. The International Fire Code, as amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as if set out at length herein, and shall be incorporated and considered as a part of this Code. 
(b)  The following additions, amendments, or deletions are made to the fire code adopted herein: 
Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Moore, Oklahoma 
Section 109.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $500.00; delete: or by imprisonment not exceeding 10 days, or both such fine and imprisonment 
Section 111.4. Delete: less than [amount] dollars and insert: more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars 
Section 308.1.4. Delete Exception 2: Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system; delete Exception 3.: LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water capacity not greater than 2½ pounds [nominal 1 pound (0.45 kg) LP-gas capacity] 
(Code 1999, § 13-101; Ord. No. 514(90), 9-17-1990; Ord. No. 631(08), 9-15-2008; Ord. No. 858(17), 6-9-2017) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 13-102. - Fire prevention. 
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the division of fire prevention in the fire department, which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(Prior Code, § 9-53; Code 1999, § 13-102)  
Sec. 13-103. - Adoption of specified appendices. 
The following appendices to the 2015 International Fire Code are adopted and incorporated by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein: Appendix B, Appendix C, and Appendix D. 
(Code 1999, § 13-103; Ord. No. 514 (90), 9-17-1990; Ord. No. 858(17), 6-17-2017)  
Sec. 13-104. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited. 
The limits referred to in the fire prevention code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are established as follows: All R zoning and C or I zoning only by permission of the fire chief in accordance with the codes adopted by this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 13-104)  
Sec. 13-105. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is to be prohibited. 
(a)  Storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited except in those areas zoned as R through C under the zoning ordinances of the city, except as permitted by the fire chief in accordance with codes adopted by the city. 
(b)  Bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited in R zoning and in the areas as approved by the fire chief. 
(Prior Code, § 9-54; Code 1999, § 13-105)  
Sec. 13-106. - Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted. 
(a)  Bulk storage shall be defined as any container exceeding 30 gallons of water capacity or any combination of containers exceeding 60 gallons of water capacity. 
(b)  In all residential zoning classifications, bulk storage of L.P.G. is permissible upon approval of the fire chief or his designee if the area where the L.P.G. is stored is at least 100 feet from any occupied structure and at least 100 feet from any property line. 
(c)  In any commercial zoning classification, bulk storage of L.P.G. is permissible upon approval of the fire chief or his designee, for sale or small exchange tanks for off-premises use and for installations essential to the business as fueling stations for equipment used in the business. 
(d)  All permitted locations shall submit a yearly application for approval and, upon approval, and the payment of a fee as determined by the city council by motion or resolution, the fire chief or his designee shall issue a permit. All permits shall be valid until the end of the fiscal year in which they were granted and shall be renewed annually. 
(Prior Code, § 9-58; Code 1999, § 13-106; Ord. No. 207(97), 10-6-1997)  
Sec. 13-107. - Provisions declared to be minimum requirements. 
The provisions of the fire prevention code, latest edition, in their interpretation and application, shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, and general welfare. Wherever any of the provisions or requirements of this code are inconsistent with the provisions of this Code or state statutes presently existing or enacted in the future, the provisions or requirements containing the most restrictive regulation shall apply and govern. 
(Code 1999, § 13-107)  
Sec. 13-108. - Modifications of the fire prevention code authorized. 
The fire chief shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the building owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 9-55; Code 1999, § 13-108)  
Sec. 13-109. - New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. 
The building officer, the chief of the fire department and the city manager shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code. The fire chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Prior Code, § 9-57; Code 1999, § 13-109)  
Sec. 13-110. - Appeals. 
Whenever the fire chief or his designee shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit or license applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal to the board of adjustment of the city within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed from. 
(Code 1999, § 13-110; Ord. No. 427(87), 2-17-1987)  
Sec. 13-111. - Life safety code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purposes of establishing rules and regulations for the protection of the public safety from the hazards of fire, smoke, fumes, etc., that certain code known as the 2015 National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code—NFPA 101, adopted by the state, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended. Not less than one copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk. The code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1999, § 13-111; Ord. No. 515(90), 9-17-1990; Ord. No. 858(17), 6-19-2017) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107.  
Sec. 13-112. - Certificate of fitness. 
(a)  A certificate of fitness is required by the responsible person conducting any of the following activities when such activities are conducted on a for hire basis: 
(1)  The servicing or recharging of any portable fire extinguisher; 
(2)  The servicing or recharging of any fixed fire extinguishing system, inspection, servicing or recharging of any restaurant hood system or fixed fire extinguishing system; and 
(3)  The installation and servicing of any fire alarm or fire communication system. 
(b)  All applications for a certificate of fitness shall be filed with the fire chief on forms provided by the fire chief. A fee as set by the council shall be charged to issue the certificate of fitness. The certificate of fitness shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance and must be renewed annually. 
(Code 1999, § 13-112; Ord. No. 502(90), 1-15-1990)  
ARTICLE B. - FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE LANES 
 
Sec. 13-121. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Fire hydrants of a type and manufacture approved by the utility director or city engineer shall be available to serve all building sites prior to start of construction. 
(b)  Building plans for all new construction shall show the location of fire hydrants on both public and private property as approved by the fire chief or his designee and the city engineer before any actual construction is undertaken. 
(c)  Hydrant locations and standards shall be as follows: 
(1)  All hydrants are to be installed according to city standards; 
(2)  No portion of a building of any occupancy except single-family dwellings shall be located more than 300 feet travel distance from a hydrant; and 
(3)  Fire hydrants shall be located apart from buildings and fully accessible from paved driveways and fire lanes. 
(d)  No unauthorized person shall use, operate, conceal or in any manner hinder the accessibility or reduce the effectiveness of any fire hydrant within the city. 
(e)  Access to fire hydrants required by subsection (a) of this section shall not be required for sites whose structures total less than 2,000 square feet unless constituting or declared a high hazard occupancy by the fire chief. 
(f)  The requirements of this section may be waived by the city council for good cause shown by the persons requesting a building permit. 
(g)  Fire hydrants shall be placed at each street intersection, provided that in no event shall the spacing exceed 500 feet in R-1 and R-2 residential areas or 300 feet in commercial, industrial or R-3 general residential areas. The distance from the nearest fire hydrant to the most remote point in a cul-de-sac or residential street loop shall not exceed 300 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 9-111; Code 1999, § 13-121)  
Sec. 13-122. - Fire lanes on private property devoted to public use. 
(a)  The marking of fire lanes on private property devoted to public use shall be approved by the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)  Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be prohibited at all times. 
(c)  Fire lanes and driveways shall be located so that all buildings served by them are accessible to fire equipment. 
(d)  All fire lanes on public or private property devoted to public use shall be marked as such with signage and curb marking. Fire lane access shall be marked with stripping and stenciling as specified in subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(1)  Signage. Signs denoting fire lanes shall be 12 inches wide by 18 inches tall and shall read "FIRE LANE. NO PARKING AT ANY TIME. CITY ORDINANCE # 13-122." Colors and height of mounting shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, current edition. Fire lanes longer than 150 feet and less than 300 feet shall have a sign at each end with an intermediate sign as close as practicable to the center of the fire lane. Fire lane signs shall at no time be separated by more than 150 feet. 
(2)  Curb marking. Curb markings shall be red with the words "FIRE LANE, NO PARKING" stenciled in white letters four inches in height, spaced at intervals of every 30 feet. Where curbs do not exist, there shall be a red stripe four inches in width. 
(e)  Where required by the code, the contractor or person in charge of any construction site, for all commercial occupancies, including, but not limited to, business, industrial, mercantile, educational, institutional, assembly, hotel, motel, multifamily dwellings and mobile home parks, shall provide and maintain an approved hard-surfaced all weather access fire lane, not less than 20 feet in width, as shown on approved site plans. Such access lane shall be complete at such time that construction has progressed to completion of the foundation. 
(f)  No fire lane shall begin closer than ten feet to a building, nor further than 50 feet from a building. The height and construction of the building shall determine this distance. 
(Prior Code, § 9-112; Code 1999, § 13-122; Ord. No. 255(99), 4-19-1999)  
Sec. 13-123. - Water supply to fire hydrants via public or private property. 
(a)  Proper size for water mains located on public or private property which supply fire hydrants for occupancies listed in section 13-122(e) shall be approved by the city engineer and the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)  The city engineer, fire chief or his designee shall approve no water main supplying fire hydrants for occupancies listed in section 13-122(e) less than six inches in diameter. 
(Prior Code, § 9-113; Code 1999, § 13-123; Ord. No. 256(99)-A, 4-19-1999)  
Sec. 13-124. - Article cumulative. 
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative to and shall not operate to repeal any other ordinances or provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 9-114; Code 1999, § 13-124)  
CHAPTER 2. - FIRE SERVICES  
ARTICLE A. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire department authorized, 11 O.S. § 29-105. 
 
Sec. 13-201. - Created; duties. 
(a)  There is a fire department of the city, the head of which is the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  It is the duty of the fire department, among others, to extinguish fires; to rescue persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate, and to administer first aid to, persons injured in or about burning structures on elsewhere in case of an emergency; to promote fire prevention; and unless otherwise provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention and safety of persons from fire in public and private buildings. 
(Prior Code, §§ 9-16, 9-18; Code 1999, § 13-201)  
Sec. 13-202. - Use of fire equipment. 
No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority take away or conceal any article used in any way by the department. No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized member of the department. 
(Code 1999, § 13-202)  
Sec. 13-203. - Authority of firefighters at fires. 
The fire chief, assistant fire chiefs or other fire department officers in charge shall have complete charge and control at all fires. Fire orders shall be obeyed. The chief or his officers may prescribe limits in the vicinity of a fire which no persons except those residing or owning property therein shall be permitted to enter except on the order of the officer in command. Police officers may aid in carrying into effect the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1999, § 13-203)  
Sec. 13-204. - Right of entry. 
The chief of the fire department and his designee may at all reasonable hours enter any building or premises within his jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this chapter and other provisions of this Code, he may deem necessary to make. 
(Prior Code, § 9-204; Code 1999, § 13-204)  
ARTICLE B. - CALLS OUTSIDE LIMITS 
 
Sec. 13-211. - Power to contract. 
The city is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into contracts or agreements with individuals, firms, private corporations or associations, or military installations or commands, or political subdivisions of the state for fire protection outside the corporate limits of the city, and to contract to provide fire protection jointly with other organizations and municipal subdivisions of the state. 
(Code 1999, § 13-221)  
Sec. 13-212. - Contracts for service. 
Any contract entered into by the city, with an individual owner, a firm, private corporation, association or political subdivision, for outside aid or mutual aid for fire protection, shall provide for the payment by the owner, firm, private corporation, association or political subdivision for such service, equipment or personnel in an amount reached through negotiation by the parties. 
(Code 1999, § 13-222)  
Sec. 13-213. - Authority to answer calls. 
The fire department is authorized to answer all calls outside the city within a reasonable distance of the city limits if first approved by the fire chief on duty. The fire chief shall determine that the equipment and personnel to be dispatched for such calls are not needed for other purposes within the city. 
(Code 1999, § 13-223)  
Sec. 13-214. - Charges for calls made outside city. 
The city may enter into a contract with persons, organizations or associations to provide fire protection service outside the city limits. Such contracts shall be conditioned upon the determination of the fire chief that the property in question is within a reasonable distance from the city and that prior to any fire protection equipment being dispatched for any fire call for such property, the fire chief on duty shall first approve such call and determine that the equipment and personnel to be dispatched are not needed for other purposes within the city. The charges for such calls shall be as specified in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 13-224)  
Sec. 13-215. - Firefighters serving in regular line of duty. 
All firefighters attending and serving at fires or doing fire prevention work outside the corporate limits of the city, as herein provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular line of duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of the city. The firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any fire pension and relief fund in the same manner as if the firefighting or fire prevention work was being done within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 13-225)  
CHAPTER 3. - POLICE SERVICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal police, 11 O.S. § 34-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 13-301. - Created. 
There shall be a police department, the head of which is the chief of police, or the police chief. 
(Prior Code, § 18-16; Code 1999, § 13-301)  
Sec. 13-302. - Duties. 
It is the duty of the police department to apprehend and arrest on view or on warrant and bring to justice violators of the ordinances of the city; to suppress all riots, affrays and unlawful assemblies which may come to their knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve warrants, writs, executions and other processes properly directed and delivered to them; to apprehend and arrest persons violating state laws as provided by law, and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all duties pertaining to the offices of police officers. 
(Prior Code, §§ 18-16, 18-17; Code 1999, § 13-302)  
Sec. 13-303. - Police officers; carrying weapons off duty; restrictions. 
(a)  Police officers shall perform such duties as shall be required of them by the chief, the city ordinances and state regulations and any other actions required in the maintenance of good order and public peace. 
(b)  A full-time duly appointed peace officer of the city who is certified by the state council on law enforcement education and training, (C.L.E.E.T.) pursuant to state law, is hereby authorized to carry a weapon, certified and approved by the chief of police of the city, or his duly authorized agent, during periods when he is not on active duty. When an off-duty officer carries a certified weapon, the officer shall be in law enforcement uniform prescribed by the employing agency, or when not wearing the prescribed law enforcement uniform shall be required to have his official peace officer's badge, commission card, and C.L.E.E.T. certification card on his person at all times when carrying a weapon certified and approved by the employing agency, and to keep the authorized weapon concealed from view at all times except when the weapon is used within the guidelines, rules, and regulations established by the employing agency. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to authorize a peace officer in actual physical possession of a weapon to consume beer or alcoholic beverages, except in the authorized line of duty as an undercover officer. Any officer in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section as though he were a private person. 
(Code 1999, § 13-303; Ord. No. 464, 10-3-1988, in part; Ord. No. 4(91), 1991)  
ARTICLE B. - POLICE BOARD OF REVIEW 
 
Sec. 13-311. - Board established. 
Pursuant to 11 O.S. § 50-123, there is hereby established a police board of review to hear appeals concerning the discharge of police officers. 
(Code 1999, § 13-311)  
Sec. 13-312. - Members. 
The board of review shall consist of: 
(1)  The mayor, ex officio, who shall be a voting member of the board; 
(2)  Two active duty or retired police officers of the city; 
(3)  One attorney residing in the city; and 
(4)  One licensed physician residing in the city. 
(Code 1999, § 13-312)  
Sec. 13-313. - Appointments. 
(a)  Members of the board of review, with the exception of the mayor, shall be appointed by the council, except that when persons meet the qualifications of section 13-312(3) and (4), the mayor shall in lieu thereof make the appointments from the governing body of the city. 
(b)  Neither the chief of police nor any person having direct appointive authority for police personnel shall be eligible for appointment to the board of review. 
(Code 1999, § 13-313)  
Sec. 13-314. - Term. 
Appointive members of the police board of review shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. 
(Code 1999, § 13-314)  
Sec. 13-315. - Hearings. 
Any eligible officer who is discharged may appeal to the police board of review. The board of review shall, within a reasonable length of time, schedule a hearing of such appeal, hear the evidence presented supporting the discharge and the evidence presented opposing the discharge, and render its decision, in writing, either affirming or reversing the discharge. 
(Code 1999, § 13-315)  
Sec. 13-316. - Records of proceedings. 
Proceedings before the police board of review shall be recorded by the secretary to the board and the minutes of the meeting shall be safely retained during such time as the aggrieved party to such proceedings may appeal the decision of the board of review. 
(Code 1999, § 13-316)  
Sec. 13-317. - Legal counsel. 
(a)  Proceedings before the police board of review shall be informal in nature and strict rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(b)  Any party shall have the right to be represented by counsel, provided that such counsel shall be an attorney licensed to practice law within the state. Such attorney shall have the right to examine and cross examine persons testifying before the board as shall the party, if not represented by counsel. 
(Code 1999, § 13-317)  
CHAPTER 4. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Emergency Management Act of 2003, 63 O.S. § 683.1 et seq.; local emergency management program, 63 O.S. § 683.11. 
 
Sec. 13-401. - Intent and purpose; authority. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to create an emergency management organization for the city to: 
(1)  Aid in mitigation and preparedness before a disaster and to alleviate injury or damage through a coordinated response and recovery from damages resulting from disaster, nuclear or conventional weapons attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or by other disaster or major emergency as defined herein; and 
(2)  Protect the lives and health of the citizens of the city, their property and property rights, whether public or private, in any emergency or disaster event endangering the lives and property of the people of the city. 
(b)  Authority. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as power or authority to abridge or lessen the legislative and administrative powers of the mayor and city council, unless such is specifically granted herein. 
(Ord. No. 836(16), § 13-401, 10-17-2016)  
Sec. 13-402. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized persons means all state, county and municipal police and fire personnel; hospital and ambulance crews; National Guard, and emergency management personnel ordered into a disaster area by proper authority; federal civil and military personnel on official business; persons who enter a disaster area to maintain or restore facilities for the provision of water, electricity, communications or transportation to the public; and such other officials as have valid reason to enter a disaster area. 
Civil emergency means a riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting together. All powers, duties and regulations relating to a disaster shall also apply to a civil emergency. 
Curfew means a prohibition against any persons walking, running, loitering, standing, or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property, or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city, except persons officially designated to duty with reference to the civil emergency. 
Disaster means any event within the city limits threatening or resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
Disaster area means the scene or location of any disaster or civil emergency. 
Emergency management means the functions charged to the emergency management department and other city departments to create a framework to provide coordinated community actions to reduce the city's vulnerability to hazards, and increase the city's resiliency and ability to respond to and recover from disasters. This includes functions and actions to mitigate, prepare for, respond to and otherwise aid the citizens of the city in the recovery from injury and damages caused by the effects of disasters. These might include, without limitation: 
(1)  Fire, flood, tornado, drought, earthquake, and other natural events; 
(2)  Transportation accidents, chemical releases, industrial accidents, and other technological events; 
(3)  Infectious disease outbreaks and other public health events; 
(4)  Civil disorder, domestic and international terrorism, acts of war, and other manmade events; and 
(5)  Any other event which develops to such an extent as to cause an extreme emergency situation which jeopardizes the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city. 
Emergency management director ("director") means the individual appointed by the city manager to carry out the functions set out in this chapter. 
Emergency management forces means the employees, equipment and facilities of all city institutions and commissions; and, in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by or obtained from volunteer persons or agencies. 
Emergency management volunteer means any person duly registered, trained, identified and appointed by the director and assigned to participate in an emergency management and/or disaster activity. 
Enemy attack means a direct or indirect assault against the city, its government, its environs, or of the nation, by the forces of a hostile nation, the agents thereof, and/or non-state sponsored militant or extremist groups, including assault by bombing, radiological, chemical or biological warfare, sabotage or terrorism. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the Federal Emergency Management Agency, as created by the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, P.L. 100-707. 
Oklahoma Department of Emergency Management (OEM) means the State of Oklahoma's Department of Emergency Management, as created in 63 O.S. § 683.4. 
Regulations includes plans, programs, and other emergency procedures deemed essential to emergency management. 
Resilience means the ability to prepare and plan for, absorb, recover from, and more successfully adapt to adverse events. 
Volunteer means the contribution of a service, equipment or facilities to the emergency management system and assigned for use in a disaster/exercise activity, given without expectation of compensation. 
(Ord. No. 836(16), § 13-402, 10-17-2016)  
Sec. 13-403. - Organization and appointments. 
The city manager is authorized and directed to create an organization for emergency management utilizing to the fullest extent the existing agencies within the city. The city manager, as executive head of the municipal government, shall be the supervisor of the emergency management forces of the city and shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operations. The organization shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The city manager shall create and maintain a department of emergency management to aid in mitigation and preparedness before a disaster and to alleviate injury or damage through a coordinated response and recovery from damages resulting from disaster, nuclear or conventional weapons attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or by other disaster or major or civil emergency as defined herein, and to protect the lives and health of the citizens of the city, their property and property rights, whether public or private, in any emergency or disaster event endangering the lives and property of the people of the city. 
(2)  The city manager shall appoint a director to be head of the emergency management department, and such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization. The director shall be a person trained in planning operations involving the activities of many different agencies which will operate to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the event of danger from enemy action or disaster as defined in this chapter. The director shall meet the qualifications promulgated by the Oklahoma Department of Emergency Management (OEM). 
(3)  The employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards, institutions and commissions will participate in emergency management activity as needed. Duties assigned to a city department shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of the department. 
(4)  Volunteer persons and agencies offering services to and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 836(16), § 13-403, 10-17-2016)  
Sec. 13-404. - Emergency powers and duties of city manager. 
(a)  Emergency authority of city manager. The city manager may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill the general powers and duties of the position as defined in article III of the city Charter. 
(b)  Emergency declaration. When in the judgment of the city manager it is necessary to invoke the emergency powers provided herein, concurrence of the mayor should be immediately sought, who shall make the decision whether or not to declare an emergency. 
(1)  If the mayor is not available, the decision shall be made by the vice-mayor; if that individual is not available, the decision shall be made by the senior councilmember available. 
(2)  In the event the mayor and city council are not available to act, then the city manager shall be the sole authority necessary to invoke the powers provided herein. 
(3)  In the absence of the city manager as the final judge of an emergency declaration, the emergency management director shall make the determination. 
(4)  Whether the mayor, the vice-mayor, a councilmember, the city manager or the director declares an emergency, such action shall not be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers or restrictions of the mayor and city council as defined in the Charter of the city. Thereafter the mayor and city council may convene to perform their legislative and administrative powers, and shall receive reports relative to emergency management activities. 
(c)  Emergency regulations. During any period when disaster threatens or when the city has been affected by disaster or major emergency, within the definition of this chapter, the city manager may promulgate such regulations as deemed necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles to facilitate the work of emergency management forces or the mass movement of persons from critical areas within or without the city. 
(2)  Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons to and/or from areas deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster. 
(3)  Regulations restricting the movement of persons upon the streets at particular times of days and in particular areas. 
(4)  Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety. 
(5)  Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published and disseminated by newspaper, television, radio and other available means of communications with the public. These regulations will have the force of ordinance when duly filed with the city clerk and violations will be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter. 
(d)  Emergency management forces. Whenever the city manager finds that any condition in the city has attained, or threatens to attain, the proportions of a disaster or emergency, he may assemble and utilize emergency management forces and may prescribe the manner and conditions of their use. 
(e)  Mutual aid—Requesting. When disaster or emergencies affect the city to the extent that conditions are beyond the control of local emergency management forces, the city manager may request aid from other communities and the state. 
(f)  Same—Rendering. When requested, the city manager may send emergency management forces to the aid of other communities affected by disaster or emergency. 
(g)  Emergency procurement. The city manager may make emergency procurements in accordance with the purchasing policies when an emergency condition arises and the need cannot be met through normal procurement methods, as referenced in section 7-206. 
(h)  Curfew. After proclamation of an emergency, the city manager may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city or to the city as a whole, as he deems advisable, and the curfew shall be applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. After the mayor and city council convene, such order is subject to their approval. 
(i)  Emergency prohibitions. After the proclamation of an emergency and in the interest of public safety and welfare, the city manager may also make any or all emergency orders deemed necessary. These may include, without limitation, orders prohibiting the following: 
(1)  Any person being on the public streets, or in the public parks or at any other public place during the hours declared by the city manager to be a period of curfew; 
(2)  The manufacture, transfer, use, possession or transportation of a molotov cocktail or any other device, instrument or object designed to explode or produce uncontained combustion; 
(3)  The transporting, possessing or using of gasoline, kerosene or combustible, flammable or explosive liquids or materials in a glass or uncapped container of any kind, except in connection with the normal operation of motor vehicles, normal home use or legitimate commercial use; 
(4)  The sale, purchase or dispensing of alcoholic beverages; 
(5)  The sale, purchase or dispensing of other commodities or goods, as the city manager reasonably believes should be prohibited to help preserve and maintain life, health, property or the public peace; 
(6)  The use of certain streets, highways or public ways by the public; 
(7)  The sale, ownership, possession, transportation, carrying, transfer and storage of firearms, ammunition and ammunition accessories during a declared state of emergency unless such is otherwise legal under state law; 
(8)  Impersonation of a city official or emergency management volunteer; 
(9)  Unauthorized use of any insignia of the city; 
(10)  Unauthorized entry into any disaster area; 
(11)  Following an emergency or disaster vehicle, or purposely driving to any location on or near a roadway where a disaster or emergency area exists; 
(12)  Proceeding to or remaining at a disaster area for the purpose of being a bystander, spectator, sightseer, or souvenir hunter, or disturbing any material objects, equipment, or thing directly or indirectly relating to or pertaining to the disaster; 
(13)  Obstructing, hindering, or delaying any public official, shelter manager, or other authorized individual in the enforcement of any rules, regulations or executive orders issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter; 
(14)  Failing to obey rules, regulations or official orders within a shelter; 
(15)  Failing to obey any executive order issued under this chapter; 
(16)  Unauthorized use of, or tampering with, a siren or other device so as to simulate any alert or take-cover signal or the termination of an alert or take-cover signal; and 
(17)  Such other activities as the city manager reasonably believes should be prohibited to help preserve and maintain life, health, property or the public peace. 
After the mayor and city council convene, all orders are subject to their approval. 
(j)  Emergency services and volunteers. The city manager may require emergency services of any city officer or employees. If regular city forces are determined inadequate, the city manager may request the services of such other available personnel as can be obtained, including citizen volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided by state law, the city Charter and ordinances for regular city employees and other registered and identified emergency management and disaster workers and, upon demand, may receive appropriate compensation for their emergency employment. 
(k)  Acceptance of emergency management funds. The city manager shall be empowered to accept any gifts, grants and loans from the federal government, from the state, or from any person, entity, organization, firm or corporation, as set out in various federal and state emergency management and disaster relief laws. 
(l)  Succession. In the event the city manager is unable to assume emergency duties for any reason, the normal succession as designated in the emergency operations plan by the city manager shall take effect. In the event those individuals are unable to assume the city manager duties, the mayor and city council shall designate an acting city manager. 
(Ord. No. 836(16), § 13-404, 10-17-2016)  
Sec. 13-405. - Duties and emergency powers of the emergency management director. 
The emergency management director shall be responsible to the city manager in regard to all phases of emergency management or disaster activity. Under the supervision of the city manager, he shall be responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of emergency management/civil defense activity (disaster services) in the city. Under the supervision of the city manager, he shall maintain liaison with the state and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby political subdivisions as to ensure the most effective operations of the emergency management program. His duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Monitoring and maintaining an awareness of all threats to and vulnerabilities of the city, including those that are natural, manmade, or technological in nature; promoting actions to mitigate, where possible, the threats and vulnerabilities identified; coordinating and disseminating information concerning those threats and vulnerabilities to the emergency management forces of the city, the civilian population, and other interested parties; and providing alerting and/or warning concerning impending threats to the population of the city; 
(2)  Developing and coordinating plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and property; and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for public health, safety and welfare; 
(3)  Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for disaster purposes; 
(4)  Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or other property for emergency purposes and designating suitable buildings as public shelters; 
(5)  Providing and promoting informational, educational, outreach, and training programs to emergency management forces of the city, the civilian population, and other interested parties as to the mitigation of, preparation for, response to, and recovery from disasters, civil emergencies and enemy attack, as defined herein; 
(6)  Conducting practice exercises to ensure the efficient operation of emergency and disaster forces and to familiarize disaster workers and residents with disaster regulations, procedures and operations; 
(7)  Maintaining and managing an emergency operations center and other support facilities and locations during disaster operations, so as to facilitate coordination of emergency management forces during disasters, civil emergencies and enemy attack; 
(8)  Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any disaster activity, real or implied; 
(9)  Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the city manager may direct to promote and execute the emergency operations plan; 
(10)  Supporting long-term recovery efforts within the city after disasters, civil emergencies and enemy attack; and promoting efforts to increase the city's resiliency prior to, during, and after emergency events; and 
(11)  Documenting all activities conducted in support of emergency management program objectives; and providing required information and reports to the city manager, the Oklahoma Department of Emergency Management (OEM), the Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA"), and other governmental agencies and organizations as required and appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 836(16), § 13-405, 10-17-2016)  
Sec. 13-406. - Emergency operations plan. 
(a)  A comprehensive emergency operations plan shall be adopted and maintained by the city council upon the recommendations of the city manager and emergency management director. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency operations plan shall be considered supplementary as to this chapter and have the effect of law whenever a disaster, as defined in this chapter, has been proclaimed. 
(b)  The emergency management director shall prescribe in the plan those positions within the disaster organization, in addition to his own, for which lines of succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will designate and keep on file with the emergency manager a current list of three persons as successors to their position. The list will be in order of succession and will as nearly as possible designate persons capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions. 
(c)  Each service chief and department head assigned responsibility in the plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned city employees and volunteers. Each chief or department head shall formulate the standard operating procedures and guidelines necessary to carry out the assigned duties and functions. 
(d)  Amendments to the emergency operations plan shall be submitted to the city manager. If approved, the city manager will submit the amendments to the city council with his recommendation for their approval. Following city council approval, such amendments shall take effect 30 days from the date of approval, unless an emergency exists and is declared, at which time the approved amendments shall become effective immediately. 
(e)  Other plans relating to emergency and disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery may also be adopted and maintained as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 836(16), § 13-406, 10-17-2016)  
Sec. 13-407. - Assistance of persons outside city government. 
When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the city government, the appropriate department head in consultation with the city manager is authorized to seek assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during and after the occurrence of a disaster until revoked by the city manager. Such services from persons outside of government may be accepted by the city on a volunteer basis or through charges agreeable to the city and contractor. Volunteers obtained to fill said needs shall be enrolled as emergency management volunteers in cooperation with the heads of city departments affected. 
(Ord. No. 836(16), § 13-407, 10-17-2016)  
Sec. 13-408. - No municipal or private liability. 
(a)  This chapter is an exercise by the city through its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety. Neither the city, nor its agents and representatives or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as the result of said activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or disaster shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any persons on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 836(16), § 13-408, 10-17-2016)  
Sec. 13-409. - Violation of regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization, as herein defined, in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation or plan issued thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 836(16), § 13-409, 10-17-2016)  
Sec. 13-410. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof, will be assessed a fine as established by section 1-108. 
(Ord. No. 836(16), § 13-410, 10-17-2016)  
Sec. 13-411. - Violation of Emergency Price Stabilization Act. 
The city manager, upon the concurrence of a majority of the city council, shall bring an action against any person, firm or individual that violates the Emergency Price Stabilization Act, as outlined in 15 O.S. § 777.1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 836(16), § 13-411, 10-17-2016)  
CHAPTER 5. - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE AND ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 13-501. - Purposes. 
While recognizing the value of effective alarm systems in deterring crime and preventing fire losses and while encouraging the use of such alarm systems, it is the purpose of this chapter to enhance and protect the emergency services, to require minimum standards for alarm systems and services therefor, and to license users thereof, to improve system effectiveness and to reduce, insofar as possible, the misuse of emergency public services. 
(Code 1999, § 13-501; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-502. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
911 system means an emergency phone system which is designed to receive emergency phone calls by dialing the three-digit number "911." The system places person requesting emergency service in touch with fire, police, and ambulance services by dialing the three-digit number "911." 
Alarm business means any person or firm engaged in the business of installing, assisting in the installation, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, moving, or removing alarm systems in the city and duly licensed by the state. 
Alarm system means any mechanism, equipment or device which is designed to detect the presence of a fire, or an unauthorized entry or activity in any building or on any property, or to direct attention to a fire, robbery, burglary, or other emergency in progress, and to signal the above occurrences either by a local or audible alarm or by a silent or remote alarm, directly or indirectly to the police or fire department. The following devices shall not constitute alarm systems within the meaning of this chapter: 
(1)  Devices which do not activate alarms that are audible, visible, or perceptible outside the protected premises; 
(2)  Devices which are not installed, operated or used for the purpose of reporting an emergency, either directly or by third party to the police or fire department; 
(3)  Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles; 
(4)  Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the police or fire department; and 
(5)  Alarm devices installed in or on premises owned or leased by the city. 
Answering service means a telephone answering service providing, among its services, the receiving, on a continuous basis through trained employees, of emergency signals from alarm systems and the subsequent relaying of messages to the police or fire department on a person-to-person basis. 
Automatic dialing device means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direction connection or otherwise, any type of communication or message indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
Central station means an office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators supervise the circuits, and where guards or servicemen are maintained continuously to investigate signals. For purposes of fire alarms, information relay systems shall be in compliance with the National Fire Prevention Association (hereinafter "NFPA") standards as set forth in NFPA 71, Central Station Signaling Systems, NFPA 72A, Local Protective Signaling Systems, NFPA 72B, Auxiliary Protective Signaling Systems, or NFPA 72C, Remote Station Protective Signaling Systems. 
Direct line means a telephone line leading directly from a central station to the police or fire department, where such line is used only to report emergency signals on a person-to-person basis. 
Emergency means the existence of a fire, or the commission or attempted commission of a robbery, burglary or other criminal action. 
Employee means any person who is employed by an alarm business and who installs, services, maintains, repairs or replaces alarm systems in the city. 
Interconnect means to connect a burglar alarm system or other alarm system, including an automatic dialing device, to a telephone line, either directly or indirectly, or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
Modified central station means an office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators supervise the circuits but where guards are not maintained to investigate alarm signals. 
Telephone dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency indicating a need for police, fire or medical responses. 
Trunk line means a telephone line leading into the police or fire department and having the primary purpose of handling emergency signals or messages on a person-to-person basis origination through a central station, modified central station, or answering service. 
(Code 1999, § 13-502; Ord. No. 482, 4-17-1989, in part; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-503. - Registration. 
The owner or occupant of any premises on which an alarm system is located shall register such alarm system with the city. Such registration shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution.  
Sec. 13-504. - False alarms. 
The term "false alarm" means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, the negligence of the alarm business operator or his employees or agents, or the negligence of the owner, user or lessee of an alarm system or his employees or agents, or which otherwise elicits a response by a law enforcement agency or the fire department when a situation requiring such response does not in fact exist. The term "false alarm" shall also mean the activation of an alarm, the purpose of which is to communicate or indicate a specific emergency situation when in fact that specific emergency situation does not exist. The term "false alarm" does not include, for example, alarms activated by utility line mishaps, tornados, earthquakes, or other violent conditions of nature, or other conditions clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer, owner or user. 
(1)  False alarms include those caused by: 
a.  Error or mistakes. Any action by any person, firm or corporation, or other entity or agent thereof, owning or operating any dwelling, building or place, which results in the activation of any alarm system when no emergency exists; 
b.  Malfunction. Any activation of any alarm system caused by a flaw in the normal operation, design, installation, or maintenance of the system, by faulty equipment or by a change in the environment or premises upon or within which the alarm system is operating; 
c.  Intentional misuse. Any intentional activation of an alarm system when no burglary, robbery, vandalism, fire or other emergency is in progress. 
(2)  An alarm will not be considered a false alarm if it is determined that the alarm was caused by: 
a.  Natural or manmade catastrophe, or an act of God. Such events include tornadoes, floods, earthquakes or other similarly violent conditions; 
b.  Vandalism, causing physical damage to the premises; 
c.  Telephone line outage; 
d.  Attempted entry of a location causing visible, physical or other evidence of damage to the location; 
e.  Severe weather causing physical damage to the premises; or 
f.  The testing of a local/audible alarm system by a licensed alarm business agent or employee who is present at the premises servicing, repairing or installing the alarm when such testing does not result in the alarm being activated for an uninterrupted period exceeding 60 seconds. 
(Code 1999, § 13-506; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-505. - Criminal liability, false alarms. 
It shall be an offense for any person to willfully, intentionally or knowingly: 
(1)  Turn on, send in or otherwise cause or permit any false call or alarm for the purpose of attracting the attention of the police or fire department; 
(2)  Use any other similar type emergency equipment used by the police or fire department without express permission from the chief of the police department of the city; 
(3)  Molest or tamper with any police or fire alarm box, telephone, radio or other instrument used in communicating or signaling either the police or fire department; or 
(4)  Turn in any type false alarm to any city official or department. 
(Code 1999, § 13-507; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-506. - Notice of false alarms. 
(a)  If an excessive number of false alarms occur at any alarm location, the police or fire departments shall give written notice to the alarm system registrant and to the alarm business responsible for maintaining and servicing the system to take corrective action within seven days to prevent future false alarms. 
(b)  An excessive number of false alarms shall be deemed to be: 
(1)  For businesses with less than 25 employees in any single location: more than three false alarms within any three-month period; 
(2)  For businesses with 25 or more employees in any single location: more than six false alarms within any three-month period; or 
(3)  For residences: more than three false alarms within any three-month period. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police and the fire chief. The fire chief or his designee is authorized to make inspections of fire and other emergency alarm systems and of the premises wherein the device or system is located, or as otherwise provided herein. 
(d)  Any inspection of an alarm location or premises shall be the same as provided in the Code. 
(Code 1999, § 13-508; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-507. - Instruction as to the operation of systems. 
(a)  The person owning an alarm business or an employee of such business shall instruct the alarm system registrant in the proper operation of the system when it is installed. It shall also be the responsibility of the alarm system registrant to cause the system to be maintained in reliable operating condition. 
(b)  All alarm businesses shall offer a service contract to ensure that emergency service and preventative maintenance are performed on the system. 
(Code 1999, § 13-509; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-508. - Emergency notification; maintenance of records; designated personnel. 
(a)  The registrant shall maintain records with the city clerk and any outside monitoring service of at least two personnel who are designated to respond in case of emergencies. The registrant shall update this information when necessary so that it is always current and accurate. 
(b)  Upon proper notification of any emergency condition, the owner's or user's designated personnel, which may by agreement be assumed by the alarm business, shall proceed immediately to the location of the activated alarm and render all necessary service and assistance to restore the alarm to normal condition. 
(Code 1999, § 13-510; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-509. - Emergency call records. 
Alarm businesses who request police or fire department response to alarm signals shall maintain a record of all such emergency calls stating the time, date, location of the alarm and the department called. The records shall indicate the cause of the alarm and if the alarm is not caused by fire, burglary, robbery, or other emergency, the records shall state corrective action taken to prevent the recurrence of the alarm. This record shall be current and shall be made available for inspection by the chief of police and fire chief, or their designated representatives, at any time during normal business hours. 
(Code 1999, § 13-511; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-510. - Minimal systems requirements. 
(a)  Fire, burglary, robbery or other emergency alarm systems which use a local audible or visual alarm device to attract the attention of the public shall be equipped so as to automatically discontinue the alarm within 30 minutes, unless the system is maintained by an alarm business with 24-hour service employees who can respond within 30 minutes after notification. 
(b)  Every alarm system shall have an uninterruptable power supply which will sustain the operation of the alarm system for a minimum period of four hours. 
(c)  All fire detection systems must comply with Life Safety Code (as adopted by the city) chapter 7, and International Fire Code (as adopted by the city) article 5, NFPA 72G, 72H and 74, all of which are adopted hereby and incorporated herein by reference. If any inconsistency or conflict exists between this Code and the aforementioned NFPA provisions, the more strict standard shall apply as required by local authority having jurisdiction. 
(d)  Only U.L. listed components are to be used in new alarm installations. Existing alarm systems, installed and operating subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived will be granted 180 days from May 22, 1992, to upgrade their alarm system to include the above-mentioned components. 
(Code 1999, § 13-512; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-511. - Operational defects to be remedied. 
The sensory mechanisms used in connection with any emergency alarm system shall be adjusted to suppress false alarms due to changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises, such as the rattling or vibrating of doors or windows, vehicular noise adjacent to the installation, or other forces unrelated to genuine alarms. 
(Code 1999, § 13-513; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-512. - Notification of tests. 
Alarm businesses and registrants shall notify the police dispatcher at police communications and shall notify the fire marshal or the fire department dispatcher prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration or installation of any alarm system which would directly or indirectly result in an emergency services response. Any alarm received after such notification while the system is out of service shall not constitute a false alarm. Alarm businesses and registrants shall notify the police and fire departments when the system is back in service. 
(Code 1999, § 13-514; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-513. - Automatic dialing devices and pre-recorded or programmed message alarm systems requirements. 
(a)  Automatic dialing devices with pre-recorded or programmed messages shall be programmed or coded to dial the phone number designated by the police/fire communications, and to dial a third party whose name appears on the application for registration. 
(b)  The pre-recorded or programmed message shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The address and phone number at the location where the emergency exists; 
(3)  The type of emergency the system is designed to detect; for example, a fire, a break-in while the premises is unattended, or a life-threatening situation. 
(c)  The pre-recorded or programmed message shall not last longer than 25 seconds and shall only redial communications once. In no case shall the messages or recordings transmit the information for a period longer than 60 seconds. 
(d)  There shall be no interconnection with a 911 system. No alarm business, central station, answering service, telephone taped dialing alarm system, or other organization or device which monitors alarms which are installed within the city shall call, or be programmed to call, the emergency number 911. 
(e)  Automatic dialing devices and pre-recorded or programmed message alarm systems which are currently in place on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived are exempt from the minimal requirements of U.L. listing. 
(Code 1999, § 13-515; Ord. No. 482, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-514. - Notice of disruption of service. 
When an alarm business service to its subscribers is disrupted for any reason by the alarm business, or the alarm business becomes aware of such disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscribers that protection is no longer provided. 
(Code 1999, § 13-516; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-515. - Police or fire inspection of alarm systems. 
Once a police response has been made to a false alarm at a location, the chief of police or his designee, or the fire chief or his designee, may inspect or have inspected the alarm system, including any monitoring service relating thereto, to determine if the system is being operated in accordance with state and city regulations and guidelines. 
(Code 1999, § 13-519; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-516. - Prompt response of agents or employees. 
(a)  A central station shall, upon the request of the police department, make every possible attempt to dispatch an agent or employee to an alarm reported to the police department for police response. 
(b)  Upon notification, such agent or employee shall promptly respond to the location of an alarm reported to the police department for police response and render all necessary service and assistance to restore the alarm to normal condition. Failure to so respond within 60 minutes from the time of notification is considered an offense and is subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Unless an actual emergency is determined to have occurred at the location of an alarm responded to by the police department, a police officer shall be under no obligation to remain at the location of the alarm to wait for an alarm agent or employee to arrive. 
(Code 1999, § 13-520; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-517. - Alarm monitoring by police department, cost, enrollment fees. 
(a)  Alarm users will have the option of having an alarm system monitored by a central station, modified central station or by direct connect to the Moore Public Safety Communications Center. It is the responsibility of the user to meet all of the provisions set forth in this chapter. A one-time hookup fee and a monthly fee will be collected for direct connects to the Moore Public Safety Communications Center. These fees are to be established by resolution, which shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The city council recognizes that several businesses who were formally monitored by the city were told to obtain private alarm monitoring services prior to the enactment of this chapter. In order to encourage their return to the city's alarm monitoring service, the council hereby agrees to reduce full payment of the one-time hookup fee under the following conditions: 
(1)  They must indicate their intent to return to the city's alarm monitoring service within one year following the enactment of this chapter; 
(2)  The business shall have been a customer on the city's system prior to October 1, 1991; and 
(3)  The city's one-time hookup fee will only be reduced by the amount expended by the business for the initiation or hookup fee with a private alarm monitoring business. 
(Code 1999, § 13-521; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
Sec. 13-518. - Penalty. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. Every day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to the full penalty contained herein. 
(Code 1999, § 13-522; Ord. No. 2(91), 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 19(92), 4-6-1992)  
CHAPTER 6. - HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENT COST RECOVERY ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 13-601. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Hazardous Material Incident Cost Recovery Ordinance." 
(Code 1999, § 13-601; Ord. No. 330(01), 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 13-602. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Costs means and includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  All costs incurred for response, containment and/or removal and disposal of hazardous materials or remedial actions, to include costs associated with transportation and temporary storage of hazardous materials. 
(2)  All costs incurred for ensuring the safety of the public, to include costs incurred for actions taken on and off the site of the hazardous material incident. 
(3)  Damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources, as determined by the appropriate local, state or federal agency, including the reasonable costs of assessing such injury, destruction, or loss resulting from a hazardous material incident. 
(4)  Health care costs for persons or animals injured from a hazardous material incident or costs of any health assessment or health effects study carried out as a necessity resulting from a hazardous material incident. 
(5)  Labor, including benefits, overtime and administrative overhead for government employees. 
(6)  The costs of operating, maintaining, leasing, repairing and replacing equipment. 
(7)  Contract labor and equipment. 
(8)  Labor and equipment obtained by the city. 
(9)  Materials, including, but not limited to, absorbents, foams, dispersants, neutralization agents, overpack drums or containers. 
(10)  Supervision of cleanup and abatement. 
Hazardous material incident means actual or threatened release of hazardous substances or material, including hazardous waste, which pose an imminent threat to the environment, and to health, safety or welfare of the population. 
Hazardous substance includes any solution, mixture, or formulation containing hazardous material, or any material which, due to its chemical or physical characteristics, is determined by the county to pose a substantial threat to the life, health, or safety of persons or property or to the environment. The term "hazardous substance" includes, but is not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum products, gases, poisons, biologic agents, flammables and corrosives. 
Natural resources means land, fish, wildlife, biota, air, water, groundwater, drinking water supplies, and other such resources belonging to, managed by, held in trust by, appertaining to, or otherwise controlled by the city. 
Person means an individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
Recovery means restoration to pre-event conditions. 
Release means the accidental or intentional, sudden or gradual spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environmental (including the abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers and other receptacles containing any hazardous material or substance or waste or pollutant or contaminant). 
Response means the provision of emergency and non-emergency assistance during and following an incident and to reduce the likelihood of secondary damage. 
Responsible party means the person whose act or omission caused a release; or the person who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous substance or waste at the time of such release without regard to fault or proximate cause; or the person who owned or had custody or control of the container which held the hazardous substance at the time or immediately prior to such release without regard to fault or proximate cause. 
(Code 1999, § 13-602; Ord. No. 330(01), 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 13-603. - Hazardous materials incidents; liability for costs. 
(a)  Any responsible party who causes a hazardous material incident shall be liable for the payment of all reasonable and necessary costs, pursuant to the fee schedule of the city, as if fully set out herein, incurred by the city for response to and remediation of such an incident. 
(b)  The city will seek all available remedies at law, including, but not necessarily limited to, this chapter and state and federal statutes, against any parties responsible for any hazardous materials event. 
(Code 1999, § 13-603; Ord. No. 330(01), 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 13-604. - Methods of enforcement. 
(a)  Civil action. The city may enforce these provisions by civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due hereunder plus administrative collection costs, attorney's fees, or for any other relief that may be appropriate. A certified copy of a judgment in favor of the city may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien upon any real or personal property owned by such persons and such lien shall be coequal with the lien of all state, district and municipal taxes superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims until paid or extinguished. 
(b)  Other remedies. This chapter shall not prohibit the city from pursuing any other remedy, whether civil or criminal, or from instituting any appropriate action or proceedings, including injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction; nor shall the recovery of expenses under this chapter in any way release the various parties, or limit them, from legal liability incurred as a result of hazardous material cleanup or abatement as defined under any local, state or federal rule or regulation. 
(Code 1999, § 13-604; Ord. No. 330(01), 7-2-2001)  
Part 14 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal roads and streets, 11 O.S. § 36-101 et seq. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14-101. - Obstructions generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way by leaving or permitting to remain thereon or therein any vehicle, object, material, structure, fence or other obstruction of any kind. 
(Code 1999, § 14-101)  
Sec. 14-102. - Interfering with street, free flow of traffic. 
(a)  It is unlawful to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; or 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress, therein, thereon and thereto. 
(b)  When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disburse, or to remove any obstructions. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Prior Code, 20-5; Code 1999, § 14-102)  
Sec. 14-103. - Removal of trees and shrubs obstructing view of traffic. 
(a)  The owner of every lot or parcel of land in the city upon which any trees, shrubs or plants are growing, or upon which any obstruction has been placed, shall remove such trees, shrubs, plants or obstruction, or parts thereof, if they are so situated as to constitute a traffic hazard by obstructing the view of any driver of any vehicle on the streets of the city to the extent that the driver is unable to observe the approach of other vehicles on streets and alleys and at intersections. 
(b)  The owner of any premises abutting on any street shall trim all trees and shrubbery growing in the parking, between the sidewalks and the roadway, of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any part of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley in such manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient passage, sight and travel along the streets, sidewalks and alleys. If premises are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the trees and shrubbery in the same manner as hereinbefore required of the owner. Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or foliage shall not be lower than ten feet above the roadway of a street or alley, nor lower than eight feet above the sidewalk. 
(c)  Any owner or occupant who fails, refuses or neglects to trim trees and shrubbery as provided in this section, after receiving five days' notice from the city manager or his designee to do so, is guilty of an offense against the city. In addition to any fine or punishment as an offense, the city may act to abate the nuisance. Every day that the owner or occupant fails, refuses or neglects to trim such trees or shrubbery after the expiration of the five days' notice shall be a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 20-3; Code 1999, § 14-103)  
Sec. 14-104. - Display of sale of goods, wares and merchandise. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it is unlawful for any person to display any goods, wares or merchandise for sale, or to sell the same, on any street, alley or sidewalk, or from any vehicle parked thereon, in the corporate limits of the city. Each separate sale or offer to sell in violation hereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any vehicle parked on the streets, alleys or sidewalks for the purpose of making merchandise available for sale by the methods prohibited by this section shall be promptly moved by the driver upon order of the police of the city, and if not promptly moved, the same shall be towed from such location upon order of the police department, and the driver or custodian of the vehicle shall also be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(c)  In each instance where an individual is guilty of an offense under the provisions of this section, the person for whom such individual is acting in the capacity of an agent or employee shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(Code 1999, § 14-104)  
Sec. 14-105. - No structures on or over streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to erect or construct, or cause to be erected or constructed, any cellar or basement way, stairway, door, awning post, canopy or any other kind of structure projecting into, upon or over, and adjoining any street or sidewalk within the city, except that the city engineer may, in his discretion, authorize the same to be done, where the public health, safety and necessity demand, by granting a permit therefor. 
(b)  Upon the granting of a permit under this section, conditions as to the erection of the structure through, upon or over any street or sidewalk may be fixed by the city engineer, and a contract shall be entered into as to the maintenance of the structure and as indemnifying agreement secured, indemnifying and saving the city harmless from any loss, costs or damage by reason of the structure projecting into, upon or over, and adjoining any street or sidewalk within the fire limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 20-2; Code 1999, § 14-105)  
Sec. 14-106. - Playing prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any sport, game, amusement or to play in, on or across the main-travelled portion of any sidewalk, street, avenue or alley of the city except as may be authorized by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 20-4; Code 1999, § 14-106)  
Sec. 14-107. - Unlawful to injure trees, shrubbery. 
It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or alley in the city. This section shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care and removal of such trees and shrubbery. 
(Code 1999, § 14-107)  
Sec. 14-108. - Street numbering system. 
(a)  All streets in the city shall be named and known as provided in this section. The principal streets of the city shall be: Main Street, being the street bearing that name at this time and running east and west through the city, and Broadway, the street now bearing that name and running north and south through the city. 
(b)  The city shall be divided into four quarters as created by Main Street and Broadway, and all streets and avenues in the northeast quarter as thus divided shall be addressed with "Northeast" prefixed to the name; all streets and avenues in the southeast quarter shall be addressed with "Southeast" prefixed to the name; all streets and avenues in the southwest quarter shall be addressed with "Southwest" prefixed to the name; and all streets and avenues in the northwest quarter shall be addressed with "Northwest" prefixed to the name. 
(Prior Code, §§ 20-91, 20-92; Code 1999, § 14-108)  
Sec. 14-109. - Duties of owners and occupants of adjacent property relative to sidewalk obstructions, hazards. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to allow any obstruction of any kind to accumulate in the sidewalk in front of his premises. All owners and occupants of property are required to keep their premises and the sidewalks, gutters, streets and alleys adjacent thereto free from weeds, trash and all obstructions and to remove such weeds, trash and obstructions from such places. 
(b)  It is unlawful to deposit, throw or sweep into or upon a street, alley, parking or sidewalk of the city any trash, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt or any other refuse of any kind. 
(Code 1999, § 14-109; Ord. No. 110(95), 1-17-1995)  
Sec. 14-110. - Sidewalk repairs. 
Repairs in all sidewalks shall be of the same material as the original walk or as may be required otherwise by the city. Sidewalk repairs shall be approved by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 20-58; Code 1999, § 14-110)  
Sec. 14-111. - Sidewalk construction specifications, width. 
(a)  This section governs the construction of concrete sidewalks. In excavating for concrete sidewalks, the ground shall be brought to a subgrade of not less than four inches below the finished grade of the walks. The subgrade shall be thoroughly tamped if necessary to furnish a solid foundation. 
(b)  The provisions of the "Standard Specifications for Highway Construction, Oklahoma Department of Transportation, 1988 Edition" (hereinafter referred to as Standard Specifications) as referenced in this section are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  Materials for the construction of concrete sidewalks shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsection of section 700—Materials of the Standard Specifications: Portland Cement Concrete, Class A, Subsection 701.01. 
(d)  All forming, placing and finishing shall be in accordance with subsection 414.04 of the Standard Specifications. A sawed joint shall be made to connect the old and new pavements. 
(1)  Contraction joints shall be of the dimensions specified. The sidewalk shall be divided into sections by dummy joints formed by a jointing tool or other acceptable means as approved by the city engineer. These dummy joints shall extend into the concrete for at least one-third of the depth and shall be approximately one-eighth inch wide; 
(2)  Expansion joints shall be formed around all appurtenances such as manholes, utility poles, etc., extending into and through the sidewalk, driveway or dividing strip. Premoulded expansion joint filler one-half inch thick shall be installed in these joints. Expansion joint filler of the thickness indicated shall be installed between the concrete and any fixed structure such as a building or bridge. This expansion joint material shall extend for the full depth of the concrete; 
(3)  Concrete shall be cured for at least 72 hours. Curing shall be by means of moist burlap or mats or by other approved methods. During the curing period all traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, shall be excluded. Vehicular traffic shall be excluded for such additional time as the city engineer shall direct; 
(4)  The general practice of crowning the walks in the residence districts is hereby prohibited. All walks shall be constructed with a flat surface pitching toward the curbline at the rate of one-fourth inch per foot; 
(5)  All sidewalks shall be four feet in width in residential areas or sections and eight feet in width in commercial/industrial areas. The outside line of four-foot walks shall be six feet from the front property line and the outside line of eight-foot walks shall be eight feet from the front property line; 
(6)  The sides of sidewalks and driveways shall be backfilled as soon as the forms have been removed and the required pointing up of honeycombed areas completed. The backfill shall be of approved earth, thoroughly compacted in layers not exceeding six inches in depth as shown on the plans or in a manner approved by the city engineer. Care shall be taken not to damage the concrete or bituminous material in placing or compacting the backfill. Where the general elevation of the adjacent ground surface is lower than the top of the sidewalk or driveway, the minimum width of the backfill shall be two feet; 
(7)  Sidewalks shall be protected from traffic using substantial barricades for a period of seven days for concrete unless otherwise permitted or ordered by the city engineer. 
(e)  No brick sidewalks shall be built within the city without prior approval of the city. 
(Prior Code, §§ 20-56, 20-57, 20-59, 20-60; Code 1999, § 14-111)  
Sec. 14-112. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. Each day upon which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1999, § 14-112)  
CHAPTER 2. - CURB AND STREET CUTS  
ARTICLE A. - STREETS 
 
Sec. 14-201. - Unlawful to cut without permit. 
It is unlawful for any person to cut the pavement or curb in or on any of the streets, sidewalks, avenues or alleys in the city for the purpose of laying pipe or other connections for utilities, or to cut or otherwise injure the pavement or curb on any of the streets, avenues or alleys for any purpose whatsoever without a permit therefor as provided by this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 20-31; Code 1999, § 14-201)  
Sec. 14-202. - Permit. 
Every person who desires to lay pipes or lines for the purpose of making and preparing any connections to utilities which will require the cutting of the pavement to make such connections shall first procure from the city engineer a written permit to cut such pavement or curb and make such installations for the proposed purpose or otherwise. No person shall have any right or authority to construct or install any pipes or lines or otherwise cut the pavement or curbs without first having secured such permit. 
(Prior Code, § 20-31; Code 1999, § 14-202)  
Sec. 14-203. - Fee, bond. 
Any person desiring to cut the pavement or other hard surface on any street or sidewalk in the city shall pay a fee for the permit and deposit a bond in such sum as is set by the city. The fee shall be in such amount as set by the city council by motion or resolution. 
(Prior Code, § 20-31; Code 1999, § 14-203)  
Sec. 14-204. - Notification of completion of work. 
All permittees shall, when they have completed the work for which such cut has been made, notify the city of the completion of such work in order that the same may be repaired. 
(Code 1999, § 14-204)  
Sec. 14-205. - No delays. 
Any permittee cutting pavement by virtue of a permit as authorized herein shall perform the excavation or other work without delay or interruption. 
(Code 1999, § 14-205)  
ARTICLE B. - CURB CUTS 
 
Sec. 14-211. - Permits. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to cut, break, tear out or remove the curbing or any part thereof along the street in the city for any purpose except upon the following conditions: Any person who desires to cut any curbing in the city shall first obtain a permit from the city before doing so. Application for such permit shall be in writing addressed to the city engineer and shall state the time and place that the applicant desires to break the curbing. The application shall contain such other information as is required by the city engineer. 
(b)  The city engineer may, in his discretion, refuse to approve any permit to cut any curbing along the streets of the city when in his opinion the cutting of the curbing shall constitute a traffic hazard, or interfere in any way with the safety of the public in the use of the street or adjacent sidewalk, or in any way deteriorate or damage the street or interfere with the use thereof by the public. Only such portions of any curbing may be cut or removed as in the opinion of the city engineer may be consistent with and not detrimental to the general public welfare. 
(Code 1999, § 14-211)  
Sec. 14-212. - Fee. 
A fee as set by the city council by motion or resolution shall be paid to the city prior to obtaining the permit required in this article. 
(Code 1999, § 14-212)  
Sec. 14-213. - Inspection. 
The removing of such curbing, the construction of the driveway and all other parts of the work in connection therewith shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 1999, § 14-213)  
Sec. 14-214. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 14-214)  
CHAPTER 3. - CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY  
ARTICLE A. - CONSTRUCTION WITHIN CITY-OWNED RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 14-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City utilities means any and all facilities conveying water, sanitary sewage, storm waters, or vehicular and pedestrian traffic or any other utilities that are owned by the city, or any other federal agency. 
Facilities means sidewalks, roadways, sod, streetscapes, lines, conduits, ducts, poles, wires, cables, receivers, pipes, culverts, mains, cross arms, and other devices used, operated, or maintained for movement of liquids, gasses, people, or information. 
Private utilities means any and all electric, heating gas, telephone and television signal, internet, or wireless carrier facilities or any other utilities not owned by the city, or any other federal agency. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-301, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 881(18) , 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 14-302. - Registration required. 
Any contractor or subcontractor whose activities are within or upon any city-owned rights-of-way or easement is hereby required to register with the city before engaging in such activities. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-302, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-303. - Registration; fine. 
(a)  A person may not engage in the business nor act in the capacity of a contractor or subcontractor within the city nor may that person bring or maintain any claim, action, suit, or proceeding in any court of the state related to the person's business or capacity as a contractor or subcontractor without a valid registration as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  A person who fails to obtain a valid registration prior to acting as a contractor or subcontractor as defined in this chapter, a person who acts as a contractor or subcontractor while his registration is suspended or revoked, or a person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation, upon conviction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-303, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-304. - Powers. 
The city is authorized to employ personnel and procure such supplies and equipment as may be necessary to carry out and implement the provisions of this chapter, subject to budgetary limitations and funding. The city may promulgate forms to implement the provisions of this chapter. The city may administer any provision of this chapter through use of the Internet or other technology as deemed necessary or appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-304, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-305. - Obtaining a rights-of-way contractor/subcontractor registration; refusal of registration. 
(a)  To obtain a contractor registration under this chapter, an applicant who is 18 years of age or older shall submit, on forms the city prescribes, an application for registration. A copy of the contractor's certificate of liability insurance shall be filed with the application and shall be not less than $500,000.00. Any insurance company issuing a liability policy to a contractor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be required to notify the city in the event such liability policy is cancelled for any reason or lapses for nonpayment of premiums. In addition, the contractor shall submit proof that the contractor has secured workers' compensation coverage satisfactory under the Workers' Compensation Act, or an affidavit of exemption or self-insurance as authorized pursuant to the Workers' Compensation Act. If the city deems it appropriate or necessary, the city may also require other information to be included on the application form to assist the city in registering the person as a contractor. The application shall contain statements that the applicant desires the issuance of a contractor registration certificate; that the applicant will comply with the provisions of this chapter; that the applicant will comply with state laws and local ordinances relating to standards and permits; that the applicant has or has not been registered or licensed as a contractor in another state and whether any disciplinary action was taken against such registration or license or whether it is still in good standing; and that the nonresident applicant appoints the secretary of state as legal service agent for all lawful process to be served upon the applicant for work performed in the state or as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall refuse to register any person if the city determines: 
(1)  The application contains false, misleading, or incomplete information; 
(2)  The applicant fails or refuses to provide any information requested by the city; 
(3)  The applicant fails or refuses to pay the required fees; 
(4)  The applicant is ineligible for registration due to a suspended or revoked registration in the state; 
(5)  The nonresident applicant has a revoked or suspended registration or license required by law for contractors in another state; or 
(6)  The applicant has failed or refuses to submit any taxes due in the state. 
(c)  The city shall notify the applicant in writing if the city denies a registration or renewal certificate, and shall provide the applicant an opportunity to respond to or cure any defect in the written application or renewal for a period of ten days from the date of the written notification. An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the city denying a registration or renewal may appeal the decision to the city manager as provided in the Administrative Procedures Act, or the applicant may reapply after a 90-day waiting period, if otherwise eligible in the provisions of this chapter. The application and renewal fees shall not be refundable. 
(d)  The city shall classify as not in good standing the registration of any contractor who fails to: 
(1)  Maintain liability insurance coverage; 
(2)  Maintain workers' compensation coverage satisfactory under the Workers' Compensation Act, or provide an affidavit of exemption or self-insurance as authorized pursuant to the Workers' Compensation Act; 
(3)  File, renew, or properly amend any fictitious name certificate; 
(4)  Maintain an active status of a corporation or registration as a foreign corporation, a limited liability company or registration as a foreign limited liability company, a limited liability partnership registration or foreign limited liability partnership registration, or a limited partnership certificate or limited partnership or foreign limited partnership certificate of authority, with the office of the secretary of state; 
(5)  File or renew a trade name registration; 
(6)  Maintain or renew a contractor registration as provided in this chapter; 
(7)  Notify the city of a change in name, address, legal business entity, or legal service agent; 
(8)  Maintain a registration as required by law in another state while registered in the state as a nonresident contractor; or 
(9)  File and pay all taxes when due in the state. 
(e)  The city shall send a written notice to the person when his registration is not in good standing. Any contractor who has been notified by the city that his registration is not in good standing shall cease soliciting or entering new services and projects as of the date of such notification; however, the contractor shall be allowed to complete projects where actual physical work has begun prior to the date of issuance of the notice that his registration is not in good standing. If the contractor fails to correct the deficiency specified in the notice by evidence satisfactory to the registrar within 30 days of the date of the notice, or if the contractor solicits or enters into new services contracts or projects while the contractor's registration is not in good standing, or while such registration is suspended or revoked, the contractor shall be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any registration that remains not in good standing for a 60-day period shall be suspended on the 60th day from the date of issuance of the notice to the contractor that his registration is not in good standing. Any registration that remains not in good standing, and is suspended for such cause, shall be revoked on the 90th day from the date of issuance of the notice to the contractor that his registration is not in good standing. The city shall notify the contractor upon suspension or revocation of his registration for failure to comply in bringing such registration into good standing as required by law. The contractor may reinstate his registration to good standing by paying the required fees provided in section 14-308 and complying with all other requirements for issuance of a registration in good standing. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city to suspend or revoke a registration pursuant to this section may appeal such decision to the city manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-305, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-306. - Criminal history records search or background check. 
(a)  When deemed appropriate, the city may conduct a criminal history records search or background check on any applicant or registered contractor and may investigate the information submitted on a contractor application or renewal form, provided no adverse action may be taken against the person until the person has been notified and given an opportunity to respond in writing. 
(b)  The city, its agents, employees and assigns shall not be liable and are granted immunity for the acts or omissions of any registered contractor or its employees, or for any person's failure or omission to properly disclose any information on an application or renewal form, including, but not limited to, pending criminal charges, arrests or prior criminal history records, disclosure of his contractor registration status, or his qualifications to perform or act as a contractor. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-306, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-307. - Contractor/subcontractor registration certificate, business limitations. 
The holder of a contractor registration certificate governed by this chapter is entitled to engage in the business within the city's rights-of-way or easements pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  A contractor's registration certificate number shall be valid and in good standing at the time of soliciting a project and during subsequent job performance; 
(2)  A contractor's registration certificate number shall be submitted when applying for any permit issued by the state, or any of its political subdivisions, for projects within the rights-of-way or easement services or projects, if a permit is required by such authority, and shall be written upon each permit issued; 
(3)  A contractor's registration certificate cannot be shared or used by any other individual or business entity; provided, however, a business firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, or other group or combination thereof acting as a unit may be granted a single registration certificate number for use by designated contractors acting as agents for the business entity when the application for registration contained sufficient information on each member, partner, officer and agent; 
(4)  Upon any change to the name, address, business entity, or legal service agent of a contractor, the city shall be notified in writing; 
(5)  A contractor shall comply with state laws and local ordinances relating to standards and permits for right-of-way or easement services and projects; and 
(6)  A contractor must pay taxes due in the state. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-307, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-308. - Registration fee. 
(a)  At the time of making application for a contractor registration certificate pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the city a fee to be set by the city in the city schedule of fees. 
(b)  All monies collected by the city for a contractor registration application, renewal and other fee assessment shall be deposited by the city into the general fund. 
(c)  The fee to be submitted with an application for a contractor registration may be prorated as set by the city. Unless prorated at the time of initial registration, fees shall be paid in the amount stated in subsection (a) of this section and such registration certificates shall expire June 30 each year. 
(d)  A renewal fee for a contractor registration shall be set by the city in the city schedule of fees. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-308, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-309. - Applicability of contractor/subcontractor registration. 
This does not apply to any work performed for the city under municipal contract. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-309, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-310. - Issuance or denial of registration. 
Within 25 calendar days from the date of application, the city shall either issue or deny the contractor registration. No registration shall be issued to an applicant until the city receives all documentation and fees necessary to obtain a registration certificate in good standing. The registration certificate issued on an original application entitles the person to act as a contractor within the city's rights-of-way or easements subject to the limitations of this chapter, until the expiration of the then current fiscal year ending June 30, except that an initial registration issued in May or June is valid until June 30 of the subsequent year. On the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, a prorated registration certificate issued between January 1, 2011, and April 30, 2011, shall be valid until June 30, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-310, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-311. - Change in contractor's name, address, legal service agent, or cease of business; notification. 
No later than ten days after the date of a change in a contractor's name, address, or legal service agent, or upon a registered contractor ceasing business as a contractor, the person shall notify the city of the change on a form provided by the city. A name, address, or legal service agent change shall be accompanied by a fee to be set by resolution. A person may not change his name under an active registration certificate if the change is associated with a change in the legal status of the business entity other than a change in marital status. Doing business under a new business name or change in legal status of a business requires issuance of a new registration certificate. When a registered contractor ceases to be active as a contractor, the city shall suspend the registration certificate of such contractor. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-311, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-312. - Certificate of renewal. 
(a)  Any contractor registration certificate issued under this chapter may be renewed for each successive fiscal year by obtaining from the city a certificate of renewal. To obtain a certificate of renewal, the person shall file with the city a renewal application by June 30 and pay the renewal fee. The application for renewal shall require statements under oath that the applicant has properly submitted income and employment taxes due in the state and whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony offense, and the nature of such offense, since issuance of the prior registration. The applicant shall include with the renewal application a copy of certificate of liability insurance, unless the registrar has a current valid certificate of liability insurance on file, and proof of workers' compensation coverage, unless exempt under the Administrative Workers' Compensation Act (85A O.S. § 1 et seq.). The renewal application need not be notarized. 
(b)  The city shall refuse to renew a contractor's registration certificate for any reason stated in section 14-305. The city shall notify the applicant in writing if the city denies the renewal as provided in section 14-310. 
(c)  If any contractor fails to file a renewal application by the June 30 deadline, that contractor's registration shall be not in good standing. A contractor has a 30-day grace period after June 30 to renew the registration certificate without a late fee. The late fee shall be set by the city in the city schedule of fees. A contractor registration certificate not renewed by August 30 shall be suspended for failure to renew, and on January 1, if a contractor's registration certificate still has not been renewed, it shall be revoked for failure to renew. 
(d)  (1)  A contractor desiring to renew a registration certificate that has been suspended for any cause provided in this chapter shall be assessed a fee equal to twice the amount of the fee established as a renewal amount. 
(2)  The city shall assess a reinstatement fee to be set by the city in the city schedule of fees plus the fee established by section 14-308 for any registration that has been revoked for any cause provided in this chapter. 
(3)  A contractor submitting an application for registration after suspension or revocation of that contractor's registration certificate must be otherwise eligible for registration under this chapter. 
(e)  The city shall include a registration status notation in a contractor's record if the status of registration changes from an active and valid registration to not in good standing, denied, suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-312, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-313. - Permits required. 
A permit is required for the construction, alteration, modification, or repair of any or all private utilities where city facilities may be disturbed on or under the city's rights-of-way. The work shall not be made in any place other than the location specified on the permit, and no work shall begin until the application has been approved and a permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-313, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 881(18) , 6-4-2018) 
Cross reference— Building permits, § 5-111; Plumbing, electrical, mechanical and other permits, § 5-113; Unlawful to cut without permit, § 14-201; Wireless facility permitting, § 14-403.  
Sec. 14-314. - Applications for work in right-of-way. 
Where work is to be done in a right-of-way, and there is no applicable permit type available elsewhere in this code, or upon the requirement of the community development director or their designee, a right-of-way permit application shall be made. There shall be three tiers of right-of-way permit applications, tier 1, tier 2, and tier 3. The applicant shall submit to the city a complete right-of-way permit application for the appropriate tier in the form provided by the city. Each tier shall have its own requirements as follows: 
(a)  A tier 1 right-of-way permit shall be required for all utility projects where the proposed utility is intended to serve one commercial or residential building or structure for private service. The community development director, or their designee, shall have final authority of the classification of the project. The requirements for application for tier 1 right-of-way permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Applications for such permits shall be filed with the city a minimum of five days prior to date anticipated commencement of construction. Applications shall include all of the following: 
a.  Complete tier 1 right-of-way permit application form. 
b.  A description of the private utility services that the applicant will or does offer. 
c.  A description of private utilities and/or facilities the applicant will or proposes to place in, on or over the rights-of-way. 
d.  A description of public utilities and facilities that the applicant proposes to remove and replace, cross-over, tie into, or encounter in any matter in the rights-of-way. 
e.  Two sets of plans, on 11 inch by 17 inch paper, specifications, and a network map of the facilities to be located within the city rights-of-way, if applicable. 
f.  The schedule and date of beginning shall be approved by the director of community development or their designee. 
g.  Additional extensions, repairs, or modifications to permitted facilities during the life of the rights-of-way permit shall be subject to separate review, approval, and collection of fees prior to amending the permit for such addition work. 
h.  If the location of the proposed private utility lies within state or federal right-of-way, the provider must provide evidence of a permit from the state or federal government. 
(b)  A tier 2 right-of-way permit shall be required for all emergency and non-emergency utility repair projects where the proposed utility repair covers less than 100 linear feet of utility pipe or cable. Utility repair projects covering more than 100 linear feet or pipe or cable must obtain a tier 3 right-of-way permit unless otherwise specified by the community development director or their designee, who shall have final authority of the classification of the project. The requirements for application for tier 2 right-of-way permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Applications for such permits shall be filed with the city a minimum of five days prior to date of anticipated commencement of construction for non-emergency repairs and shall be made on the next succeeding business day for emergency repairs whether or not the emergency work has been completed for emergency repairs. Applications shall include all of the following: 
a.  Complete tier 2 right-of-way permit application form. 
b.  A description of the private utility services that the applicant will or does offer. 
c.  A description of private utilities and/or facilities the applicant will or proposes to place in, on or over the rights-of-way. 
d.  A description of public utilities and facilities that the applicant proposes to remove and replace, cross-over, tie into, or encounter in any matter in the rights-of-way. 
e.  Two sets of plans, on 11 inch by 17 inch paper, specifications, and a network map of the facilities to be located within the city rights-of-way, if applicable. 
f.  The schedule and date of beginning shall be approved by the director of community development or their designee. 
g.  Additional extensions, repairs, or modifications to permitted facilities during the life of the rights-of-way permit shall be subject to separate review, approval, and collection of fees prior to amending the permit for such addition work. 
h.  The linear length of the proposed utility repair pipe or cable. 
i.  When disturbing lanes of traffic and as required by the city based on the proposed scope of work, provider shall submit a traffic control plan, storm water pollution prevention plan, and/or trench safety plan; 
(c)  A tier 3 right-of-way permit shall be required for all utility projects where the proposed utility is intended to serve more than one commercial or residential building or structure for private or public service, including wireless facilities regulated by article B of this chapter. The community development director, or their designee, shall have final authority of the classification of the project. The requirements for application for tier 3 right-of-way permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  The applicant and/or utility company shall coordinate with the city the location and design of the proposed utility to ensure that the proposed utility does not interfere with existing utilities and with any city infrastructure and shall meet required separation distances to city infrastructure as required by this code and applicable state law. The city shall make available information regarding the known location of all city utilities upon request. 
(2)  Applications for such permits shall be filed with the city prior to date anticipated for the commencement of construction and shall include all of the following: 
a.  Complete tier 3 right-of-way permit application form. 
b.  A description of the private utility services that the applicant will or does offer. 
c.  A description of private utilities and/or facilities the applicant will or proposes to place in, on or over the rights-of-way. 
d.  A description of public utilities and facilities that the applicant proposes to remove and replace, cross-over, tie into, or encounter in any matter in the rights-of-way. 
e.  Three sets of plans, on 11 inch x 17 inch paper, specifications, and a network map of the facilities to be located within the city rights-of-way and for the entire project. These plans shall include a site plan indicating the location of the proposed utility as well as all city infrastructure. 
f.  The schedule and date of beginning shall be approved by the director of community development or their designee. 
g.  Additional extensions, repairs, or modifications to permitted facilities during the life of the rights-of-way permit shall be subject to separate review, approval, and collection of fees prior to amending the permit for such addition work. 
h.  Provider shall submit a traffic control plan, storm water pollution prevention plan, and/or trench safety plan, if applicable, and as required by the city. 
i.  The names and telephone numbers of at least two persons serving as emergency contacts for the applicant who can be reached by telephone 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of an emergency; 
j.  If the location of the proposed wireless facility lies within state or federal right-of-way, the provider must provide evidence of a permit from the state or federal government. 
(3)  If the city deems necessary, the provider shall provide a hold harmless agreement with the city for the proposed utility. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-314, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 881(18) , 6-4-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 881(18) , adopted June 4, 2018, amended the title of § 14-314 to read as herein set out. The former § 14-314 title pertained to applications.  
Sec. 14-315. - Emergency conditions. 
In the event of an emergency occurring during non-office hours, and starting of a project is necessary for the protection of public or private property, said person must contact the police and fire department; an application for a permit as provided in this chapter shall be made on the next succeeding business day whether or not the emergency work has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-315, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-316. - Errors within city plans. 
Neither the city nor any employee or agent thereof shall be held responsible for the accuracy or any error appearing in any map. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-316, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-317. - Validity of permit. 
The issuance of a permit based upon approved plans, specifications, and other data shall not prevent the director of community development or his designee from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans, specifications, and other data or from preventing construction being carried on thereunder when in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or standard of the city. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-317, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-318. - Expiration of permits. 
(a)  Every permit issued by the director of community development or his designee, under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the construction authorized by such a permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the construction authorized by such permit is suspended at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such construction can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permit fee shall be a new full permit fee. 
(b)  Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which he may commence work under that permit when he is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The director of community development or his designee may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-318, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-319. - Inspection. 
Upon the date of completion, or when notified by the applicant of the project's completion if earlier than the stated date of completion, the director of community development, or their designee, shall make an inspection to determine if city facilities or properties have been restored without damage. If the community development director or their designee determines that the project has not been satisfactorily completed, then the applicant will be given written instructions describing the work which needs completion. Additionally, depending on the nature and scope of the work performed under the permit, the director or their designee may require that a set of engineer certified "as-built" plans be submitted when work is accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-319, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-320. - Reimbursement—Cost of completion. 
If the applicant has still not completed the work identified pursuant to this chapter, by the agreed upon date, or within such other period that may be prescribed by the director of community development or his designee, the city will give notice to the applicant to complete the project within 30 days. If the applicant fails to meet such deadline, the city, at its sole option, may elect to complete or contract to complete the project to city standards and/or restore city utilities and facilities, and bill the applicant for time and material costs, plus 20 percent for overhead. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-320, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-8-2017; Ord. No. 881(18) , 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 14-321. - Reimbursement—Cost of repair. 
At any time that a city-owned facility is damaged and the city is called upon to make repairs, the applicant will be billed for time and material costs, plus 20 percent for overhead. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-321, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-322. - Exemption. 
This chapter does not apply to any work performed for the city under municipal contract. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-322, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-323. - Revocation. 
They city shall have the right to revoke the permit of any applicant for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-323, 1-17-2017)  
Sec. 14-324. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person who shall engage in any business, trade, or vocation for which a license, permit, certificate, or registration is required by this chapter, without having a valid license, permit, certificate, or certificate of registration, as required, or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter or by any code adopted by this chapter, or who shall otherwise violate any provision of this chapter or of any code adopted by this chapter, or who shall violate any lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers provided for in this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-108. 
(Ord. No. 845(17), § 14-324, 1-17-2017)  
ARTICLE B. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF WIRELESS FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 14-401. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
Decorative pole means a streetlight or traffic signal pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational, directional signage, temporary holiday or special event attachments, may be placed. 
Macro tower means a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters of: 
(1)  Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole located within 500 linear feet of the new pole in the same public right-of-way; or 
(2)  Fifty-five feet above ground level; or 
(3)  Supports or is capable of supporting antennas. 
Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term includes: 
(1)  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
(2)  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
(3)  Electrical, coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation and is not to exceed 50 feet; and 
The term does not include: 
(1)  An electric generator; 
(2)  A pole; or 
(3)  A macro tower. 
Network provider or provider means: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
Service pole means a pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by the City and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by the City and supporting only network nodes. 
Small cell shall be included as a type of "network node." 
Utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services a telecommunications provider. 
Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
Wireless facilities means "micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node support poles," as those terms are defined in this section, and related ground equipment. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-402. - Applicability. 
(a)  Providers shall adhere to the requirements found in this chapter for the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and replacement of wireless facilities within the city's public right-of-way or on city owned property. 
(b)  Wireless facility installations or collocations, installed other than in city owned rights-of-way, shall be installed in accordance with all of the provisions of this code, including the City of Moore Land Development Code, Part 12, Chapter 2, 3, and 4, Article H. 
(c)  This chapter governs location and criteria for the installation of wireless facilities, including: micro network nodes, network nodes, node support poles, and related ground equipment, being installed. This chapter shall apply to all locations, installations, and collocations in, on, over or under the public rights-of-way or city owned property of such wireless facilities, installed pursuant to an agreement with the city in its discretion. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-403. - Permitting. 
(a)  Attachments to existing poles or structures. A provider shall not install, modify or relocate a network node on an existing pole or structure within the public right-of-way without first obtaining an approved wireless facility ROW permit from the city. Prior to installation, modification or relocation of a network node on an existing pole or structure, provider shall complete and submit to the city a complete wireless facility ROW permit application and a commercial electrical permit application, by a qualified electrical contractor in the form provided by the city, along with standard required documents. Up to five separate network nodes may be submitted under one permit application. Each permit application shall include the following items: 
(1)  Payment of the permit application fee as established in the current fee schedule and all other fees required by the city, including but not limited to annual fees set forth in a franchise agreement or other similar approved agreements for use of the city-owned right-of-way, as such fees may be adjusted from time to time pursuant to the agreement. 
(2)  An aerial map showing the location of the existing pole or structure to which the network node is proposed to be attached, and a street view image of the same; 
(3)  Stamped construction and engineering drawings prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Oklahoma, and for wireless facilities proposed to be attached to a service pole or other city-owned or -controlled structure, a certification from the engineer that the existing pole or structure and its foundations have sufficient structural stability to support the proposed network node and can bear the wind load without pole modification. Such construction and engineering drawings must also address the design of the connection of any item to the pole; 
(4)  Geographic information system (GIS) data for the location of each proposed wireless facility in the form required by the city; 
(5)  Detailed drawings, with calculations, showing strict conformity to the size limitations as set forth in this chapter; 
(6)  Documentation identifying the frequency on which the proposed network node will operate and a certification that the proposed network node shall not cause any interference with the city's traffic signal system, public safety radio system, private police cell system, or other city communications infrastructure; 
(7)  The names and telephone numbers of at least two persons serving as emergency contacts for the provider who can be reached by telephone 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of an emergency; 
(8)  Stamped engineering drawings for the electrical service providing power to the proposed network node, which must include the conduit size, circuit size, calculations for amp, proposed voltage, and distances running. The city is entitled to disconnect power to the network node or other wireless facilities in emergency situations; 
(9)  Scaled dimensional drawings or pictures of the proposed attachments of the network node to the existing poles or structures as well as any other proposed wireless facility, indicating the horizontal and vertical spacing from existing curbs, driveways, sidewalks, and other existing poles. This shall include a before-and-after image of the pole and all proposed attachments thereto and associated standalone equipment; 
(10)  Scaled dimensional construction and engineering drawings indicating the current public right-of-way line and showing any proposed underground conduit and equipment. Such drawings shall also show a sectional profile of the public right-of-way and identify all existing utilities and existing utility conflicts; 
(11)  Where required by the city based on the proposed scope of work, provider shall submit a traffic control plan, storm water pollution prevention plan, and/or trench safety plan; 
(12)  If the location of the proposed wireless facility lies within state or federal right-of-way, the provider must provide evidence of a permit from the state or federal government; and 
(13)  Certification that the new network node is spaced apart from existing, approved or proposed new network nodes a distance of at least 1,000 feet; and 
(14)  The information required to be submitted for construction in rights-of-way by article A of this chapter. 
(b)  Installation of network nodes on new poles. A provider shall not install or relocate a new node support pole or a network node on a new node support pole within the public right-of-way. 
(c)  Electrical supply. 
(1)  Provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power service to the provider's wireless facilities. Provider's electrical supply shall be separately metered from the city and must match city infrastructure voltage. The city shall not be liable to the provider for any stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the wireless facilities, including without limitation, stoppages or shortages caused by any act, omission, or requirement of the public utility serving the wireless facility structure or the act or omission of any other tenant or provider of the wireless facility structure, or for any other cause beyond the control of the city; 
(2)  All electrical power service is to be designed and installed according to part 5, chapter 4 of this Code, including the currently adopted version of the NEC; 
(3)  A commercial electrical permit is required for all electrical power service work. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-404. - Network node and node support pole requirements. 
(a)  Installation. Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install all wireless facilities in a quality and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements of this section, other provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable laws and ordinances. All work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and/or replacement of wireless facilities shall be in compliance with all applicable laws. The following requirements apply to the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and/or replacement of wireless facilities: 
(1)  Wireless facilities shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in an equipment box, cabinet or other enclosure that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging off a pole shall be sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or visually minimized to the extent possible; 
(2)  No wireless facility shall be located or placed in a manner that encroaches on existing or proposed city corner sight triangles or sight line triangles, as defined by section 12-553 of this Code; 
(3)  Electrical meters shall not be mounted on a service pole or other city-owned or controlled structure without prior approval from the community development director or their designee. Standalone electrical meters shall be located on or within a pad-mounted pedestal that shall be powder coated a neutral color that harmonizes with the surrounding area in which it is located. All electrical meters serving network nodes must display the provider's name and contact information; 
(4)  All power to a network node located on or attached to a service pole or other city owned or controlled structure must be able to be disconnected to provide a safe working environment; 
(5)  Use of city conduits for a provider's wireless facilities is prohibited; 
(6)  Network node attachments to a pole shall be installed at least eight feet above the ground; 
(7)  No protrusion from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole to which a network node is attached shall be more than two feet; 
(8)  The color of network nodes shall match the color of the poles or structures to which they are attached such that the network nodes blend with the color of the poles or structures and surrounding area structures; 
(9)  Before beginning excavation in any public right-of-way, provider shall be responsible for complying with all laws relating to verifying the location of existing utility lines and facilities and avoiding encroachment thereon, including the requirements of this chapter; 
(b)  Inspections. 
(1)  The city may perform visual inspections of any wireless facilities located in the public right-of-way as the city deems appropriate without notice. 
(2)  In the event of an emergency situation, the city may, but is not required to, notify provider of an inspection. The city may take all actions necessary to remediate the emergency situation and the city shall notify provider as soon as practicable after remediation is complete. 
(3)  The city shall perform electrical inspections to the electrical supply systems as required by part 5, chapter 4 of this Code. 
(c)  Placement. 
(1)  Design conditions. As a condition for approval of wireless facilities, the city can require reasonable design or concealment measures for the wireless facilities. Therefore, any installation that requires design or concealment measures must have these measures submitted with the permit application. The city requests that a provider explore the feasibility of using camouflage measures to improve the aesthetics of the wireless facilities, or any portion thereof, to minimize the impact to the aesthetics in these installations. 
(2)  Decorative poles. Provider shall neither allow the installation of, nor install wireless facilities on a decorative pole. 
(3)  Public right-of-way. Wireless facilities shall not obstruct, impede, or hinder pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the public right-of-way or obstruct or interfere with the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers. Provider shall promptly remove wireless facilities that are installed in a location that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the city, that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, or that otherwise render the public right-of-way non-compliant with applicable laws, including but not limited to the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(4)  Notice to remove unauthorized wireless facilities and penalty. If a provider fails to remove any unauthorized wireless facility or any wireless facility that is located in an improper location within 30 days after receiving written notice or the date required by the city, the provider shall be subject to a penalty of up to $500.00 per day until the wireless facility is removed or relocated to the correct area within the permitted location, regardless of whether the provider's contractor, subcontractor, or vendor installed the wireless facility in strict conformity with this chapter. 
(f)  Generators. Provider shall not allow or install generators or back-up generators in the public right-of-way. 
(g)  Equipment dimensions. 
(1)  Each antenna that does not have exposed elements and is attached to an existing structure or pole must: 
a.  Be located inside an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume; 
b.  Not exceed a height of three feet above the existing structure or pole; and 
c.  Not protrude from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole by more than two feet. 
(2)  If an antenna has exposed elements and is attached to an existing structure or pole, the antenna and all of the antenna's exposed elements must: 
a.  Fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet; 
b.  Not exceed a height of three feet above the existing structure or pole; and 
c.  Not protrude from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole by more than two feet. 
(3)  The cumulative size of other wireless equipment associated with the network node attached to the existing structure or pole may not: 
a.  Be more than 28 cubic feet in volume; or 
b.  Protrude from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole by more than two feet. 
(4)  Ground based enclosures, separate from the pole, housing any equipment related to the network node, may not be higher than three-feet six-inches from grade, wider than three-feet six-inches, or deeper than three-feet six-inches. 
(5)  Equipment attached to a utility pole must be installed in accordance to the provisions of this chapter, the National Electric Safety Code, the National Electric Code, and the utility pole owner's construction standards. 
(h)  Signage. 
(1)  Provider shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of the node support poles and network nodes that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed four-by-six inches, unless otherwise required by law or the city. 
(2)  Provider shall not post any other signage or advertising on the node support poles and network nodes, or utility pole. 
(i)  Ground equipment. 
(1)  Ground equipment near street corners and intersections. Ground equipment shall be minimal and the least intrusive. Ground equipment must remain out of the sight triangle as described by section 12-533 of this Code. 
(2)  Ground equipment density. To enhance the safety requirements of line of sight of pedestrians, particularly small children, the city may deny a request for a proposed location. 
(j)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Repair. Whenever the installation, placement, attachment, repair, modification, removal, operation, use, or relocation of wireless facilities, or any portion thereof, is required and such installation, placement, attachment, repair, modification, removal, operation, use, or relocation causes any property of the city to be damaged or to have been altered in such a manner as to make it unusable, unsafe, or in violation of any laws, provider, at its sole cost and expense, shall promptly repair and return such property to its original condition. If provider does not repair such property or perform such work as described in this section, then the city shall have the option to perform or cause to be performed such reasonable and necessary work on behalf of the provider and to charge the provider for the reasonable and actual costs incurred by the city. Provider shall promptly reimburse the city for the costs. 
(2)  Graffiti abatement. Provider shall remove all graffiti on any of its wireless facilities located in the public right-of-way as soon as practical, but not later than ten days from the date provider receives notice thereof. 
(3)  Tree maintenance. Provider and/or its contractors or agents shall obtain written permission from the city before trimming trees hanging over the provider's wireless facilities to prevent branches of such trees from contacting the provider's wireless facilities. When directed by the city, provider shall trim such trees under the supervision and direction of the city. The provider shall make all reasonable efforts to promote the health and well-being of any such trees, and shall not at any time trim trees in a manner that causes unsightly conditions to arise. The city shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from provider's actions under this section. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-405. - Inventory of network node and node support poles. 
(a)  Provider shall maintain a list of its wireless facilities located in the city and the utility as-builts for associated underground appurtenances and shall provide the city an inventory of the location and/or as-built of each such wireless facility and appurtenances upon request from the city. Upon the city's written request, provider shall provide the information within 30 days of city's request. The inventory of wireless facilities shall include GIS coordinates, date of installation, city pole ID number (if applicable), type of pole used for installation, pole owner, and description/type of installation for each wireless facility. With respect to wireless facilities that become inactive, the inventory shall include the same information as active installations in addition to the date the wireless facility was deactivated and the date the wireless facility was removed from the public right-of-way. City may compare the inventory to its records to identify any discrepancies. 
(b)  In the event provider's contact information changes and differs from the information provided on a permit application, provider shall promptly provide updated contact information to the city for emergency purposes. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-406. - Installations on traffic signals, street signage, other traffic control structures and lighting structures. 
(a)  Installations of wireless facilities on a traffic signal structure or lighting structure must not interfere with the integrity of the structure in any way that may compromise the safety of the public and must be in strict conformance with an agreement applicable to each such installation and the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Installation of wireless facilities on any traffic signal structure shall: 
(1)  Be encased in a separate conduit than the traffic signal or lighting electronics; 
(2)  Have a separate electric power connection than the traffic signal or lighting structure; and 
(3)  Have a separate access point than the traffic signal or lighting structure; 
(c)  The city shall have the ability to temporarily cut-off electricity to the wireless facilities for the safety of maintenance personnel. In the event of failure of components of the traffic signal system for whatever reason, including damage resulting from vehicular collisions, weather-related events, or malicious attacks, city will respond to restore traffic signal operations as a matter of public safety. Should the events that result in damage or failure of the traffic signal system also affect provider's wireless facilities, provider shall have the sole responsibility to repair or replace its wireless facilities and shall coordinate its own emergency efforts with the city. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-407. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to install, and permit others to install, utility facilities in the public right-of-way. In permitting such work to be done by others, the city shall not be liable to provider for any damage caused by those persons or entities. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to locate, operate, maintain, and remove city traffic signal poles in the manner that best enables the operation of its traffic signal system and protects public safety. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to locate, operate, maintain, and remove any city pole or structure located within the public right-of-way in the manner that best enables the city's operations and protects public safety. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-408. - Interference with operations and liability. 
(a)  The city shall not be liable to a provider for any damage caused by other providers with facilities sharing the same pole or for failure of provider's wireless facilities for whatever reason, including damage resulting from vehicular collisions, weather-related events, or malicious attacks. 
(b)  The city shall not be liable to a provider by reason of inconvenience, annoyance, or injury to the provider's wireless facilities or activities conducted by provider related thereto, arising from the necessity of repairing any portion of the public right-of-way, or from the making of any necessary alterations or improvements in, or to, any portion of the public right-of-way or in, or to, city's fixtures, appurtenances, or equipment. The city will use reasonable efforts not to cause material interference to provider's operation of its wireless facilities. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-409. - Signal interference with city's communications infrastructure prohibited. 
(a)  No interference. In the event that provider's wireless facilities interfere with the city's traffic signal system, public safety radio system, private police cell system, or other city communications infrastructure, the provider shall promptly cease operation of the wireless facility causing such interference upon receiving notice from the city and refrain from operating such wireless facility in the future. Provider shall respond to the city's notice to address the source of the interference as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 24 hours of receiving notice. 
(b)  Protocol for responding to event of interference shall be in strict conformance with the agreement applicable to each such installation and the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Additionally, the provider shall include any additional information relevant to the execution of the remediation plan. 
(2)  In the event that interference with city facilities, services, or operations cannot be eliminated, provider shall shut down the interfering wireless facility and remove or relocate the wireless facility that is the source of the interference as soon as possible to a suitable alternative location approved by city. 
(c)  Following installation or modification of a network node, the city may require provider to test the network node's radio frequency and other functions to confirm it does not interfere with the city's facilities, services, or operations. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-410. - Abandonment of wireless facilities. 
Provider shall remove wireless facilities when such facilities are abandoned regardless of whether provider receives notice from the city. The removal of wireless facilities shall be completed in accordance with the provisions of an agreement with the city and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-411. - Relocation and removal at provider's expense. 
(a)  Provider shall remove and relocate a wireless facility at its own expense to an alternative location in accordance to an agreement with the city, but in no case later than 120 days after receiving written notice that removal, relocation, and/or alteration of the wireless facility is necessary. 
(b)  Provider's duty to remove and relocate its wireless facility at its expense is not contingent on the availability of an alternative location acceptable for relocation. City may make reasonable efforts to provide an alternative location within the public right-of-way for relocation, but regardless of the availability of an alternative site acceptable to provider, provider shall comply with the notice to remove its wireless facility as instructed. 
(c)  The city may remove the wireless facility if provider does not remove the wireless facility within 120 days. In such event, provider shall reimburse city for the city's actual cost of removal of provider's wireless facility within 30 days of receiving an invoice from the city. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-412. - Removal or relocation by provider. 
(a)  If the provider removes or relocates a wireless facility at its own discretion, it shall notify the city in writing not less than ten days prior to removal or relocation. Provider shall obtain all permits required for relocation or removal of its wireless facilities prior to relocation or removal. 
(b)  The city shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by provider for wireless facilities that have been removed. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-413. - Restoration of wireless facilities. 
Provider shall repair any damage to the public right-of-way and the property of any third party resulting from provider's removal or relocation activities or any other of provider's activities within ten days following the date of such removal, relocation, or activity, at provider's sole cost and expense, including restoration of the public right-of-way and such other property to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date provider was granted a permit for the applicable location, including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs, or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole approval of the city and according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-414. - Provider responsibility. 
Provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of provider's employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, and subcontractors in connection with the performance of activities within the city's public right-of-way, as if such acts or omissions were provider's acts or omissions. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Sec. 14-415. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person found in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or fail to do anything required by this part or by any part of any code adopted by this part, or who shall violate any lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers provided for in this part, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to punishment as provided by section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 876(17) , 12-18-2017)  
Part 15 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES  
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 15-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this part, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means any narrow public passageway or street ordinarily located in the interior portion of platted blocks, having no legal or official name other than alley, as herein defined, and ordinarily open to traffic and used for service or delivery purposes to the rear of stores, dwellings or buildings. 
Arterial street means any U.S. or state numbered route, controlled-access highway or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-102. 
Authorized emergency vehicle means: 
(1)  Vehicles of fire departments; 
(2)  Ambulances or vehicles specified pursuant to 63 O.S. § 1-2512(B) of licensed ambulance service providers; 
(3)  State vehicles of law enforcement agencies; 
(4)  County vehicles of sheriffs and full-time commissioned deputies and vehicles designated by the sheriff for support of the sheriff's office, including privately-owned vehicles driven by the sheriff and full-time, part-time and reserve commissioned deputies, provided the audible sirens and flashing red lights equipped on such privately-owned vehicles are used only in a law enforcement capacity and in the course of duty; 
(5)  Municipal vehicles of police departments; 
(6)  Vehicles owned and operated by the United States Marshals Service or the Federal Bureau of Investigation; 
(7)  Vehicles of the Oklahoma National Guard units designated by the Adjutant General for support to civil authorities; or 
(8)  Vehicles owned and operated by any local organization for emergency management as defined by 63 O.S. § 683.3. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-103. 
Bicycle means every device upon which any person may ride, propelled solely by human power through a belt, chain, or gears, and having two or more wheels; excluding mopeds. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-104. 
Boulevard or through street means any street or highway on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided by law or ordinance. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-175. 
Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-105. 
Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway when within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, office buildings, railroad stations or public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the highway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-106. 
Bus loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Commercial chauffeur and chauffeur mean every person who operates, drives or is in actual physical control of a Class A, B or C commercial motor vehicle, as defined in 47 O.S. §§ 1-107.1—1-107.3. 
Commercial vehicles. 
(1)  Class A. Any combination of vehicles, except a Class D motor vehicle, with a gross combined weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds, provided the gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicles being towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds. 
(2)  Class B. Any single vehicle, except a Class D motor vehicle, with a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds, or any such vehicle towing a vehicle not in excess of 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating. This class shall apply to a bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds and designed to transport 16 or more persons, including the driver. 
(3)  Class C. Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles, other than a Class A or Class B vehicle as defined above, which is: 
a.  Required to be placarded for hazardous materials under 49 CFR 172, subpart F; or 
b.  Designed by the manufacturer to transport 16 or more persons, including the driver. 
(4)  Class D. 
a.  A Class D motor vehicle is any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles which: 
1.  Regardless of weight: 
(i)  Is marked and used as an authorized emergency vehicle, as defined in section 15-101; or 
(ii)  Is designed and used solely as a recreational vehicle; 
2.  Is a single or combination vehicle with a gross combined weight rating of less than 26,001 pounds; 
3.  Is a single or combination farm vehicle with a gross combined weight rating of more than 26,001 pounds if: 
(i)  It is entitled to be registered with a farm tag and has a farm tag attached thereto; 
(ii)  It is controlled and operated by a farmer, his family or employees; 
(iii)  It is used to transport either agricultural products, farm machinery, farm supplies or any combination of those materials to or from a farm; 
(iv)  It is not used in the operations of a common or contract motor carrier; and 
(v)  It is used within 150 air miles of the person's farm or as otherwise provided by federal law; or 
4.  Is operated by a licensed driver employed by a unit of local government that operates a commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of that unit of local government for the purpose of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding or salting, if: 
(i)  The properly licensed employee who ordinarily operates a commercial vehicle for these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle; or 
(ii)  The employing governmental entity determines that a snow or ice emergency requires additional assistance. 
b.  A Class D motor vehicle shall not include any vehicle which is: 
1.  Designed to carry 16 or more passengers, including the driver; or 
2.  Required to be placarded for hazardous materials under 49 CFR 172, subpart F, provided a farm vehicle, as defined in subsection (4)a.3 of this definition, which is required to be placarded for hazardous materials under 49 CFR 172, subpart F, shall be considered to be a Class D motor vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 1-107.1—1-107.4. 
Crosswalk means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the roadway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-111. 
Curb loading zones means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers, freight or materials. 
Curb means the edge of a roadway marked or understood as such. 
Daytime means one-half hour before sunrise until one-half hour after sunset. The term "nighttime" means any other time. 
Double park means the standing or stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, on the roadway. 
Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-114. 
Emergency means a condition suddenly created, requiring immediate action for the preservation of public peace, health or safety, and among other things particularly means any fire, unusual storm, death, riot or unusual traffic condition. 
Explosives means as defined in 49 CFR 173. 
Flammable liquid means liquid which has a flash point of 70 degrees Fahrenheit or less, as determined by a Tagliabue or equivalent closed-up test device and having a vapor pressure not exceeding 40 psi at 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Intersection means: 
(1)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict; or 
(2)  Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-126. 
Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
License to operate a motor vehicle means: 
(1)  Any valid driver's license or permit to operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of the state, including any temporary license or instruction permit, the lawful possession of which by a resident of the state shall be evidence that the resident has been granted the privilege to operate a motor vehicle. 
(2)  Any nonresident's operating privilege as defined in section 47 O.S. § 1-138, which is evidenced by the lawful possession of a valid driver's license or permit to operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of another state. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-128. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor; and a combustion engine with a piston or rotor displacement of 150 cubic centimeters or greater. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-135. 
Motor-driven cycle means any motor vehicle having a power source that if the power source is a combustion engine, has a piston or rotor displacement of greater than 35 cubic centimeters but less than 150 cubic centimeters regardless of the number of chambers in the power source, if the power source is electric, has a power output of greater than 1,000 watts; and a seat or saddle for the use of each rider; and not more than three wheels in contact with the ground. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-136. 
Metal tire means every tire, the surface of which in contact with the highway is wholly or partly of metal or other hard, nonresilient material. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-133. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle not operated upon rails. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-134. 
Motor vehicle accident is defined and classified as in the "Manual on Classification of Motor Vehicle Traffic Accidents" prepared by the Committee on Uniform Traffic Accident Statistics, Traffic Conference, and distributed by the National Safety Council. 
Muffler means a device designed for the use on a particular internal-combustion engine and properly affixed thereto for the purpose of reducing the exhaust noise of such engine to an unobjectionable level. 
Official traffic-control devices means all signs, barricades, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this part placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic which conforms to the latest edition of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways," published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, a copy of which is on file. 
Operator means every person, other than a commercial chauffeur or chauffeur, who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a highway or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-149. 
Owner means a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle; or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with a right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-141. 
Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers; a public parking lot is any parking lot on right-of-way dedicated to public use or owned by the state or a political subdivision thereof. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-142. 
Passenger means a rider in any vehicle other than the driver. 
Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-143. 
Police officer means every officer of the municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-147. 
Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-148. 
Railroad means a carrier of persons or property operated upon stationary rails. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-149. 
Railroad sign or signal means any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-150. 
Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rail. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-151. 
Registration means the registration certificates and registration plates issued under the laws of the state pertaining to the registration of vehicles. 
Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-154. 
Revocation of driver's license or revocation of driving privilege means the termination by formal action of the department of a person's driver's license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the public highways, such action shall include the requirement of the surrender to the department of public safety said person's driver's license. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-155. 
Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-156. 
Road tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
Roadway means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein refers to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-158. 
Safety zone or island means an area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
School bus means every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately-owned and -operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school. The term "school bus" shall not include buses normally used in city transit which may be used part-time for transportation of school children within the city during some portion of the day. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-160. 
Semi-trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests or is carried by another vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-162. 
Shoulder means the portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use, and for lateral support of base and surface courses. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-158. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-163. 
Solid tire means every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-164. 
Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-167. 
Stop , when required, means complete cessation from movement. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-169. 
Stop or stopping , when prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance of the directions of a police officer, a traffic-control sign or signal. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-170. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-122. 
Suspension of driver's license or suspension of driver's privilege means the temporary withdrawal by formal action of the department of a person's driver's license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the public highways. Such action shall include the requirement of the surrender to the department of public safety said person's driver's license. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-173. 
Taxicab means and includes any motor vehicle for hire, designed to carry eight persons or less, operated upon any street or highway, or on call or demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for transportation for hire between such points along streets or highways as may be directed by the passenger or passengers so being transported. This classification shall not include: 
(1)  Motor vehicles of eight-passenger capacity or less operated by the owner where the cost of operation is shared by fellow workmen between their homes and the place of regular daily employment, when not operated for more than two trips per day; 
(2)  Motor vehicles operated by the owner where the cost of operation is shared by the passengers on a "share the expense plan"; or 
(3)  Motor vehicles transporting students from the public school system when said motor vehicle is so transporting under contract with a public, private, or parochial school board or governing body. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-174. 
Through street or highway means every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided by law or ordinance. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-175. 
Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either single or together, while using any highway for purposes of travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-177. 
Traffic-control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternatively directed to stop, proceed or proceed with caution. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-178. 
Traffic lane means the portion of the traveled way for the movement of a single line of vehicles. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-179. 
Trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle; provided, however, this definition shall not include implements of husbandry as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-125. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-180. 
Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-182. 
Urban district means the territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of a quarter of a mile or more. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-185. 
U-turn means turning a vehicle around so as to proceed in the opposite direction. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; this shall not include implements of husbandry, electric personal assistive mobility devices, and motorized wheelchairs. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-186. 
Yield means the yielding of the right-of-way to all vehicles or pedestrians approaching from the right or left intersecting street which are so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-102, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-102. - Security verification form. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by law, no motor vehicle shall be operated within the city unless there is in effect with respect to such vehicle security for the payment of loss resulting from the liability imposed by law for bodily injury, death and property damage sustained by any person arising out of the ownership, maintenance, operation or use of the vehicle. Every person, while operating or using a motor vehicle within the city which is not owned by such person, shall maintain in force security for the bodily injury, death or property damage sustained by any person arising out of the operation or use of the vehicle, unless such security has been provided by the owner in accordance with this section which does not exclude the person from coverage. Proof of such security shall be carried in the vehicle at all times and shall be produced for inspection upon request by any law enforcement officer or representative of the department of public safety and, in case of collision, such proof shall be shown upon request of any person affected by the collision. 
(b)  The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or operator's security verification form or an equivalent form from the department of public safety during operation of the vehicle: 
(1)  Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or any agency or political subdivision thereof; 
(2)  Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of a business, corporation or utility on the exterior, and which is in compliance with provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 7-600—7-607, according to the records of the state department of public safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance, or fleet policy; 
(3)  Any vehicle authorized for operation pursuant to a permit number issued by the interstate commerce commission or the corporation commission; 
(4)  Any licensed taxicab; and 
(5)  Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer. 
(c)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Compulsory Insurance Law means the law requiring liability insurance in conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in the state as found in 47 O.S. § 7-606. 
Online verification system for motor vehicle insurance is an online verification system for motor vehicle liability policies as required by the Compulsory Insurance Law which is provided and maintained by the department of public safety. Any law enforcement officer, to establish compliance with the Compulsory Insurance Law during a traffic stop or accident investigation, shall access information from the online verification system to verify the current validity of the policy described on a security verification form produced by the operator of each motor vehicle during the traffic stop or accident investigation. If compliance is not confirmed for the policy described on the security verification form produced by the operator and a subsequent investigation conducted by the officer verifies that the operator is not in compliance or if no security verification form is produced, the officer shall issue a citation to the operator for failure to comply with the Compulsory Insurance Law. Establishing compliance with the Compulsory Insurance Law through the online verification system shall not be the primary cause for law enforcement to stop a motor vehicle. 
Operator's policy means an operator's policy of liability insurance which shall insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him by law for damages arising out of the operation or use by him of any motor vehicle not owned by him, subject to the same limits of liability required in an owner's policy. 
Owner's policy means an owner's policy of liability insurance which: 
(1)  Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate reference all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted; 
(2)  Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other person, except as provided in subsection (3) of this definition, using an insured vehicle with the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from the liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, operation or use of such vehicle; 
(3)  May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with existing laws; and 
(4)  Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in accordance with 47 O.S. § 7-204. 
Security means: 
(1)  A policy or bond meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 7-204; 
(2)  A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits required under 47 O.S. § 7-330 as acceptable limits for a policy or bond; or 
(3)  Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 7-503, having the equivalency of limits required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable limits for a policy or bond. 
Security verification form means a form, approved by the state insurance commissioner, verifying the existence of security required by the Compulsory Insurance Law of the state. 
(d)  An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department upon request of any peace officer of the department shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-108 and court costs. 
(e)  The nonresident owner of a motor vehicle not registered in the state may give proof of financial responsibility by providing proof of compliance with the financial responsibility laws of the state in which the vehicle is registered or by filing with the department of public safety a certificate of an insurance company authorized to transact insurance in the state in which the vehicle is registered, or if such nonresident does not own a motor vehicle, then in the state in which the insured resides, provided such certificate otherwise conforms to the provisions of this section, and the department of public safety shall accept the same upon condition that the insurance company complies with the following provisions with respect to the policy so certified: 
(1)  The insurance company shall execute a power of attorney authorizing the department to accept service on its behalf or notice of process in any action arising out of a motor vehicle accident in the state; and 
(2)  The insurance company shall agree in writing that such policies shall be deemed to conform with the laws of the state relating to the terms of motor vehicle liability policies issued in the state. 
The provisions of this section shall apply to nonresident owners and operators of vehicles that are not registered in the state only if the state in which the vehicle is registered requires compulsory liability insurance. In such cases, compliance with the requirements of the law of the state of registration shall be deemed in compliance with the laws of the state. 
(f)  A sentence imposed for any violation of this section may be suspended or deferred in whole or in part by the court. 
(g)  Any person producing proof in court that a current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department reflecting this liability coverage for such person was in force at the time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge. Any person producing proof in court that a current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department of public safety reflecting liability coverage for the person was in force at the time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of the charge. If proof of security verification is presented to the court by no later than the business day preceding the first scheduled court appearance date, the dismissal shall be without payment of court costs. The court may access information from the online verification system to confirm liability coverage. The court shall not dismiss the fine unless proof that liability coverage for the person was in force at the time of the alleged offense is presented to the court. 
(h)  Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the court clerk shall forward an abstract to the state department of public safety within five days reflecting the action taken by the court. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-103, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 7-601 et seq.  
Sec. 15-103. - Vehicle owner not to permit or authorize violation of law or this chapter. 
It is unlawful for any person to authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him, or under his control, to be driven upon any street in the city by any person who is not authorized to drive a motor vehicle under the laws of the state, or to be driven or to stand or to be parked in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-104, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-104. - Parent or guardian not to authorize or permit child or ward to violate chapter. 
It is unlawful for a parent of a child or the guardian of a ward to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-105, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-105. - Adoption of state vehicle laws. 
There is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference the state motor vehicle code, 47 O.S. § 1-101 et seq., and the state "Rules of the Road," 47 O.S. § 11-101 et seq., and all other misdemeanor traffic and motor vehicle violations in 47 O.S., as now exist and as may be from time to time amended. Such state laws as adopted herein by reference shall be fully enforceable by the city within the city limits as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-106, 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 2. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 
 
Sec. 15-201. - Authority to install traffic-control devices. 
The city manager, subject to direction of the council, shall have placed and maintained traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may have placed and maintained such additional traffic-control signs, signals and devices as it may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. The city manager may have traffic-control devices tested under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-201, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-202. - Design and construction of traffic-control devices; manual of specifications. 
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the latest edition of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways," as published by the state department of transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-202, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Uniform manual adopted by state, state approval required on state highways, 47 O.S. § 15-104 et seq.  
Sec. 15-203. - Traffic signs required for enforcement. 
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-203, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-201.  
Sec. 15-204. - Obedience to official traffic-control devices. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted in this chapter to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-204, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-201.  
Sec. 15-205. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flag person gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; 
(4)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing; and 
(5)  The tracks at the crossing are not clear 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(c)  The operator of any Class A, B, or C commercial vehicle not required to stop at all railroad crossings, as prescribed in 47 O.S. § 11-702, shall slow down and check that the tracks are clear of an approaching train. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-205, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-701.  
Sec. 15-206. - Traffic-control signal legend. 
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the word "Go," "Caution" or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used, and the terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green alone or "Go." 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign or barricade at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited; 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; and 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk; 
(2)  Steady yellow alone. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited; and 
b.  Pedestrians facing such signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles; 
(3)  Steady red alone or "Stop." 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until indication to proceed is shown. However, vehicles in the right traffic lane after making a stop as above required may enter the intersection cautiously and make a right turn unless "No Turn on Red" signs are posted to prohibit right turns; but such vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian or other traffic in the intersection, and such turn shall not be made so as to interfere with traffic proceeding on a green signal indication on the cross street; 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone or until authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal; and 
(4)  Steady red with green arrow. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone or until authorized so to do by pedestrian "Walk" signal; and 
c.  In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made. In the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-206, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-202.  
Sec. 15-207. - Pedestrian-control signals. 
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the term "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  "Walk." Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles; and 
(2)  "Wait," "Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the Walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "Wait" signal is showing. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-207, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-203.  
Sec. 15-208. - Flashing signals. 
(a)  Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if none, than before entering the intersection. The right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; and 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(b)  This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-208, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-204.  
Sec. 15-209. - Pedestrian-activated school crossing signal. 
Whenever a pedestrian-activated school crossing signal is provided, it requires obedience by vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Flashing yellow. 
a.  When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution; and 
b.  Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may actuate the signal-control switch, and shall wait until steady red alone is shown before entering the roadway or intersection controlled by the signal; 
(2)  Steady yellow alone. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection or past the signal when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited; and 
b.  No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which the signal controls vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown; 
(3)  Steady red. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then before passing the signal or entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until flashing yellow is shown alone; and 
b.  Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles; and 
(4)  Steady red and steady yellow combined. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and that such vehicular traffic shall remain standing until the flashing yellow is shown alone; and 
b.  Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal is about to be shown, and shall not enter the signal-controlled roadway or intersection, or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular traffic; but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-209, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-205.  
Sec. 15-210. - Display of unauthorized signs or signals, political signs. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, which attempts to direct the movement of traffic which projects any flashing or revolving beams of light, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign, signal or device bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)  The city is empowered to remove every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device without notice. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-210, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-206.  
Sec. 15-211. - Defacing or removing traffic-control devices. 
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, change the position of or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-211, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-212. - Designation of crosswalks and safety zones. 
The city manager, subject to direction by the council, is authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and have maintained by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary; and 
(2)  Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-212, 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 3. - EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 15-301. - Equipment required; use of equipment. 
(a)  Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped as required by 47 O.S. No person shall operate a vehicle upon a street of the city which is not equipped as required by state law. 
(b)  No person shall fail to use such equipment in the manner required by state law, or use it in a manner prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-301, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Equipment required on vehicles, 47 O.S. § 12-101 et seq.  
Sec. 15-302. - Muffler required, cutouts. 
(a)  Every vehicle shall be equipped, maintained, and operated so as to prevent excessive or unusual noise. Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler or other effective noise-suppressing system in good working order and in constant operation, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, bypass or similar device. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in any manner which will amplify or increase the noise or sound emitted louder than that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle. 
(b)  The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke, or both. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-302, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-402.  
Sec. 15-303. - Width, height, length, weight and load. 
No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width, height, length, weight or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law, except in accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-303, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Vehicle size, weight and load, 11 O.S. § 14-101 et seq.  
Sec. 15-304. - Windshields to be unobstructed; wipers required. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Critical area means the area cleaned by the normal sweep of the windshield wiper blade on the driver's side. The area covered by the wiper blade cannot be reduced from manufacturer's original specifications. 
Noncritical areas means all other areas. 
Outright breakage means glass which is severely cracked or shattered to the extent that air passes through it or, if by running a fingertip over the cracked area, the glass moves or sharp edges can be felt. 
Star break or shot damage means a vented break with cracks radiating from the point of impact. 
Stress or hairline crack means a crack which has no visible point of impact. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle which: 
(1)  Is not equipped with a windshield; 
(2)  Has any outright breakage in the windshield or in the window on either side of the driver; 
(3)  Has any star break or shot damage, three inches or more in diameter, located in the critical area; or 
(4)  Has two or more stress or hairline cracks, 12 inches or more in combined length, located in the critical area. 
(c)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster, other nontransparent material, or debris, including, but not limited to, snow, ice, or frost, upon the front windshield or the side wings, or side or rear windows or suspend any sign, poster, object, or other material from the interior of the vehicle which materially obstructs, obscures, or impairs the driver's clear view of the highway ahead or to either side or of any intersecting highway. 
(d)  The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with an electric windshield wiper mechanism for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. 
(e)  Every windshield wiper blade and windshield wiper mechanism upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good working order. When replacing the wiper blade, the length of the blade shall not be reduced from the manufacturer's specification. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-304, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-404.  
Sec. 15-305. - Inspection of vehicles. 
Police officers may at any time upon reasonable cause to believe that a vehicle is unsafe or not equipped as required by law, or that its equipment is not in proper adjustment or repair or the operator is not properly licensed, require the driver of such vehicle to stop and submit such vehicle to an inspection and such test with reference thereto as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-305, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— State officers may inspect vehicles, 47 O.S. §§ 13-102, 13-103.  
Sec. 15-306. - Vehicles to be registered, display of tags. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the city without a state vehicle license or tag as may be required by law. 
(b)  No person shall fail to display the state vehicle license or tag as required by law or attach any trailer hitch or other device in a manner as to cover or partially cover the vehicle license. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-306, 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 4. - CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 15-401. - Vehicles injurious to streets; metal tires prohibited. 
(a)  Every solid rubber tire on a vehicle shall have rubber on its entire traction surface at least one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery. 
(b)  A person shall not operate or move on any hard-surfaced highway any vehicle having any metal tire in contact with the roadway, except when authorized by special permit. 
(c)  (1)  Any tire on a vehicle moved on a highway shall not have on its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike or any other protuberance of any material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire, except that it shall be permissible: 
a.  To use farm tractors or implements of husbandry with tires having protuberances which will not injure the highway; 
b.  To use tire chains of reasonable proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice, or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to skid; or 
c.  For pneumatic tires equipped with or having on their periphery studs of metal, porcelain or other material to be sold or used in the state, if constructed to provide resiliency upon contact with the road surface, so that not more than three percent in the aggregate of the traction surface of such tire is composed of such studs and so that such studs do not project more than three thirty-seconds of an inch beyond the tread of the traction surface of such tire and have a rate of wear which will so limit such projection. 
(2)  The exceptions permitted in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  The use of such tires or tire chains shall be limited to vehicles with rated capacities up to and including two tons; 
b.  Any tire so equipped shall not be used on a public highway earlier than November 1 of each year or later than April 1 of the following year; and 
c.  Copies of this subsection (c) shall be posted in all places at which tires or tire chains are sold, and a printed or written warning on the time limitation for the use of such tires or tire chains shall be furnished to each buyer, purchaser, or user by the seller of such studded tires or tire chains. 
(d)  Operator selectable "on demand" studded tires having traction-enhancing studs located outside the normal tread area which allows their operation as conventional tires on dry roads or as studded tires on ice-coated roads by the expedient of reducing or increasing the air pressure within the tires, shall be exempt from the prohibitions of subsection (c) of this section with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The use of such tires shall be limited to vehicles with rated capacities up to and including two tons; 
(2)  Any such tire shall not be deflated so that the studs lower and make contact with the road surface earlier than November 1 of each year or later than April 1 of the following year. 
(e)  A person shall not operate any vehicle when one or more of the tires in use on that vehicle is in unsafe operating condition or has a tread depth less than two-thirty-seconds inch measured in any two adjacent tread grooves at three equally spaced intervals around the circumference of the tire, provided such measurements shall not be made at the location of any tread wear indicator, tie bar, hump, or fillet. As used in this subsection, an unsafe tire includes, but is not limited to, any tire: 
(1)  On which the ply or cord is exposed in the tread area; 
(2)  Which has been regrooved or recut below the original groove depth, except tires that have been designed with under-rubber sufficient for regrooving and are so marked; 
(3)  Marked "Farm Implement Only," "Not for Highway Use," or any other marking that would indicate that the tire is not for normal highway use, provided no such marking shall be altered or removed; 
(4)  On which any bulges, bumps, or knots show in the tread or sidewall area; or 
(5)  On the front steering axle of a truck-tractor which has tread depth measuring less than four-thirty-seconds inch. 
(f)  Every wheel on a vehicle shall not be cracked and shall be securely fastened to the hub of the vehicle with all lug nuts properly affixed. 
(g)  No vehicle or combination of vehicles, weighing eight tons or more, loaded or unloaded, shall be driven or moved on Eastern Avenue, between SW 34th Street and Indian Hills Road, within the corporate limits of the city. This subsection shall not apply to vehicles owned and operated by public utility corporations or the city while such vehicles are being used in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 152(96), 4-15-1996; Ord. No. 202(97), 8-18-1997; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-401, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-402. - Obstructive and dangerous vehicles; covering of loads. 
(a)  No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed, or so loaded as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the city and in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(b)  No vehicle shall he driven or moved on any street unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(c)  No person shall operate on any street any vehicle with any load unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders or other loose materials susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have such load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the load from the vehicle. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry or agricultural products only, except baled agricultural products; however, any such trucks shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent such livestock or poultry from escaping therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-402, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 14-105.  
Sec. 15-403. - Permit for vehicles with protruding parts on wheels. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive, pull or move, otherwise than by hauling, upon the paved streets of the city, any tractor or other vehicle with lugs, flanges or other protruding parts upon the surface of the wheels of the same, without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer. Such permit shall not be granted unless all lugs, flanges or other protruding parts upon the surface of the wheels are first removed, or unless a base or board way is laid upon the paved street for the wheels of such vehicle to run upon so as to keep the wheels from coming in contact with the pavement and so as to entirely protect the pavement from the wheels. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-403, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-404. - Deposit of glass, nails or other injurious matter in streets; responsibility to remove after accident. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, or let fall and remain, in or upon any street, any scrap iron, nail, tack, glass or other thing which is likely to injure persons or damage property, or to render a street unsafe for traffic. 
(b)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. The owner of the vehicle, or insurer of the owner of the vehicle if the owner's insurance policy provides coverage for such expense, shall be responsible for the cost of removal of the vehicle and the glass or other injurious substance and any vehicle storage fees. The cost of the removal of the vehicle and any storage fees shall be the same as established by the corporation commission for nonconsensual tows. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-404, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1110.  
CHAPTER 5. - DRIVING, OVERTAKING AND PASSING 
 
Sec. 15-501. - Driving on right side of roadway, exception. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the laws governing such movement; 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway, provided any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the laws applicable thereon; 
(4)  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic; or 
(5)  Upon a roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic. 
(b)  Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane when available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway and may be temporarily driven upon the right-hand shoulder for the purpose of permitting other vehicles to pass. This subsection shall not apply when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(c)  Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) of this section. However, this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-501, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-301.  
Sec. 15-502. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite direction. 
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right. Upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-502, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-302.  
Sec. 15-503. - Passing vehicle on left. 
The following requirements shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special requirements hereinafter stated: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle; 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle; and 
(3)  Every driver who intends to pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, which requires moving his vehicle from one lane of traffic to another, shall first see that such movement can be made with safety and shall proceed to pass only after giving a proper signal by hand or mechanical device. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-503, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-303.  
Sec. 15-504. - Passing vehicle on right. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles and marked with lines for two or more lanes of traffic in each direction; and 
(3)  Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-504, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-304.  
Sec. 15-505. - Passing requirements, duty of overtaken vehicle. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. The overtaking vehicle must return to the roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
(b)  Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, the driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(c)  Every driver who intends to pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, which requires movement of his vehicle from one lane of traffic to another, shall first see that such movement can be made with safety and shall proceed to pass only after giving a proper signal by hand or mechanical device. 
(d)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-505, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-305.  
Sec. 15-506. - Passing prohibited. 
(a)  No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction; 
(2)  When traversing an intersection or railroad grade crossing; or 
(3)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(b)  It is a violation to pass on the left by going to the left of the center of the roadway across a double-marked centerline for the purpose of passing a vehicle traveling in the same direction. 
(c)  This section shall not apply upon a one-way roadway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-506, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-306.  
Sec. 15-507. - Designation of no-passing zones. 
(a)  The state department of transportation as regards state and federal highways, and the city manager, subject to direction of the council, as regards all other streets, are authorized to determine those portions of a highway where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous and shall, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, have the beginning and end of such zones indicated. When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
(b)  Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone, no driver shall at any time drive to the left side of the roadway within such no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement stripping designed to mark such no-passing zone through its length. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-507, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-307.  
Sec. 15-508. - School buses; markings; passing regulations. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon any street or highway in the city upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus on which the red loading signals are in operation and which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children and other occupants shall stop the vehicle before it reaches the school bus. The driver may then proceed to pass such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and prudent and with due caution for the safety of such school children and other occupants after the loading signals are deactivated. 
(b)  Every school bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly visible signs containing the words "School Bus" in letters not less than eight inches in height and, in addition, shall be equipped with visual signs meeting the requirements of state law which shall be actuated by the driver of the school bus whenever, but only whenever, such vehicle is stopped on a street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is part of or adjacent to such street or highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-508, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-705.  
Sec. 15-509. - Driving on laned roadways, marking traffic lanes. 
(a)  The city manager, subject to direction of the council, is authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway or any street where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)  Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall he driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety and has properly signaled his intentions to do so; 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is sign posted to give notice of such allocation; and 
(3)  Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. 
(c)  Where traffic lanes have been marked, no operator of any vehicle shall fail or refuse to keep the vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making lawful turning movement or otherwise authorized by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-509, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-309.  
Sec. 15-510. - Driving on divided highways. 
Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or peace officers. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through a permanent opening in the dividing space, barrier or section or at a permanent cross-over or intersection as established unless specifically prohibited by public authority. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any temporary opening in a dividing space, barrier or section or at a temporary cross-over or intersection unless specifically authorized by a public authority or at the direction of a peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-510, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-311.  
Sec. 15-511. - Following too closely. 
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. Such driver following too closely shall be deemed negligent. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-511, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-310.  
Sec. 15-512. - Restricted-access roadways. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-512, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-312.  
Sec. 15-513. - Driving through service drives. 
No vehicle shall he driven through any service drive or parking area except for the purpose of attaining service or merchandise or for the purpose of parking thereon. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-513, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-514. - Reckless driving. 
(a)  It shall be deemed reckless driving for any person to drive a motor vehicle in a careless or wanton manner without regard for the safety of persons or property. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00 and shall pay court costs. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-514, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-901.  
Sec. 15-515. - Careless or negligent driving. 
(a)  No person shall drive, use, operate, park, cause to be parked, or stop any vehicle: 
(1)  In a careless manner; 
(2)  In a negligent manner; 
(3)  In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person or property; or 
(4)  In such a manner or condition as to interfere with the lawful movement of traffic or use of the streets. 
(b)  Every driver of a motor vehicle shall, upon stopping, or upon stopping and leaving the vehicle, park the same in a careful and prudent manner and place so as not to interfere with the operation of other vehicles or with pedestrians or other traffic. Failure to comply with these requirements shall he deemed careless driving in violation of this section. 
(c)  Any driver who operates or continues to operate his vehicle when any other person riding thereon or therein engages in any activity or does any act which interferes with his operation thereof is guilty of careless driving. 
(d)  A driver of a motor vehicle who collides with another vehicle or with any person or property because of driving error is guilty of careless driving. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-515, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-516. - Inattention to driving; texting while driving. 
(a)  Every driver shall remain alert and give full attention to the safe control and operation of his vehicle while it is in motion. Any driver who engages in any activity or does any act while driving that interferes with the safe operation and control of his vehicle is guilty of inattention to driving. A driver of a motor vehicle who collides with another vehicle or with any person or property because of inattention is guilty of careless driving. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or highway within the city while using a hand-held electronic communication device to manually compose, send or read an electronic text message while the motor vehicle is in motion. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or the maximum designated by state law. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall not apply if the person is using a cellular or electronic device for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an imminent emergency situation: 
(1)  An emergency responder; 
(2)  A hospital, physician's office or health clinic; 
(3)  A provider of ambulance services; 
(4)  A provider of firefighting services; or 
(5)  A law enforcement agency. 
(e)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cellular telephone means an analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by the Federal Communications Commission to operate in the frequency bandwidth reserved for cellular telephones. 
Compose , send or read , with respect to a text message, means the manual entry, sending or retrieval of a text message to communicate with any person or device. 
Electronic communication device means an electronic device that permits the user to manually transmit a communication of written text by means other than through an oral transfer or wire communication. The term "electronic communication device" does not include a device that is physically or electronically integrated into a motor vehicle or a voice-operated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a motor vehicle, or a hands-free device that allows the user to write, send or read a text message without the use of either hand except to activate, deactivate or initiate a feature or function. 
Text message includes a text-based message, instant message, electronic message, photo, video, or electronic mail. 
(Ord. No. 808(15), 10-19-2015; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-516, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-901d.  
Sec. 15-517. - Driving over fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-517, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Driving over fire hose, 47 O.S. § 11-1109.  
Sec. 15-518. - Following fire or emergency apparatus. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(b)  The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any emergency vehicle or shall not purposely drive to any location on a highway where an emergency exists which would interfere with the free movement of authorized emergency vehicles or any other traffic using the highway at that location. For the purpose of this subsection the definition of emergency shall include traffic accidents, airplane accidents, disasters, explosions, civil disturbances and (without limitation by the foregoing) any other related circumstances which tend to cause traffic congestion. The purpose of this subsection is to eliminate sightseers and other persons who do not have official business at the scene of an emergency, and whose presence would tend to cause traffic congestion. 
(Ord. No. 506, 2-5-1990; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-518, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1108.  
Sec. 15-519. - Procedure on approach of emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of the state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-519, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-405.  
Sec. 15-520. - Driving under the influence while under age. 
(a)  It is unlawful, and punishable as provided in subsection (c) of this section, for any person under 21 years of age to drive, operate, or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within the state who: 
(1)  Has any measurable quantity of alcohol in the person's blood or breath at the time of a test administered within two hours after an arrest of the person; 
(2)  Exhibits evidence of being under the influence of any other intoxicating substance as shown by analysis of a specimen of the person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine in accordance with the provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 752 and 759; or 
(3)  Exhibits evidence of the combined influence of alcohol and any other intoxicating substance. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "other intoxicating substance" means any controlled dangerous substance as defined in 63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq., or any other substance, other than alcohol, which is capable of being ingested, inhaled, injected, or absorbed into the human body and is capable of adversely affecting the central nervous system, vision, hearing, or other sensory or motor function. 
(c)  Any person under 21 years of age who violates any provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of driving under the influence while under age. A violator shall be punished for a first offense by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00 or by completion of 20 hours of community service, or by requiring the person to attend and complete a treatment program, or by any combination of fine, community service, or treatment. 
(1)  The court may assess additional community service hours in lieu of any fine specified in this section. 
(2)  In addition to any penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section, the person may be subject to: 
a.  The cancellation or denial of driving privileges as ordered by the court pursuant to 47 O.S. § 6-107.1; 
b.  The seizure of the driver's license at the time of arrest or detention, and the administrative revocation of driving privileges by the department of public safety pursuant to 47 O.S. § 754; and 
c.  The mandatory revocation of driving privileges pursuant to 47 O.S. § 6-205.1, which revocation period may be modified as provided by law. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the filing of charges pursuant to 47 O.S. § 761 or 47 O.S. § 11-902 when the facts warrant. 
(e)  When the municipal court has determined that a person under the age of 18 years has committed any offense described in subsection (a) of this section, or that a person 18, 19, or 20 years of age has committed an offense described in this section, the court shall notify the department of public safety on a form prescribed by the department as provided in 47 O.S. § 6-107.2. 
(f)  The notice shall include the name, date of birth, physical description and, if known, the driver's license number of the person. The notice shall contain a recommendation to the department to cancel or deny driving privileges for a specified period of time, in the discretion of the court, except as otherwise provided by law, as follows: 
(1)  For a period not to exceed six months; 
(2)  For a period not to exceed one year; 
(3)  For a period not to exceed two years; or 
(4)  Until the person attains 21 years of age. 
The court shall send a copy of the notice to the person first class, postage prepaid. 
(g)  In addition to the administrative revocation of driving privileges pursuant to 47 O.S. § 754 and the mandatory revocation of driving privileges pursuant to 47 O.S. § 6-205.1, this section applies to any crime, violation, infraction, traffic offense or other offense involving or relating to the possession, use, sale, purchase, transportation, distribution, manufacture, or consumption of beer, alcohol, or any beverage containing alcohol and to any crime, violation, interaction, traffic offense or other offense involving or relating to the possession, use, sale, purchase, transportation, consumption, ingestion, inhalation, injection, or absorption of any controlled dangerous substance as defined by 63 O.S. § 2-101(8) or any substance which is capable of being ingested, inhaled, injected, or absorbed into the human body and is capable of adversely affecting the central nervous system, vision, hearing, or other sensory or motor functions. 
(h)  Any person whose driving privileges are canceled or denied pursuant to this section may file a petition for relief based upon error or hardship pursuant to 47 O.S. § 6-107.2. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-521.1, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-906.4.  
Sec. 15-521. - Driver's license required. 
No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle on any public roadway within the city unless such person has a current, not suspended or revoked, valid driver's or chauffeur's license as required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-522, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 6-303.  
Sec. 15-522. - Driving while license suspended, use of false license. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in his possession any cancelled, revoked, suspended, fictitious, photo static or fraudulently altered operator's or chauffeur's license; 
(2)  Lend his operator's or chauffeur's license to any other person or knowingly permit the use thereof by another; 
(3)  Display or represent as his own any operator's or chauffeur's license not issued to him; or 
(4)  Permit any unlawful use of an operator's or chauffeur's license issued to him. 
(b)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any public street within the city at a time when his privilege to do so is cancelled, suspended or revoked. This includes persons who operate a motor vehicle with a suspended set-up number that has been issued by the department of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-523, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 6-303, 6-305.  
Sec. 15-523. - Permitting unlicensed person to drive. 
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any street in the city by any person who is not authorized or licensed to drive a motor vehicle under the laws of the state or under the laws of the state of the driver's residence of record. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-524, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 6-305.  
Sec. 15-524. - Driving through funeral processions. 
(a)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. 
(b)  This section shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by police officers. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-525, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-525. - Driving in funeral procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable except when otherwise directed or escorted by a police officer. Each driver shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practicable and safe and at a speed as designated by the escort for the procession. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-526, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-315.  
Sec. 15-526. - Identification of funeral processions. 
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by headlights turned on or by the display upon the outside of each vehicle an identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-527, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-527. - Use of roller skates, coasters, skateboards on roadway. 
(a)  No person shall operate, ride upon, or propel any roller skates, coasters, skateboards, toy vehicles or similar devices on or over any of the following places: 
(1)  On any roadway within the city except while crossing a street in a crosswalk; 
(2)  On any sidewalk or street abutting a business within the city, including, but not limited to, parking areas and sidewalks used for ingress and egress to any place of business; 
(3)  On any public property where signs are posted prohibiting such use, such as parking lots, bicycle or jogging paths; 
(4)  In any concrete or asphalt drainage ways, storm sewers or culverts (whether posted or not); or 
(5)  On private property where a sign prohibiting such items or activity has been posted by the owner, lessee, or person in charge of the property. 
(b)  Operators of roller skates, coasters, skateboards, toy vehicles or similar devices shall yield the right-of-way to other pedestrians using public walkways and shall not otherwise endanger or interfere with pedestrian traffic on those walkways. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any public street, sidewalk, alley, plaza or parking, which has been closed or set aside for the purpose of a community event, celebration or festival for which a revocable permit has been approved and the use of such items or activity has been approved. 
(d)  The enforcement officer may issue a warning on a first offense when in the judgment of the enforcement officer a warning will be sufficient to alleviate the problem. If an offender is under the age of 18 years, a parent or guardian of the offender shall be notified and shall be mailed or handed a copy of the written warning or citation. 
(e)  Any person found guilty of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-528, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-528. - Play streets authorized. 
The city manager, subject to direction by the council, if any, shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and have placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-529, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-529. - Use of play streets by motor vehicles. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then such drivers shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-530, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-530. - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-531, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-531. - Driving on sidewalk prohibited. 
Except as provided in 47 O.S. § 11-805.3, the driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-532, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Power of city to prohibit driving on sidewalks, 11 O.S. § 22-117.  
Sec. 15-532. - Driving in public parks and other properties restricted. 
(a)  No person shall drive, operate or propel a motor vehicle or motor-driven cycle, including a motor scooter or motor-driven bicycle, in any park, public property or right-of-way or easement, within or owned by the city, except upon established roadways or roadways designed for vehicular traffic. A vehicle may be driven a reasonable distance from the roadway for the purpose of going to and from a parking place. 
(b)  No person shall drive, operate or propel a motor vehicle or motor-driven cycle past any barrier, sign or other device indicating that vehicular traffic is prohibited in, upon or through any area upon which vehicular traffic is prohibited. 
(c)  Emergency vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-533, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-533. - Driving on property without permission. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle of any size driven by a motor of any size on or within any private property except where the operator of the motor vehicle has first obtained the consent of the owner of the property in writing. 
(b)  Motor driven vehicles may be driven a reasonable distance from the street only when the operator is going to or from a parking stall or space. Emergency vehicles such as police, fire, civil defense or other emergency motor driven vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-534, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-534. - Starting stopped or parked vehicles. 
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-535, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-603.  
Sec. 15-535. - Backing of vehicle. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made without interfering with other traffic. No vehicle shall be backed upon any street except for such distance as may be necessary to permit the vehicle to enter the proper driving lane from a parked position. Such backing shall be done only after the driver of the vehicle has ascertained that such movement can be made without endangering other traffic. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-536, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1102.  
Sec. 15-536. - Opening and closing vehicle door. 
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so. No person shall leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic to load or unload passengers. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-537, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1105.  
Sec. 15-537. - Obstructions to driver's view, number in front seat; overloading school bus. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(c)  No school bus shall be operated on the streets or highways in the state when loaded with passengers in excess of the number for which such bus is designed to carry. The number of passengers determined by the local school board which the bus is designed to carry shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the bus. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-538, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-538. - Clinging to vehicle. 
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized scooter, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-539, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1204.  
Sec. 15-539. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-540, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-540. - Riding outside vehicle compartment. 
(a)  No operator of a motor vehicle shall allow a passenger to ride outside the passenger compartment of the vehicle on the streets of the city, provided this subsection shall not apply to persons so riding on private property or for parades or special events, while in the parade procession, nor shall this section apply to passengers riding while sitting or kneeling on the floor of the bed of a pickup truck. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of $10.00 and shall pay court costs of $15.00, provided the department of public safety shall not assess points to the driving record of any licensed or unlicensed person convicted of a violation of this section. 
(b)  No person shall ride, hang, or stand outside the passenger compartment of any vehicle while on the streets of the city, except this section shall not apply to persons so riding on private property or for parades or special events, while in the parade procession, nor shall this section apply to persons riding as a passenger in the bed of a pickup truck so long as the person is kneeling or sitting on the floor of the bed of the pickup truck. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to employees engaged in the necessary discharge of duties while riding in the space of a truck intended for merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 30(92), 7-20-1992; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-541, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1114.  
Sec. 15-541. - Driving through safety zone. 
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone or island. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-542, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1301.  
Sec. 15-542. - Child passenger restraint system or seat belt required; exceptions; penalty. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Child passenger restraint system means an infant or child passenger restraint system that meets the federal standards as set by 49 CFR 571.213. 
(b)  Every driver when transporting a child under eight years of age in a motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of the state, shall provide for the protection of said child by properly using a child passenger restraint system as follows: 
(1)  A child under four years of age shall be properly secured in a child passenger restraint system. The child passenger restraint system shall be rear-facing until the child reaches two years of age or until the child reaches the weight or height limit of the rear-facing child passenger restraint system, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  A child at least four years of age but younger than eight years of age, if not taller than four feet nine inches in height, shall be properly secured in either a child passenger restraint system or child booster seat. 
(3)  If a child is eight years of age or is taller than four feet nine inches in height, a seat belt properly secured to the vehicle shall be sufficient to meet the requirement of this section. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to city ordinance, state statute, or federal law; 
(2)  The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle; 
(3)  A driver of a vehicle if all of the seat belts in the vehicle are in use; 
(4)  The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable to be placed in such devices, provided there is written documentation from a physician of such medical reason; 
(5)  The transportation of a child who weighs more than 40 pounds and who is being transported in the back seat of a vehicle while wearing only a lap safety belt when the back seat is not properly equipped with combination lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and shoulder safety belts in the back seat are being used by other children who weigh more than 40 pounds; provided, however, for purposes of this subsection, the term "back seat" shall include all seats located behind the front seat of a vehicle operated by a licensed child care facility or church; Provided further, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a child has met the weight requirements of this subsection if, at the request of any law enforcement officer, the licensed child care facility or church provides the officer with a written statement verified by the parent or legal guardian that the child weighs more than 40 pounds. 
(d)  A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to stop a vehicle if it appears that the driver of the vehicle has violated the provision of this section and to give an oral warning to the driver. The warning shall advise the driver of the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to install or use a child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor vehicle. 
(e)  A violation of the provisions of this section shall not be admissible as evidence in any civil action or proceeding for damages. In any action brought by or on behalf of an infant for personal injuries or wrongful death sustained by motor vehicle collision, the failure of any person to have the infant properly restrained in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be used in aggravation or mitigation of damages. 
(f)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of $50.00, or the maximum amount allowed by state law, whichever is greater, and shall pay court costs. This fine shall be suspended in the case of the first offense upon proof of purchase or acquisition by loan of a child passenger restraint system. The fine need not be suspended if the child was being transported in a motor vehicle already equipped with a child passenger restraint system. 
(Ord. No. 809(15), 10-19-2015; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-543, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1112.  
Sec. 15-543. - Seat belts required for front seat passengers; exceptions. 
(a)  Every operator and front seat passenger of a Class A commercial motor vehicle, Class B commercial motor vehicle, Class C commercial motor vehicle or a passenger car operated in the city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat belt system, required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208. For the purposes of this section, the term "passenger car" shall mean a Class D motor vehicle, but shall not include trucks, truck-tractors, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, motorized bicycles or vehicles used primarily for farm use and licensed pursuant to 47 O.S. § 1134. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a passenger car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written verification from a physician licensed in the state that he is unable to wear a safety seat belt system for medical reasons. The issuance of such verification by a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall such physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever, in damages or otherwise, to any person injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt system. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is a route carrier of the U.S. Postal Service. 
(d)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of $20.00, or the maximum amount allowed by state law, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 423, 2-2-1987; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-544, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-417.  
Sec. 15-544. - Certain vehicles to stop at all railroad crossings. 
(a)  The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicles within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and while so stopped, shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or tracks. 
(b)  No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or traffic-control signals direct traffic to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-545, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-702.  
Sec. 15-545. - Approaching stationary emergency vehicle displaying flashing lights. 
The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary authorized emergency vehicle that is displaying a flashing combination red or blue light or any combination of red or blue lights, shall: 
(1)  If traveling on a highway that consists of two or more lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of travel as that of the driver, the driver shall proceed with due caution and shall, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic conditions, change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to the stationary authorized emergency vehicle; or if the driver is not able to change lanes or if to do so would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the motor vehicle to a safe speed for the existing road, weather, and traffic conditions; and 
(2)  If traveling on a highway other than a highway described in subsection (1) of this section, the driver shall proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the motor vehicle to a safe speed for the existing road, weather, and traffic conditions. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-546, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-314.  
Sec. 15-546. - Procedures for motor vehicles required to merge in maintenance and construction zones. 
(a)  When any highway has been closed to traffic while the highway is flooded or under repair, maintenance or construction and traffic-control devices or barricades have been erected, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through, under, over, or around the traffic-control devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter the closed area. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons while engaged in the construction, maintenance and repair of the highway or to persons entering therein for the protection of lives or property, provided that persons having their places of residence or places of business within the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at their own risk. 
(b)  Whenever construction, repair and maintenance of any highway is being performed under traffic, the city or other authority shall erect, or cause to be erected, traffic-control devices to warn and guide the public. Each person using the highway shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagmen or other traffic-control devices which are placed to regulate, control, and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance area. As used in this subsection, the term "construction or maintenance area" means any area upon or around any highway that is visibly marked as an area where construction, repair, and maintenance is temporarily occurring. The construction or maintenance area also includes the lanes of highway leading up to the area upon which an activity described in this section is being performed, beginning at the point where properly posted traffic-control devices start to warn and guide the public into and through the construction or maintenance, including, but not limited to, instructions to merge from one lane into another lane, to reduce speed, or to follow directions of flagmen. 
(c)  The "Merge Now" traffic-control device that is used to warn and guide the public using the highway to merge, shall be located no greater than one mile nor less than 1,500 feet in advance of the highway construction or maintenance area. Whenever any traffic-control device requires traffic to merge due to the closure of a section or lane of highway, the merge shall be completed: 
(1)  As soon as practicable after passing the traffic-control device; and 
(2)  Without passing any other traffic proceeding in the same direction. 
(d)  No person shall remove, change, modify, deface or alter any traffic-control device or barricade which has been erected on any highway under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-546, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1302.  
CHAPTER 6. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
ARTICLE A. - PARKING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 15-601. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(4)  Within an intersection; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the authority having jurisdiction indicates a different length by signs or marking; 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance (when properly signposted); 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway underpass; 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(b)  No person engaging in the collection and disposal of solid waste or recycling material, or both, as a business, pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Act (27A O.S. § 2-10-101 et seq.), shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  Within an intersection; 
(3)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(4)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway underpass; or 
(5)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(c)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under the control of the person into any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(d)  No person shall park any vehicle in front of any show, theater, or place of amusement during any performance or entertainment therein, or while patrons are in such place either before the commencement or after the close of any performance. The police or fire chief shall plainly indicate such non-parking spaces by appropriate signs or markings. 
(e)  No person shall park, stand, stop or store a motor vehicle on the following streets or during the time limits indicated after signs are posted accordingly: 
(1)  West Main Street, commencing at the intersection of West Main and Telephone Road to the intersection of West Main Street and Irving Drive; 
(2)  Broadway Avenue, from the intersection of Broadway Avenue and the north city limit to the intersection of Broadway Avenue and the south city limit within the city; 
(3)  Janeway Avenue, from the intersection of Janeway Avenue and Northwest Twenty-Seventh Street to the intersection of Janeway Avenue and Southwest Fourth Street within the city, excepting the east side of the maintained portion of Janeway Avenue from the intersection of Janeway Avenue and Northwest Fifth Street to the intersection of Janeway Avenue and Southwest Fourth Street within the corporate limits; 
(4)  Julie Street; 
(5)  Northeast Twelfth Street, on either side where such street abuts the Moore Community Park, between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on each day; 
(6)  Northeast Twenty-first Street, commencing at the place where such street connects with North Broadway Street, thence eastward to and across the drainage ditch or canal passing under the street, thence eastward to and through the curve to the left to the place and point where such curve is completed and such street commences its direction to the north; 
(7)  Southwest First Street, south side from the intersection of Southwest First Street and Telephone Road to the intersection of Southwest First Street and Janeway Avenue in the city; 
(8)  E. Main Street from and including the intersection of E. Main Street and Telephone Road to and including the intersection of E. Main Street and S. Ramblin Oaks Drive within the city; and 
(9)  Messenger Lane, on either side of Messenger Lane beginning at NE 12th Street and extending south a distance of 960 feet. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-601, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1003.  
Sec. 15-602. - Handicapped parking restrictions. 
(a)  (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any parking space that is designated and posted as a reserved area for the parking of a motor vehicle operated by or transporting a physically disabled person unless such person has applied for and been issued a detachable placard indicating physical disability under the provisions of 47 O.S. § 15-112, and such placard is displayed as provided in 47 O.S. § 5-112 or in rules adopted pursuant thereto, or has applied for and been issued a physically disabled license plate pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 1135.1 or 1135.2, and such license plate is displayed pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Vehicle License and Registration Act (47 O.S. § 1101 et seq.). 
(2)  It shall also be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle, whether with or without a physically disabled placard or plate, in any disabled parking space access aisle, wheelchair ramp, wheelchair loading/unloading area or any portion thereof. 
(b)  (1)  Violation of these provisions shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, the person shall be fined $500.00, provided any person cited for a first offense of a violation of this section who has displayed a placard which has expired pursuant to 47 O.S. § 15-112(D)(4) or (D)(5) shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge and shall not be required to pay the fine or court costs if the person presents to the court within 30 days of the issuance of the citation a notice from the department of public safety that the person has obtained a valid placard pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 15-112(D). 
(2)  In addition, vehicles unlawfully parked in violation of these provisions shall be subject to immediate tow by a licensed tow truck operator at the request of the landowner or a duly appointed agent of the landowner, at the request of any person unable to lawfully gain access to or move their vehicle, at the request of any person unable to lawfully gain access to the area blocked by the unlawfully parked vehicle, or at the request of appropriate law enforcement personnel. The owner of any vehicle unlawfully parked in violation of these provisions shall pay any and all reasonable and necessary costs associated with towing and storage of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-602, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1007.  
Sec. 15-603. - Parking not to obstruct traffic or signs. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to prohibit the free movement of authorized emergency vehicles or vehicular traffic. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(c)  No person shall at any time stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device or in case of emergency within any alley except for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise, with the maximum time permitted for loading or unloading being as provided in this Code or as posted; however, such vehicle must be headed in the proper direction in the alley and it must be parked on the right half of one-way alleys. 
(d)  Any vehicle parked upon the public streets or right-of-way shall be parked so as not to obstruct the view of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal by oncoming traffic. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-603, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-604. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park his vehicle upon any street or highway, as defined in section 15-101, any dedicated right-of-way, or any easement shown on any plat maps of the city, for the principle purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying the vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise; 
(3)  Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; and 
(4)  Selling merchandise or any other thing from vehicles without appropriate permit or license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-604, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-605. - Double parking. 
Double parking is permitted for a period of not to exceed ten minutes and only if a competent driver licensed under state law remains in complete control of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-605, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-606. - Removing enforcement marking. 
No person, with intent to extend the time during which a motor vehicle can be parked at a time-restricted parking space, shall remove, erase, obliterate, smudge or otherwise delete or disfigure any chalk or any other mark or symbol used by authorized employees of the city in connection with the enforcement of motor vehicle parking restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-606, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-607. - Standing or parking on left side of roadway. 
(a)  The city manager, subject to direction of the council, may determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway and to have signs or marks placed giving notice thereof. 
(b)  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs or marks are placed to permit such standing or parking. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-607, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-608. - Parking on private property; impounding of vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle on the private property of another without the consent of the owner of the property, his agent or tenant. 
(b)  Any unoccupied vehicle parked in violation of this section may, upon complaint of the property owner, his agent or tenant, be removed and impounded by the property owner; and the vehicle owner must pay removal, storage and impounding fees. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-608, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-609. - Driving or parking on commercial business property restricted; signs. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to drive or park a motor vehicle onto the driveway, parking area or any portion of the premises of any business or commercial property if signs are posted. 
(b)  This section shall be enforced as to all private property where a sign shall have been posted in a clearly visible location stating substantially as follows: 
"PRIVATE PROPERTY. NO PARKING OR TRESPASSING." 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-609, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-610. - Parking more than 24 hours. 
No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-610, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-611. - Unattended vehicles. 
The person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall not permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the street. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-611, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1101.  
Sec. 15-612. - Authority to restrict parking time. 
(a)  The city council, by resolution, may establish parking time limits, or prohibit parking on designated streets by having appropriate signs placed thereon. 
(b)  When such signs are in place, no person shall park a vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-612, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-613. - Parking in private parking spaces without permission of owner. 
(a)  The parking, leaving or keeping of vehicles, either with or without occupants, upon real property owned or leased for use of hotels or business establishments as private parking places, without permission of the owner or lessee, as the case may be, is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Any vehicle parked or left in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall, upon the complaint of the owner or lessee of the property, be removed from the premises by the property owner or his designee, at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. Such removal may be accomplished by the property owner or his designee directing any person operating a towing service to pull the vehicle to his garage or place of business, where it shall be held in the custody of the towing company until the towing charges, if any, are paid. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-613, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-614. - Prohibiting parking within fire lanes on certain private property. 
The city manager, or his authorized representative, when the public safety shall require, is authorized and directed to prohibit parking upon private property used for shopping centers, schools, hospitals, nursing homes, restaurants and places of public entertainment within zones to be clearly designated and defined by appropriate sign, when the same is necessary for the establishment of fire lanes to avoid obstruction of free passage and access. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, within such prohibited fire lanes, except on direction and by authority of a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-614, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-615. - Limiting parking to authorized emergency vehicles. 
The city manager, subject to any directions which the city council may give, is authorized to designate streets or portions thereof where parking is limited to authorized emergency vehicles. When signs are in place giving notice of such limitation, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-615, 12-19-2016)  
ARTICLE B. - MANNER OF PARKING 
 
Sec. 15-621. - Distance from curb. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the right-hand curb. Every vehicle stopped and parked upon the left-hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or stopped with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within 18 inches of the left-hand curb. A person engaging in the collection and disposal of solid waste or recycling material, or both, as a business, pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Act (27A O.S. § 2-10-101 et seq.), shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while in the performance of such activities 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-620, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1004.  
Sec. 15-622. - Brakes to be set: motor not to be running: securing animals. 
Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked. Animals left or parked on the streets shall be securely hitched. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-621, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-623. - Angle parking. 
(a)  The city manager, subject to direction of the council, may determine upon what streets and parts of streets angle parking will be permitted and authority shall continue until changed permitting angle parking on any such street or part of street and until the angle parking markings or signs are amended. 
(b)  On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(c)  Angle parking is not permitted on any state or federal-aid highway unless the state department of transportation has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-622, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-624. - Parking within marked spaces. 
In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus marked off and not on or over a line delineating a space. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-623, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-625. - Parking to be such as to leave ten feet of roadway available for traffic. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-624, 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 7. - SPEED REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 15-701. - Speed limit. 
(a)  Notwithstanding a maximum speed limit enumerated in this Code, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any alley, highway, roadway, street or public parking area at a speed greater than or less than is reasonable or prudent under the conditions then existing, considering visibility, amount of traffic, condition of roadway surface, presence of pedestrians, obstruction of view and other similar facts. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle upon a street at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(c)  Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) of this section, the limits specified in this chapter or established as authorized shall be maximum lawful speeds. No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed in excess of such maximum limits as follows: 
(1)  25 miles per hour on any street, except as may be posted otherwise; and 
(2)  25 miles per hour in any designated school zone under the following conditions, unless a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted: 
a.  When signed with the legend "When Flashing" and flashing lights are in operation; and 
b.  When signed with the legend "When Children Are Present." A child shall be considered present when he is within 15 feet of the curb or edge of the street within a school zone or near enough so that a potential hazard exists with motorized traffic. 
(d)  The city manager has authority to post lower speed limits than those presented in this chapter where special hazards exist. 
(e)  The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the designated limits shall not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic, or by reason of weather or highway conditions and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle or on entering the roadway in compliance with legal requirement and the duty of all persons to use due care and precaution. 
(f)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when driving upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic, or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
(Ord. No. 504, 2-5-1990; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-701, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-801.  
Sec. 15-702. - Special speed regulations. 
(a)  Speed limits are hereby established, except in school zones, on state and federal highways in the city as follows, and no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of such limits: 
Street Name 	Section 	Miles Per Hour 
Janeway Street 	North city limits to SW 4th 	30 
Santa Fe 	NW 12th to SW 4th 	35 
Santa Fe 	SW 19th to south city limits 	40 
Telephone Road 	SW 19th to SW 34th Street 	45 
Telephone Road 	SW 34th to south city limits 	40 
Broadway 	North city limits to N 18th Street 	40 
Broadway 	S 4th to S 19th 	40 
Broadway 	S 19th to south city limits 	45 
Eastern 	NE 27th to SE 4th 	40 
Bryant 	North city limits to NE 27th 	40 
NE 27th 	Eastern to Bryant 	35 
N 12th 	Santa Fe to Estell 	35 
NE 12th 	Estell to Sunnylane 	40 
NW 5th 	I-35 to Broadway 	35 
Main 	I-35 to Broadway 	30 
Main 	Broadway to Eastern 	35 
SE 19th 	Bryant to Sunnylane 	50 
SE 19th 	Broadway to Eastern 	35 
SW 34th 	West city limits to I-35 	25 
SW 34th 	Railroad to Eastern 	35 
SW 34th 	Eastern to Broadway 	40 
SE 34th 	Sunnylane to Sooner 	40 
SE 34th 	Sooner to east city limits 	35 
Indian Hills 	Eastern to Bryant 	35 
 
(b)  Any special speed zones inconsistent with these regulations are expressly amended. 
(Ord. No. 540, 12-4-1990; Ord. No. 779(14), 7-21-2014; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-702, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-703. - Minimum speed. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle at such slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation. Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this provision by directions to drivers and in the event of willful disobedience to this provision or refusal to comply with the direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the continued slow operation by a driver shall be unlawful and constitute a blocking of traffic and a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-703, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-704. - Speed limits in construction zones. 
Where any municipal street or roadway shall be under construction, maintenance or repair and a maximum safe, careful, and prudent speed shall have been determined by the city manager, during the period of the construction, maintenance, or repairs and shall have been plainly posted at each terminus thereof and at various points as necessary along the route thereof the determined maximum speed, no person shall drive any vehicle upon the portion of the municipal street or roadway at a speed in excess of the speed so determined and posted. Violation of the posted speed limit in the repair, maintenance, or construction zone shall result in the doubling of the appropriate fine. For purposes of this section, the term "repair, maintenance, or construction zone" means any location where repair, maintenance, or construction work is actually in progress and workers present. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-704, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-804.  
CHAPTER 8. - RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 15-801. - Right-of-way at intersection. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle on a street which is not a state or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(b)  When two vehicles enter or approach an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(c)  The right-of-way rules declared in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a "T" intersection, traveling down the base of the "T" intersection approaching a dead end must yield the right-of-way to all traffic. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-801, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 11-401, 11-403.  
Sec. 15-802. - Right-of-way at intersections, vehicles arriving at same time. 
(a)  Where two or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or signals on two or more intersecting cross streets, and are approaching so as to enter the intersection at the same time, where each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where each vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different highway, provided that the driver of a vehicle on a street which is not a state or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(c)  Where one vehicle is required to stop and the other to slow or take caution, the one slowing or taking caution shall have the right-of-way. Where one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution, the one required to take caution shall have the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-802, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-803. - Left turn at intersection. 
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall give a signal and yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. However, the driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this chapter, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-803, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-402.  
Sec. 15-804. - Designation of through streets. 
The city manager, subject to direction of the council, may designate any street or part of street as a through street. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-804, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-805. - Signs at through streets. 
Whenever the city manager designates and describes a through street, the city manager shall have placed and maintained a stop sign, or if deemed more appropriate at any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street intersection such through street, and a heavy-traffic street not so designated. Stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be determined by the manager if deemed desirable. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-805, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-806. - Determination of stop and yield intersections. 
(a)  The city manager, subject to direction by the council, is authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine: 
(1)  Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required; or 
(2)  Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection as prescribed in section 15-807, in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. 
(b)  Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the nearest line of the intersecting roadway. 
(c)  Every stop sign shall bear the word "Stop" in letters not less than eight inches in height. Every yield sign shall bear the word "Yield" in letters not less than seven inches in height. Every stop sign and every yield sign shall, at nighttime, be rendered luminous by internal illumination, or by a floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements in the face of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-806, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-807. - Vehicles entering stop intersections. 
(a)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. 
(b)  Such driver, after having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard. The driver having so yielded may proceed only when it is prudent and apparently safe to do so. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-807, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-703.  
Sec. 15-808. - Vehicle entering yield intersection. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary and yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. If such driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign is required for safety to stop, and shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersection roadway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-808, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-703.  
Sec. 15-809. - School zones and crosswalks. 
(a)  The city manager, subject to direction by the council, is authorized to erect signs to designate school zones and school zone crosswalks. 
(b)  No person may drive a vehicle past a school sign or through a school zone at a speed greater than that posted on school days or when children are present, all as posted. Drivers proceeding in a school zone shall stop and yield the right-of-way to pedestrians in school zone crosswalks when so directed by a school safety patrol member or when such crosswalk is occupied by pedestrians between the hours on school days or when children are present, all as posted. 
(c)  Any driver involved in a school zone crosswalk collision with a pedestrian after failing to slow and yield the right-of-way to such pedestrian shall be deemed prima facie in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-809, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-810. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-810, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-704.  
Sec. 15-811. - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-811, 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 9. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 15-901. - Method of turning generally and at intersections. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway; 
(2)  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection; and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection; and 
(3)  Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. After entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(b)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required by this section, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway, unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-901, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 11-601, 11-604.  
Sec. 15-902. - Authority to place turning markers. 
(a)  The city manager, subject to direction by the council, is authorized to have placed markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. Such course to be traveled shall be indicated. 
(b)  When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-902, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-903. - Authority to restrict turning; obedience required. 
(a)  The city manager, subject to direction by the council, may determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn, and shall have placed proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn, left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-903, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-904. - Limitations on turning, U-turns. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall operate a vehicle so as to turn more than 90 degrees on any street or highway. 
(b)  Persons excepted are those who can safely execute that turn if at an intersection, but it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make such a turn at any intersection: 
(1)  Where traffic-control signals are installed; 
(2)  Where a police officer is directing traffic, except at the latter's direction; or 
(3)  Where an official no U-turn sign has been placed and is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-904, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-905. - Turning or stopping movements; signals required. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required by ordinance, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(c)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-905, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-604.  
Sec. 15-906. - Signals; method required. 
(a)  Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle and to any combination of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-906, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-605.  
Sec. 15-907. - Method of giving hand signals. 
All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner: 
(1)  Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally; 
(2)  Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward; and 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-907, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-606.  
CHAPTER 10. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 15-1001. - Authority to designate one-way streets. 
(a)  The city council, by resolution, may designate any street or alley or part thereof as a one-way street or alley. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  The following streets are hereby designated as one-way streets: 
(1)  I-35 service road, east, between Southwest Fourth Street and Northwest Eighteenth Street within the city limits, northbound; 
(2)  I-35 service road, west, between Southwest Fourth Street and Northwest Twelfth Street within the city limits, southbound. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1001, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1002. - One-way streets, direction of traffic. 
Upon those streets and parts of streets in those alleys and parts of alleys designated as one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1002, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-308.  
Sec. 15-1003. - Rotary traffic islands. 
A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1003, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-308.  
CHAPTER 11. - TRUCK ROUTES AND PARKING 
 
Sec. 15-1101. - Truck routes; map multiple citations; impoundment. 
(a)  The council, by motion or resolution, may prescribe routes through the city for the use of trucks in general or trucks of particular kinds or other vehicles which are not ordinary private passenger vehicles passing through the city. The city shall see that appropriate and adequate signs are placed along such routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes. 
(b)  When such signs are so erected and in place, the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route has been prescribed as provided herein, while passing through the city, shall keep on such route and shall not deviate therefrom except in case of emergency. Drivers of such vehicles shall follow such routes so far as practicable also when driving within the city and not merely through the city. 
(c)  The city clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out the truck routes designated by the city. 
(d)  Any truck which has been involved in two or more driving or parking violations for which citations have been issued and not paid as required shall be subject to impoundment upon the issuance of the third citation. The enforcing officer shall make all reasonable efforts to contact the owner or operator before impoundment. The costs of impoundment shall be paid by the owner before any impounded truck is released. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1101, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1102. - Permits required for operation on certain streets. 
(a)  No person, except in case of emergency, shall drive or operate a bus or truck larger than a 1½-ton truck upon any minor or collector street without a permit issued by the city. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a permit as provided herein upon application and approval by the city manager or his designee. A fee shall be charged and collected for such permit which shall state the time and street upon which the vehicle is to be operated. A permit is valid only for the date and time issued. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1101, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1103. - L.P.G. prohibitions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to drive a liquefied petroleum or hazardous material truck, whether empty or loaded, in the city. Liquefied petroleum or hazardous material trucks may be driven on through streets as designated by the city, but may not be parked for any purpose on any public street in the city. No truck, trailer, storage building or any other structure containing hazardous materials in bottles, buckets, barrels or any other container may be parked for any purpose on a public street in the city. Such hazardous materials may be removed at the expense of the owner, by the city manager or designee, to storage in a proper location until the city judge shall direct that such hazardous materials he returned to the rightful owner or otherwise disposed of as provided by law. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the following streets are hereby designated as through streets: North 27th Street, North 12th Street, South 4th Street, South 19th Street, South 34th Street, Sunnylane, Bryant, Eastern, Broadway, South Telephone south of Southwest 4th Street, Santa Fe, Interstate 35, North Moore or Shields north of Northwest 27th Street, and others as may be designated. 
(Prior Code, § 9-81; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1104, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1104. - Compliance with state law. 
All persons owning liquefied petroleum gas or hazardous material trucks shall comply with all state laws, the city liquefied petroleum gas regulations, and have in force adequate public liability and property damage insurance. 
(Prior Code, § 9-82; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1105, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1105. - Trucks transporting flammable liquids, hazardous material not to be left unattended more than 15 minutes. 
It is unlawful for any person to park a truck or vehicle transporting explosives, gasoline or other flammable liquids, combustible liquids or hazardous materials and to leave the same unattended within the city. Such truck or vehicle may be left parked within an agricultural district or may be parked unattended on any street or alley only for an emergency and then only for a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. Such a truck shall in no way obstruct traffic using the street or alley. 
(Prior Code, § 9-62; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1106, 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 12. - LOADING ZONES 
 
Sec. 15-1201. - Authority to designate curb loading zones. 
The city manager, subject to direction of the council, may determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones, and shall have placed and maintained appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1201, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1202. - Parking or standing in passenger loading zones restricted. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for period not to exceed three minutes. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1202, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1203. - Standing or parking in freight loading zones. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(b)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1203, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1204. - Permit to back to curb for loading or unloading. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. The traffic engineer may revoke such permits at any time. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any permit issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1204, 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 13. - PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS 
 
Sec. 15-1301. - Authority to designate public carrier stops. 
The city manager, subject to direction of the council, may establish bus stops, stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such manner as it determines to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1301, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1302. - Bus stops, restrictions. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1302, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1303. - Taxi stands, loading passengers. 
The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street or any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated. This section shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1303, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1304. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed; except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter such zone. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1304, 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 14. - ACCIDENTS 
 
Sec. 15-1401. - Accidents involving death or personal injury. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 15-1403. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1401, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1402. - Accidents involving damage to property. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in apparent damage to property shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible. The driver shall remain at the scene of such accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 15-1403. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. Any person failing to stop or comply with the requirements under such circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  If the damage resulting from such accident is to the property of the driver only, with no damage to the person or property of another, the driver need not stop at the scene of the accident but shall make report of the damage resulting. 
((Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1402, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1403. - Duty to give information and render aid. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his correct name, address and registration number of the vehicle he is driving, and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit his driver's license and his security verification form, as defined in this Code, to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1403, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-104.  
Sec. 15-1404. - Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. 
The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the correct name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, and provide the operator or owner with information from his security verification form, as defined in this Code, or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking, and providing information from his security verification form, as defined by this Code, and a statement of the circumstances thereof. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1404, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-105.  
Sec. 15-1405. - Duty upon striking fixtures upon a highway. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit his driver's license and his security verification form, as defined in this Code, and shall make report of such accident when and as required in section 15-1407. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1405, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-106.  
Sec. 15-1406. - Immediate notice of accident. 
The driver of a vehicle involved in any accident shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police department, on forms provided by the police department, after complying with the requirements of section 15-1403. A report shall be made on forms provided by the department. Where personal injury or death occurs, the driver of the vehicle shall remain at the scene of the accident until police officers arrive, except in cases of personal injury requiring immediate attention. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1406, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-107.  
Sec. 15-1407. - When driver unable to report. 
(a)  An accident report is not required under this chapter from any person who is physically incapable of making report during the period of such incapacity. 
(b)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an accident as required in section 15-1406 and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall make or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1407, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-111.  
CHAPTER 15. - MOTORCYCLES 
 
Sec. 15-1501. - Operation of motorcycle. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, including a motor scooter or motor-driven bicycle, on a street in the city during a time when state law prohibits the operation of such vehicle. 
(b)  No driver of a three-wheel motor vehicle or motor driven bicycle shall carry any other person on, upon or within such vehicle on any street in the city, except as hereinafter provided. If any two-or three-wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter of 12 inches or greater or any bicycle shall have either a double seating device with double foot rests or a side car attachment providing a separate seat space within such side car attachment for each person riding therein so that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of the side car, it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of 16 or older to carry a passenger. A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is excepted from the provisions hereof. 
(c)  No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk. 
(d)  Handlebars on motorcycles and motor scooters shall not exceed 12 inches in height, measured from the crown or point of attachment. 
(e)  No rider of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall hold to any moving vehicle for the purpose of being propelled. 
(f)  No driver of a motorcycle, motor scooter or bicycle shall pass other vehicles between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction, authorized emergency vehicles excepted. 
(g)  No person shall operate any motorcycle or any motor scooter at a speed greater than the speed limit legally posted. In no event nor at any time may an operator under the age of 16 years operate a motorcycle or motor scooter at a speed greater than 35 miles per hour. 
(h)  A person operating a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall ride only on the permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1501, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Restriction on transporting others by motorcycles, motorized scooters, etc., 47 O.S. § 11-1103; speed limitation on motorcycles, motorized scooters, etc., 47 O.S. § 11-805.  
Sec. 15-1502. - Equipment required. 
The following equipment shall be required on all motorcycles and all motor scooters except when attached on actual trail rides conducted outside of public streets, roads and highways: 
(1)  Rear-view mirrors. All vehicles covered under this chapter shall be equipped with two mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than three inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a distance of 200 feet to the rear of his vehicle; 
(2)  Windshield. All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped with a windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect the operator from foreign objects, except that in lieu of such windshield the operator shall wear goggles or face shield of material and design to protect him from foreign objects; 
(3)  Brakes. All vehicles covered under this chapter shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of same to stop and hold such vehicles, including two separate means of applying the brakes, one of which is effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel and one of which is effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a stop lamp on the rear of the vehicle which shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than 100 feet to the rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be actuated upon application of the service brake; 
(4)  Speedometer. All vehicles covered under this chapter shall be equipped with a properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least the maximum legal speed limit for the vehicle; 
(5)  Fender. All vehicles covered under this chapter shall be equipped with a fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided by the manufacturer; 
(6)  Lights. All vehicles covered under this chapter shall carry at least one lighted head lamp capable of showing a white light visible at least 300 feet in the direction in which the same are proceeding, and one tail lamp mounted in the rear which, when lighted, shall omit a red light plainly visible from at least 300 feet to the rear; and such lights required by this chapter shall be burning whenever such vehicles are in motion during the period from one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance of at least 500 feet ahead; 
(7)  Red reflectors. All vehicles covered under this chapter shall carry on the rear thereof, either as a part of the tail light or separately, at least one red reflector which shall be of such size and characteristics as to be visible at night from all distances within 350 feet to 100 feet from the vehicle when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlights on motor vehicles; 
(8)  Muffler. No person shall operate a vehicle covered under this section with an exhaust system modified so that motor noise is increased greater than that of the original muffler equipment provided by the manufacturer of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1502, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-601 et seq.  
Sec. 15-1503. - Headgear required. 
No person under 18 years of age shall operate or ride upon any motorcycle unless such person is properly wearing a crash helmet of a type which complies with standards established by 49 CFR 571.218. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1503, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-609(B).  
Sec. 15-1504. - License required. 
All operators of motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall have a current, valid license issued by the state and conform to any specific restriction contained thereon. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1504, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1505. - Minibikes, dirt bikes, trail bikes restricted on operations. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate within the city limits a minibike, trail bike or dirt bike within 300 feet of a residential dwelling. However, minibikes used by regularly organized units of any Shrine Temple shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while being used in any parade or other function of such body. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1505, 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 16. - BICYCLES 
 
Sec. 15-1601. - Effects of regulations, parent's duty. 
(a)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to the exceptions stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1601, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1201.  
Sec. 15-1602. - Applicability of traffic laws. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the state declaring rules and or road applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1602, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1202.  
Sec. 15-1603. - Obedience to traffic-control devices. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn, left turn or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1603, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1604. - Manner of riding bicycle. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(c)  A person shall ride a bicycle only in the manner in which it is designed and equipped to carry the person. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1604, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1203.  
Sec. 15-1605. - Riding on roads and bicycle paths. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall ride as close as is safe to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except under any of the following situations: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction; 
(2)  When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway; 
(3)  When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions and while exercising due care, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Fixed or moving objects; 
b.  Parked or moving vehicles; 
c.  Pedestrians or animals; 
d.  Surface hazards; or 
e.  Any time it is unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway; and 
(4)  When riding in the right-turn-only lane. 
(b)  Any person riding a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a one-way street or highway with two or more marked lanes of travel may ride as close as is safe to the left-hand curb or edge of the street or highway. 
(c)  No person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter shall pass other vehicles between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction. 
(d)  Persons riding bicycles or motorized scooters upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorized scooters. Persons riding two abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable flow of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane. 
(e)  Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1605, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1205.  
Sec. 15-1606. - Speed restrictions. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1606, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1607. - Carrying articles. 
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1607, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1608. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1608, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1609. - Riding on sidewalk prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk in the business district. 
(b)  Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(c)  The city manager may erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon. When such signs are in place, no person shall disobey them. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1609, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1610. - Lights and brakes. 
(a)  Every bicycle in use at the times described in 47 O.S. § 12-201(B) shall be equipped with a lamp on the front emitting a white light visible from a distance of at least 1,000 feet to the front. This subsection shall not apply to a street or highway with a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less. 
(b)  Every bicycle in use at the times described in 47 O.S. § 12-201(B) shall be equipped with a lamp on the rear emitting a red light visible from a distance of at least 1,000 feet to the rear. This subsection shall not apply to a street or highway with a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less. 
(c)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a red reflector which shall be visible for 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. 
(d)  Every bicycle when in use at the times described in 47 O.S. § 12-201(B) shall be equipped with reflective material of sufficient size and reflectivity to be visible from both sides for 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. 
(e)  A bicycle or its rider may be equipped with lights or reflectors in addition to those required by the foregoing sections, provided such lights or reflectors shall comply with the provisions and limitations of 47 O.S. ch. 12, art. II (47 O.S. § 12-201 et seq.). 
(f)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle within 25 feet from a speed of ten miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(g)  A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1610, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 12-702—12-709.  
Sec. 15-1611. - Rider not to cling to other vehicle. 
No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1611, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1204.  
Sec. 15-1612. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1613, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1613. - Dealers to report. 
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or used bicycles shall make a report to the police department of every bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, the name or make, the frame number thereof and the number of the license plate thereon, if any. Dealers buying a bicycle shall not be required to secure a license therefor, but may leave any existing license plate, if any, thereon until the bicycle is sold. A person purchasing a bicycle from a dealer for use shall secure a license as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1614, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1614. - Penalty. 
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1615, 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 17. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 15-1701. - Subject to traffic-control signals. 
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as declared in this part. At all other places, pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1701, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-501.  
Sec. 15-1702. - Rights and duties of persons operating wheelchair or motorized wheelchair. 
Every person operating a wheelchair or a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights and all of the duties applicable to a pedestrian contained in this chapter except those provisions which by their nature can have no application. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-501.1.  
Sec. 15-1703. - Right-of-way at crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1702, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-502.  
Sec. 15-1704. - Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk. 
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1703, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-505.  
Sec. 15-1705. - Crossing at right angles. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1704, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1706. - When pedestrians shall yield. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  This section shall not apply under the conditions stated in section 15-1707 when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1705, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-503.  
Sec. 15-1707. - Prohibited crossing. 
Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1706, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1708. - Obedience to railroad signals. 
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1707, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1709. - Walking along roadway. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction and shall yield to approaching vehicles. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any portion of a bridge for the purpose of diving or jumping therefrom into a lake, river or stream for recreation, and it shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to use a bridge where sidewalks are not provided for the purpose of standing or sightseeing. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1708, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-506.  
Sec. 15-1710. - Hitchhiking; soliciting business. 
(a)  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, donation, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1709, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-507.  
Sec. 15-1711. - Drivers to exercise care. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1710, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-504.  
Sec. 15-1712. - Use of white cane; special provisions for blind pedestrians. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person not wholly or partially blind to carry or use upon the streets, highways or public places of the city any cane or walking stick which is white in color or red tipped. 
(b)  Any driver of a vehicle who knowingly approaches within 15 feet of a person who is in the roadway or at an intersection and who is wholly or partially blind and who is carrying a cane or walking stick white in color, or white tipped with red, or who is using a dog guide wearing a specialized harness, or who is wholly or partially deaf and is using a signal dog wearing an orange identifying collar, or who is physically handicapped and is using a service dog, shall immediately come to a full stop and take such precautions before proceeding as may be necessary to avoid accident or injury to the person wholly or partially blind, deaf or physically handicapped. For purposes of this subsection, a dog guide means any dog that is specially trained to guide a blind person. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1711, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 7 O.S. §§ 11, 12.  
CHAPTER 18. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 15-1801. - Authority of police and fire officials. 
(a)  It is the duty of all police officers of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and the state, to make arrests for the traffic violations, and to investigate accidents. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, mechanical signals or signs in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event of a fire or other emergency as herein defined, or other unusual traffic conditions, to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or fire department may direct and take control of traffic as conditions may require, and as near as practicable, follow the general provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire or other emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1801, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1802. - Authority to direct traffic. 
All traffic in the city shall be controlled by ordinances of the city and the laws of the state relating thereto. No person shall direct or attempt to direct traffic except police officers and other officers authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1802, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1803. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The city manager is empowered to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the city and to make temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)  The city may have traffic-control devices tested under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1803, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1804. - Obedience to police and fire officials required. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1804, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-103.  
Sec. 15-1805. - Applicability to public employees. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, any state, county, city or other governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. No such driver shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(b)  This chapter shall not apply to the military forces organizations of the United States and of the National Guard when performing any military duty. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1805, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1806. - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privilege set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park, or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this part; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as speeding does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement; and 
(5)  Disregard regulations governing turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver is properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal or of flashing red or blue lights or a combination of flashing red and blue lights meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 12-218, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red or blue light visible from in front of the vehicle. This subsection shall not be construed as requiring a peace officer operating a police vehicle properly and lawfully in response to a crime in progress to use audible signals. 
(d)  The exemptions in subsection (b)(3) and (5) of this section shall be granted to a law enforcement officer operating an authorized emergency vehicle for law enforcement purposes without using audible and visual signals required by this section as long as the action does not endanger life or property if the officer is following a suspected violator of the law with probable cause to believe that: 
(1)  Knowledge of the presence of the officer will cause the suspect to: 
a.  Destroy or lose evidence of a suspected felony; 
b.  End a suspected continuing felony before the officer has obtained sufficient evidence to establish grounds for arrest; or 
c.  Evade apprehension or identification of the suspect or the vehicle of the suspect; or 
(2)  Because of traffic conditions, vehicles moving in response to the audible or visual signals may increase the potential for a collision. 
The exceptions granted in this subsection shall not apply to an officer who is in actual pursuit of a person who is eluding or attempting to elude the officer in violation of 21 O.S. § 540A. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1806, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-106.  
Sec. 15-1807. - Persons working on streets exempted. 
Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance or repair of public utilities. All highway and public utility operations shall be protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices or flagmen. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1807, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-105.  
Sec. 15-1808. - Closing streets for repairs, barricades required; use of street restricted. 
(a)  City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are authorized, as necessary, subject to control of the chief of the traffic division, to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance or construction. In exercising such authority, such person shall erect or cause to be erected proper control devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been closed to traffic. 
(b)  When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, and traffic-control devices or barricades have been erected, no person shall drive any vehicle through, under, over or around such traffic-control devices or barricades, or otherwise enter the closed area. This subsection shall not apply to persons while engaged in such construction, maintenance and repair or to persons entering therein for the protection of lives or property. Persons having their places of residence or places of business within the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at their own risk. 
(c)  Whenever construction, repair or maintenance of any street or utility line or facility is being performed under traffic, the city personnel, contractor, or utility company concerned shall erect or cause to be erected traffic-control devices to warn and guide the public. Every person using such street shall obey all signs, signals, markings flagmen or other traffic-control devices which are placed to regulate, control and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance area. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1808, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1809. - Riding animals and animal-drawn vehicles. 
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1809, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-104.  
Sec. 15-1810. - Notification of runs by emergency vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive on the streets of the city any emergency vehicle, including, but not limited to, police patrol cars, fire trucks, ambulances, sheriff's cars, highway patrol cars and police motorcycles, while sounding a siren, horn, bell or other noise-making device designed to forewarn the populace of the approach of such vehicle, without first advising the police department by contacting the police dispatcher on duty of the intention to make the emergency run and giving the name of the person making the run, the destination, the route which is intended to be traveled and the nature of the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1810, 12-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 19. - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 15-1901. - Authority to impound vehicles; release of vehicles. 
(a)  Members of the police department are authorized to remove a vehicle from a street to a garage or other place of safety under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When an officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense and the officer is, by ordinance, state statute or departmental policy, required or permitted to take and does take the person arrested either before a duly appointed judge or to a place of incarceration; 
(2)  When such a vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, causeway, tube or tunnel, highway or any public thoroughfare or street, and it constitutes a hazard or obstruction to traffic; 
(3)  When a vehicle is left unattended or disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of such vehicle is, by reason of physical injury or otherwise, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; 
(4)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; 
(5)  When any vehicle has been parked for more than one hour in excess of the time allowed for parking in any place; 
(6)  When any vehicle which has been involved in two or more violations of this part for which citation tags have been issued and not presented as required, is parked in violation of any provisions of this chapter; 
(7)  When any vehicle is found where a report or complaint has previously been made alleging that the vehicle has been stolen; 
(8)  When the vehicle is parked in a marked handicapped parking space and the vehicle displays no handicapped parking decal or tag displayed as provided by law; 
(9)  When the vehicle is parked in any parking area marked by a sign or otherwise as a "Tow-Away" zone; 
(10)  When at the request of a private property owner or the agent thereof; 
(11)  When a vehicle is found to be in violation of the Oklahoma Vehicle License and Registration Act, as set forth in 47 O.S. § 1115.1. 
(12)  When the officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle is not insured as required by the Compulsory Insurance Law of the state as documented by one of the following: 
a.  An admission by the driver or other occupant of the vehicle; 
b.  Confirmation through the state tax commission records indicating the vehicle is not insured; 
c.  Confirmation through the state department of public safety driving records or city municipal court records indicating a prior conviction for failure to have insurance within the past six months; 
(13)  When the officer has probable cause that the person operating the vehicle has not been granted driving privileges or that the driving privileges of the person are currently suspended, revoked, canceled, denied, or disqualified; 
(14)  When at the scene of an accident, the owner or driver is not in a position to take charge of the vehicle and direct or request its proper removal; 
(15)  When a red sticker has been affixed to a vehicle warning the vehicle will be impounded after 48 hours if not removed. 
(b)  A vehicle impounded under subsection (a) of this section shall be released to the owner of the vehicle, or other person lawfully entitled to take possession of the vehicle, or any other person lawfully entitled to take possession of the vehicle, provided that such return or delivery of same shall be made only after presenting such proof of interest upon the following conditions when no longer needed for investigation by the police department subject to the following: 
(1)  If the person seeking the release has a valid title or the vehicle is currently registered, which registration can be verified by the state tax commission or any similar governmental entity that records and verifies the ownership of vehicles for any other state, and that the person has a valid driver's license or a temporary one issued when that person surrenders his license or other proper photo identification and valid insurance as required by the Compulsory Insurance Law of the state. 
(2)  If the person has a bill of sale from a local automobile dealer, dated within 30 days of the date of impound, the person has a valid driver's license or other proper photo identification and valid insurance. 
(3)  If the person has a valid insurance verification form and the vehicle identification number is on this card, and on the day of the attempted release the state tax commission verifies that the registered owner is the person seeking release of the vehicle, and the person has a valid driver's license or other proper photo identification and valid insurance. 
(4)  If the registered owner is unable to be present, but sends the title or registration, a notarized statement describing the vehicle and giving the police department the owner's permission to release the vehicle to the person presenting the title or registration and letter and that person has proper photo identification and a copy of valid insurance for the vehicle. For out of state owners, their local police department may electronically notify the city police department for verification of ownership. The police department shall keep on file the original letter or notification. 
(5)  The person attempting to obtain the release must sign a hold harmless agreement releasing the city and wrecker service from any and all liability in releasing said vehicle. The police department shall provide the forms. 
(c)  Whenever any vehicle has been impounded in the manner provided for by this section, the registered or legal owner of the vehicle may contest the validity of the removal or storage by filing a written request for a hearing with the police department. Such written request must be filed before the vehicle is retrieved from storage; provided, however, the city shall not be required to provide a hearing if the request is received more than ten days following actual or constructive notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle that said vehicle has been so removed or stored. Failure of either the registered or legal owner to timely request or to timely appear upon a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the hearing requirement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 211(97), 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 684(10), 11-15-2010; Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1901, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-1902. - Abandoning vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall abandon a motor vehicle on a street, highway or other public property. Any member of the state highway patrol or any qualified sheriff, deputy sheriff or any member of the police department shall deem a vehicle abandoned and shall have the authority to remove or direct the removal of the vehicle when found upon a portion of the street, highway, shoulder or right-of-way, if after a period of 48 hours there is no evidence of an apparent owner who intends to remove the vehicle. 
(b)  If such officer has reasonable cause to believe a vehicle has been abandoned in a location which would be hazardous to the free flow of traffic or be highly susceptible to damage from vandalism or other harm, he shall have the authority to remove or direct the removal of the vehicle immediately. 
(c)  Any officer or agent who has removed or directed the removal of an abandoned vehicle must promptly request the state tax commission or other appropriate motor license agent to furnish the name and address of the owner of and any lienholder on the vehicle and must within 20 days from receipt of the requested information send a notice to the owner and any lienholder by regular mail, postage prepaid, at the addresses furnished by the tax commission or motor license agent, of the vehicle's location. This subsection shall not be construed to create any civil liability upon such officer, any agency, department or political subdivision of the city or employee thereof for failure to provide such notice to the owner or lienholder. 
(d)  The owner of a motor vehicle abandoned in violation of this Code or the owner of any vehicle which shall have been lawfully removed from any highway or other public property, or any lienholder on such vehicle, may regain possession of the vehicle in accordance with regulations of the city upon payment of the reasonable cost of removal and storage of such vehicles. 
(e)  A lienholder as used in this section means those lienholders as shown on the vehicle title. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-1902, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference— Abandonment of vehicles, 47 O.S. § 901 et seq.  
CHAPTER 20. - PENALTIES AND ARREST PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 15-2001. - Penalty. 
(a)  No person shall do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this part. 
(b)  No parent of a child or the guardian of a ward shall authorize any child or ward to violate any provisions of this part. 
(c)  No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle registered in his name to be driven, or to stand, or to be parked in violation of any provisions of this part. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this part, or performs any unlawful act as defined in this part, or fails to perform any act required in this part is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-108. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-2001, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-2002. - Citation tags on parked vehicles. 
In cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped in violation of this part, police officers and other persons appointed by the chief of police shall affix citation tags to the vehicles. A violator of any provision of this part who has been given a citation tag and fails to appear in accordance with the instructions of such tag shall be subject to a separate offense as provided in section 1-108. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-2001, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 15-2003. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was standing or parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such standing or parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(b)  The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure as described in this chapter has been followed. 
(Ord. No. 841(16), § 15-2003, 12-19-2016)  
Part 16 - TRANSPORTATION  
CHAPTER 1. - RAILROADS 
 
Sec. 16-101. - Obstructing passage of trains. 
Any person who willfully or maliciously places any obstruction or any other thing on the track of any railroad within the limits of the city, or who tears up, removes, burns or destroys any part of such railroad, or the works thereof, with intent to obstruct the passage of any engine or car thereon, or to throw them off the track, is guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 16-102)  
Sec. 16-102. - Climbing on trains. 
It is unlawful for any person to climb upon, hold to, or in any manner attach himself to, any railway train, locomotive or railway car while such is in motion within the city, unless such person is acting in the line of duty. It is unlawful for any person to board any train or railroad car except with a proper ticket or the permission of the person in charge of the train or car or in the line of duty. 
(Prior Code, § 19-3; Code 1999, § 19-105)  
Part 17 - UTILITIES  
CHAPTER 1. - LEASE OF SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 17-101. - Lease of utilities to authority. 
The city hereby consents and agrees to the lease of the city's water, sanitary sewerage and refuse systems and facilities and all future additions thereto to the city public works authority as authorized by statute, to be effective at the time and upon the terms and conditions specified in a certain "lease" prepared under the direction of the city council and filed in the office of the city clerk. The mayor of the city hereby is authorized and directed, on behalf of the city, to execute and deliver the lease of the city public works authority. 
(Code 1999, § 17-101)  
Sec. 17-102. - Authority rules adopted by reference, penalty. 
Rules and regulations adopted by the city Public Works Authority are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, applicable as if set out in full herein. Any violation of the rules and regulations of the authority shall be punishable as provided in section 1-108. 
(Code 1999, § 17-102) 
Editor's note— See the minutes and resolutions of the authority board of trustees and the city public works authority rules and regulations for regulations governing utilities, rates and payment procedures for municipal utilities by the authority.  
CHAPTER 2. - GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Management Act, 27A O.S. § 2-10-101 et seq.; littering, 21 O.S. § 1753.3 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carry out service means a special category of service by the city for qualified persons who are physically unable to move the mobile containers to the curbside. 
Commercial means any business, activity or use. 
Curbside service means pickup service provided by the city at the curb or within the public street right-of-way. 
Dumpster means any commercial garbage container provided or approved by the city, including, but not limited to, polycarts. 
Garbage means and includes all accumulations of animal and vegetable matter, or both, which is refuse of kitchens, pantries, dining rooms, markets and public places. 
Mobile container means any residential garbage container provided or approved by the city, including, but not limited to, polycarts. 
Refuse and rubbish mean ashes, cinders, papers, brokenware, discarded clothing and wears, tin cans and vessels and such other articles as are generally termed to be the natural accumulation of resident families. The terms "refuse" and "rubbish" do not include dirt. 
Yard trash means lawn clippings and leaves which must be in a trash bag and placed at curb side. 
(Code 1999, § 17-201; Ord. No. 529, 7-2-1990)  
Sec. 17-202. - Receptacles. 
(a)  Only one mobile container (polycart) shall be provided to each household by the city. This mobile container shall be used as the first means of disposing of garbage. Yard waste may be placed in plastic bags, of at least two-ply, containing less than 39 gallons tightly-tied, and weighing less than 40 pounds per bag, not to exceed five bags. All yard waste placed in plastic bags in excess of five will be picked up for an additional cost pursuant to the fee schedule. No other containers, except those provided by the city, shall be permitted. Additional mobile containers (polycarts) may be obtained for the disposal of garbage at a cost pursuant to the city fee schedule. 
(b)  The containers provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be placed within three feet of the street curbside, except in the case of carry out service where the container shall be placed within 75 feet of the front curbline, not inside a garage or other structure, and no gate granting access to the container shall be locked. It shall be the responsibility of the resident to place the container near the curb on the day designated for pickup by 7:00 a.m. The resident shall remove the container from curbside on the same day. 
(c)  Carry out service shall be provided to residents who are physically unable to place containers at curbside. Yard trash is not included in this service. This service will be provided by the city employees at no additional fee. The city will require that a form provided by the city be completed requiring a doctor's certificate as proof of a resident's inability to place the container at curbside. 
(d)  Mobile containers that are damaged or destroyed through abuse, neglect or improper usage by the resident shall be repaired or replaced by the city at the expense of the resident or owner of the residence. Mobile containers that are stolen or damaged through normal and reasonable usage will be repaired by the city at the city's expense. 
(e)  Businesses collected on mobile container routes will be provided with mobile containers. 
(f)  Brush will be accepted for pickup provided the bundles of brush are no longer than two feet and no more than 12 inches in diameter and placed at curbside. 
(g)  It is unlawful for any person to deposit for collection, on any street, parking or any private property in the city, any garbage, refuse or rubbish without placing it in enclosed containers meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1999, § 17-202; Ord. No. 529, 7-2-1990; Ord. No. 190(97), 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 203(97), 8-18-1997)  
Sec. 17-203. - City to furnish service. 
The city shall furnish garbage and trash hauling service to the city. No other person may remove or cause to be removed garbage, refuse, rubbish or waste from any refuse container or other receptacle used for the deposit of same, or to transport, carry through or over the streets of the city any such garbage, refuse, rubbish or waste, without proper authorization as may be required by law. 
(Prior Code, §§ 11-4, 11-6; Code 1999, § 17-203)  
Sec. 17-204. - Refuse vehicles. 
All vehicles used for collection, removal, transportation or hauling of refuse, rubbish or garbage in the city shall be constructed in such a manner as to prevent any portion of such matter from falling or blowing from such vehicles and shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Prior Code, § 11-5, in part; Code 1999, § 17-204)  
Sec. 17-205. - Refuse not to accumulate. 
(a)  All premises must be kept free and clear of all garbage, refuse, rubbish and waste of all kinds, by the owner, occupant or person in charge of such premises. No garbage, refuse, or waste shall be allowed to accumulate thereon except for such small amounts as shall accumulate between regular removals thereof. Any such conditions are hereby declared to be an offense and a nuisance, and may be punished and abated as such. 
(b)  The city shall provide a service for the removal of large accumulations of trash pursuant to the policy of the city and the fee schedule for the city. 
(Prior Code, § 11-7; Code 1999, § 17-205; Ord. No. 344(02), 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 654(09), 9-8-2009)  
Sec. 17-206. - Dumping. 
In disposing of garbage, rubbish, refuse and waste, the same shall be removed beyond the limits of the city to some suitable place for dumping. It is unlawful to dump refuse, rubbish, garbage or waste at any place in the city unless specifically authorized by law or ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 11-8, in part; Code 1999, § 17-206)  
Sec. 17-207. - Contracting with private services. 
(a)  Customers or proposed customers contracting with the city for trash or garbage hauling service shall be permitted to contract with private garbage hauling services for industrial, commercial and other nonresidential refuse only upon the approval of the city manager, and upon recommendation of the public works department. Approval may be granted only if the city is not able to serve the garbage, trash or other refuse hauling service required by such customers or proposed customers. 
(b)  Any private trash, garbage or refuse hauling service contracting for such service in the city shall furnish to the city clerk a certificate of insurance and shall keep the same in full force and effect at all times while contracting with any customer in the city. The insurance shall show such contractor as having public liability insurance in the sum as set by the city per occurrence in worker's compensation coverage and automobile liability on the motor vehicle used in hauling such refuse in the sum as set by the city per occurrence. 
(Code 1999, § 17-207; Ord. No. 529, 7-2-1990)  
Sec. 17-208. - Certain buildings to use dumpsters. 
All buildings or structures having three or more commercial, business, industrial, residential dwellings or any combination thereof and which have garbage collection contracts with the city shall be required to use garbage dumpsters furnished by the city or any dumpster approved by the city in which all garbage, refuse, rubbish or waste shall be placed to be removed. 
(Prior Code, § 11-10; Code 1999, § 17-208)  
Sec. 17-209. - Collection rates and charges for sanitation service. 
For one designated container provided for recyclable materials curbside recycling shall be provided bi-weekly for all residential customers at an additional cost per month as established by resolution. 
(Code 1999, § 17-209; Ord. No. 529, 7-2-1990; Ord. No. 828(16), § 2, 8-1-2016)  
Sec. 17-210. - Penalty. 
Any person violating these regulations shall, upon conviction in municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-108, in addition to any other actions and remedies available. 
(Code 1999, § 17-210)  
CHAPTER 3. - CUSTOMER ASSISTANCE PROGRAM IN RESPONSE TO SANITARY SEWER BACKUP 
 
Sec. 17-301. - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted to provide a means of relief in order to ease the impact of a sanitary sewer backup in a customer's yard or residence by disinfecting the affected area whether the area is inside or outside the structure. The customer assistance program services will be offered to customers when the backup is initially identified as the result of a stoppage in the city's main. The services to be provided are limited to only those set forth in this chapter and any claim for the payment of damages from a sanitary sewer backup must be handled by filing a tort claim with the city clerk.  
Sec. 17-302. - Scope of work. 
The customer assistance program is authorized to perform only the following work as directed by the risk manager, loss control officer, or designee: 
(1)  Spillage in yards: Removal of any solids and application of disinfectant. 
(2)  Spillage in structures: 
a.  Vacuuming or removing spillage and waste material. 
b.  Mopping affected bare floors and cleaning of baseboards, bare walls and plumbing fixtures. 
c.  Removal of small items which the customer authorizes for disposal including small areas of carpet and pad. 
d.  Moving of furniture as required for the sole purpose of performing the above work and within the capabilities of the crew.  
Sec. 17-303. - Exclusions and items outside scope of work. 
The following items are excluded under this chapter: 
(1)  The customer assistance program will not be offered if the risk management or community development department has previously recommended a back-flow prevention device at the residence. 
(2)  The customer assistance program will not be offered to businesses, churches or commercial property. 
(3)  The customer assistance program does not cover the cleaning of towels, rugs, clothing, curtains, or other similar items. 
(4)  The cleaning of heating and ventilation ducts fall outside the scope of the program as well as the removing or repairing of damaged drywall, wallboard, or other wall coverings.  
Sec. 17-304. - Administration. 
The city risk management board will serve as administrator of claims pursuant to this chapter. Claims shall be made pursuant to the provisions of the Governmental Tort Claims Act (51 O.S. § 151 et seq.). Claims are to be presented within one year of the date the loss occurs. A claim shall be forever barred unless notice thereof is presented within one year after the loss occurs. 
(Code 1999, § 17-304; Ord. No. 137(95), 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 162(96), 7-1-1996)  
CHAPTER 4. - SEWER, SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE PRETREATMENT 
 
Sec. 17-401. - Regulations adopted. 
The city's "Sewer, Sewage Disposal and Industrial Waste Pretreatment Regulations," as originally adopted by Ord. No. 22(92), October 18, 1993, and amended by Ordinance No. 98(94), October 3, 1994, and any other amendments, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. A copy of the regulations are on file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 17-401; Ord. No. 22(92), 10-18-1993; Ord. No. 98(94), 10-3-1994; Ord. No. 605(07), 12-3-2007)  
Sec. 17-402. - Penalty. 
A violation of the city's sewer, sewage disposal and industrial waste pretreatment regulations is punishable as provided in section 1-108, unless another penalty is specifically provided in the regulations. 
(Code 1999, § 17-402)  
Appendix 1 - ELECTRIC FRANCHISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 741(13), adopted February 4, 2013, and approved by the electors at a special election held on May 14, 2013, has been included herein as superseding the former appendix 3 which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 448, adopted May 2, 1988, and approved by the electors at a special election held on June 28, 1988. 
 
SECTION 1. - DEFINITIONS. 
The Word "City" as hereinafter used shall mean and designate the City of Moore, Cleveland County, Oklahoma, and the word "Company" as hereinafter used shall mean and designate the Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company, a corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Oklahoma and its successors and assigns. 
(Ord. No. 741(13), 2-4-2013)  
SECTION 2. - GRANT FRANCHISE. 
(a)  The City hereby grants to the Company the right, privilege and authority to produce, transmit, distribute and sell electricity within the corporate limits of the City for all purposes for which it may be used, to the City, its inhabitants and the public generally, and the right, privilege and authority to construct, maintain and operate a system of poles, wires, conduits, transformers, substations, and other facilities and equipment in, upon, across, under and over the streets, alleys, public grounds and other places in each and every part of said City for the purpose of producing, transmitting, distributing and selling electricity to the City, its inhabitants, and to the public generally. 
(b)  The franchise hereby granted shall be effective from and after the date of approval of this Ordinance by the qualified electors of the City and acceptance by the Company, and shall remain in full force and effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the City from granting an electric franchise to any other person, firm, or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 741(13), 2-4-2013)  
SECTION 3. - NOT TO IMPEDE TRAFFIC. 
The Company shall construct, operate and maintain its property in such manner as will, consistent with necessity, not obstruct nor impede traffic unduly. 
(Ord. No. 741(13), 2-4-2013)  
SECTION 4. - HOLD HARMLESS TO CITY. 
The Company shall defend and indemnify the City against all liability for injury to any person or property caused by the negligence of the Company in the construction, operation and maintenance of its property within the City. 
(Ord. No. 741(13), 2-4-2013)  
SECTION 5. - COMPLIANCE WITH RULES. 
Electric service provided hereunder to the City, its inhabitants, and to the public generally, and rates charged therefor shall be in accordance with orders, rules and regulations of the Corporation Commission of the State of Oklahoma or other governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 741(13), 2-4-2013)  
SECTION 6. - ASSIGNMENT. 
The Company shall have the right to assign this franchise and the assignee by written acceptance thereof shall be bound by all the provisions hereof. An authenticated copy of such assignment and acceptance shall be filed with the Clerk of the City. 
(Ord. No. 741(13), 2-4-2013)  
SECTION 7. - FRANCHISE FEE. 
(a)  From and after the approval and acceptance of this franchise, and in consideration of the granting of this franchise, the Company agrees to pay and shall pay to the City an annual franchise fee in an amount equal to three percent (3%) of its gross revenues arising from the sale of electricity within the corporate limits of the City, such payment to be made on or before the 25th day of July of each year, after deducting therefrom any amount due the Company from the City. 
(b)  The Company shall abide by any order, rule or regulation of the Corporation Commission of the State of Oklahoma requiring the listing separately of all or any portion of such franchise fee on electric bills to customers. 
(c)  Such franchise fees paid by the Company to the City shall be in lieu of all other franchise, excise, license, occupation, privilege, inspection, permit, or other fees, taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 741(13), 2-4-2013)  
SECTION 8. - SERVICE TO CITY. 
The Company shall furnish to the City without charge each fiscal year during the term hereof electric current to be used exclusively by the City for operation of traffic signal lights and buildings occupied and operated by the City for municipal purposes, to be applied by the Company as a credit to billings to the City, provided that such electric current shall not exceed one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the kilowatt-hours sold by the Company to customers within the corporate limits of the City during the preceding fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 741(13), 2-4-2013)  
SECTION 9. - SPECIAL ELECTION. 
A special election is hereby called for the purpose of submitting this Ordinance to the qualified electors of the City residing within its corporate limits for their approval or disapproval, provided the Company shall pay the cost of such election. The election shall be held on the 14th day of May, 2013, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The Mayor of the City Council is authorized and directed to issue an election proclamation calling such election and is further directed to take all steps that may be necessary for holding the election and for the submission of this Ordinance to the qualified electors of the City. If a majority of the qualified electors of the City voting thereon fail to approve this franchise at said election, no rights shall accrue hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 741(13), 2-4-2013)  
Appendix 2 - THE MOORE CABLE SYSTEM ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 398(02), adopted December 16, 2002, amended appendix 5 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such appendix pertained to similar provisions and derived from Ord. No. 132, 1-3-1978. 
 
SECTION 1. - DEFINITIONS. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein unless otherwise defined by federal or state law. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may hereinafter be further amended, and if not defined therein, such words shall have their common and ordinary meaning. 
A.  "Access channel" means any channel on a System which, by the terms of this Ordinance or otherwise, is required to be kept available without charge by Franchisee for partial or total designation to public, educational and/or local government use and over which Franchisee exercises no editorial control. 
B.  "Affiliate" means an entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with Franchisee. 
C.  "Application" means any proposal, submission or request to: (1) construct and operate a System within the City; (2) transfer a Franchise or control of a Franchise; (3) renew a Franchise; (4) modify a Franchise, or; (5) seek any other relief from the City pursuant to this Ordinance, a Franchise Agreement, the Cable Act as amended, or the FCC rules and regulations. 
D.  "Cable system" shall mean a facility, consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service, which includes video programming, and other communications services which are provided to multiple Subscribers within the City. It shall include, without limitation, all of the component, physical operation and programming elements of a network of cable, electrical and electronic equipment, designed, constructed, wired or used for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and transmitting by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave or other means audio and/or audio/visual electrical impulses of television, radio and other intelligences, either analog or digital, including, but not limited to, cable television for sale to the inhabitants and businesses of the City. 
E.  "Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as further amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as further amended from time to time. 
F.  "Cable service" means (A) the one-way transmission to Subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and (B) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
G.  "City" means the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
H.  "City attorney" is the City Attorney for the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
I.  "City clerk" is the City Clerk of the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
J.  "City engineer" is the City Engineer of the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
K.  "City manager" means the City Manager of Moore, Oklahoma or his duly authorized representative. 
L.  "Converter" means a device used for changing the frequency of a television signal. It may also include descrambling or decoding capabilities. 
M.  "Council" is the City Council of the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
N.  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission. 
O.  "Franchise" means the right granted by the City to a Franchisee to construct, maintain and operate a System under, on and over streets, roads and all other Public Ways and easements within the City. 
P.  "Franchise agreement" means the contract entered into in accordance with this Ordinance, and sets forth the terms and conditions under which the Franchise will be exercised. 
Q.  "Franchisee" means any Person granted a Franchise pursuant to this Ordinance and shall include any successor thereto. 
R.  "Gross revenues" means all cash, credits, property or other consideration of any kind or nature received directly or indirectly by the Franchisee arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from the operation of the System to provide Cable Service within the City. Gross Revenues shall include, but not be limited to: monthly fees charged Subscribers for basic Cable Service; any optional, pay per view, premium, per-channel or per-program service or charges for any other type of Cable Service; installation, disconnection, and change in service fees; leased channel fees; Converter and equipment fees, rentals or sales; net advertising revenues; net revenues from home shopping channels; fees from use of Access Channels, revenues from studio rental, production fees and equipment charges when applicable; Gross Revenues shall not include bad debt, Franchise fees or any sales, excise or other taxes or fees, which are imposed directly on any Cable Service subscriber by any governmental unit or agency and which are collected by the Franchisee on behalf of such governmental unit or agency. 
S.  "Normal business hours" means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, Normal Business Hours must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
T.  "Normal operating conditions" means those service conditions which are within the control of the Franchisee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the Franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the Franchisee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the System. 
U.  "Ordinance" means the Moore Cable System Ordinance, unless the context shall indicate otherwise. 
V.  "Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture, organization or legal entity of any kind, and any lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof. 
W.  "Public way" means the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, road, thoroughfare, alley or other public right of way or public place including, without limitation, public utility easements dedicated for compatible use within the City. 
X.  "Service area" means the present municipal boundaries of the City and any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means. 
Y.  "Subscriber" means any Person who legally receives Cable Service delivered over the System. 
Z.  "System" means the Cable System. 
A.A.  "Transfer of franchise" means any transaction in which (1) any majority ownership or other controlling interest in a Franchise or its System is transferred from one Person or group of Persons to another Person or group of Persons, none of whom already own a controlling ownership interest in the transferring person; or (2) the rights and/or obligations held by the Franchisee under a Franchise Agreement are transferred or assigned to another Person or group of Persons, none of whom already own a controlling ownership interest in the transferring person. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 2. - GRANT OF AUTHORITY; FRANCHISE REQUIRED. 
A.  In order to make Cable Services available to the residents of the City, the City may grant one or more Franchises in accordance with this Ordinance and the execution of a Franchise Agreement. 
B.  No Person may construct or operate a System in the City without a Franchise granted by the City and having entered into a Franchise Agreement with the City. 
C.  Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the City from seeking additional Franchisees at any time pursuant to a request for proposals or applications. Responses shall comply with this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 3. - FRANCHISE CHARACTERISTICS. 
A.  A Franchise shall be for a term or period of time not to exceed twenty (20) years to serve all areas of the City, and shall be in effect from and after approval thereof by the Council in accordance with applicable law. 
B.  A Franchise authorizes the Franchisee to use the Public Ways within the City for installing cables, wires, lines, underground conduit and other facilities to operate a System within the City, but does not authorize such use on private property without the owner's consent, nor does the Franchise permit the use of privately-owned easements without separate agreement of the owners, unless otherwise permitted by law. 
C.  A Franchise shall be nonexclusive, and will not preclude the issuance of another Franchise, nor affect the City's right to authorize use of any Public Way by other Persons as it deems appropriate. 
D.  A Franchise shall not relieve the Franchisee of any requirement of any ordinance, rule, regulation or specification of the City of general applicability now or hereinafter lawfully enacted by the City. The Franchisee shall at all times be subject to the lawful exercise of the police power of the City to the full extent that such powers now or hereinafter may be vested in or granted to the City. However, any ordinance, rule, regulation or specification of the City enacted after a Franchisee has entered into a Franchise Agreement shall not materially alter the rights or obligations of the Franchisee under the existing ordinance and Franchise Agreement unless specifically authorized by state or federal law. 
E.  A Franchisee and the City shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with the Cable Act, all federal and state laws governing Cable Service and all laws of general applicability. 
F.  The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to a Franchise Agreement as if fully set out in such agreement. The terms of a Franchise Agreement shall prevail over conflicting provisions of this Ordinance. 
G.  The Franchisee shall make Cable Service available to all residents and businesses within the City, subject to the provisions of Section 10.5. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 4. - APPLICATIONS FOR GRANT, RENEWAL, MODIFICATIONS OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE. 
A.  A written Application shall be filed with the City for the (a) grant of a new Franchise; (b) renewal of a Franchise; (c) modification of a Franchise Agreement; or (d) transfer of a Franchise pursuant to this ordinance, the Franchise Agreement or the Cable Act. The applicant has the burden to demonstrate compliance with all applicable laws and entitlement to the relief sought. 
B.  The applicant must file an original and five (5) copies of the Application together with any required filing fee as set forth in this Ordinance. The Application shall also conform to any request for proposals and shall contain all requested information. 
C.  All Applications shall identify Persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the Application. 
D.  All Applications accepted for filing by the City shall be available during the City's regular business hours for public inspection. 
E.  An Application for the initial grant of a Franchise shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant and identification of ownership and control of the applicant including: (a) names and addresses of the ten (10) largest holders of an ownership interest and all Persons with a five percent (5%) or more ownership interest in the applicant; (b) the names of Persons who control the applicant including, without limitation, all officers and directors; (c) any other business affiliation and cable interest of each named Person. 
2.  A statement as to whether the applicant, or any Person controlling the applicant, or any officer, director or major stockholder has been adjudged bankrupt, had a cable Franchise revoked, or been found guilty of any violation of any security or anti-trust law, or of the commission of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude; and if so, the identification of such Person and a full explanation of such circumstances. 
3.  A demonstration of the applicant's technical, legal and financial ability to construct and/or operate the proposed System, including identification of key personnel. 
4.  A description of the applicant's prior experience in System ownership and construction, and identification of all communities the applicant or its principals have served. 
5.  Identification of proposed Cable Service Area and a detailed description of the facilities proposed and the characteristics of the System including, but not limited to, channel capacity, technical design, and performance and quality expectations. 
6.  A detailed description of the construction of the proposed System, together with a proposed construction schedule. Where appropriate, the applicant shall include an explanation of how services will be converted from the existing facilities to the new facilities. 
7.  A description of all services to be provided, including, without limitation, all broadcast and non-broadcast signals and all non-television services to be carried on the System. If tiers of service are to be used by the Franchisee, a description of each tier service to be available to Subscribers. 
8.  A description of proposed rate schedule for Cable Service and equipment to be provided or used in association with the basic cable service tier, together with all forms or information required to allow the determination by the City of the maximum initial permitted rates and charges. Additionally, and for informational purposes, the Franchisee shall disclose to the City any and all charges to be made for all other services and equipment. 
9.  A demonstration of how the applicant's proposal will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, taking into account the costs thereof including a description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent community needs assessment conducted by or for the City. 
10.  A statement showing pro-forma financial projections for the first five (5) years. 
11.  An affidavit of the applicant or authorized officer thereof certifying to the truth and accuracy of all information in the Application, acknowledging the enforceability of Application commitments, and that the Application proposal meets all regulatory authority requirements. 
12.  Any other information which may be necessary to demonstrate compliance with all laws as may be relevant to City's consideration of the Application. 
F.  An Application for modifications of the Franchise Agreement shall include, as a minimum, the following information: 
1.  The specified modifications requested. 
2.  The justification and basis for the requested modification including a statement of impact the requested modification may have on Subscribers or others, and the financial impact approval or disapproval may have on the applicant. 
3.  Any other relevant information which may be reasonably necessary for the City to make an informed decision. 
G.  An Application for renewal of a Franchise shall comply with the requirements of Section 25 herein. 
H.  An Application for approval of the Transfer of a Franchise shall comply with the requirements of Section 26 herein. 
I.  Each Application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the following amounts as may be appropriate: 
1.  For new or initial Franchise ..... $500.00 
2.  For renewal of a Franchise ..... $500.00 
3.  For a transfer of a Franchise ..... $250.00 
4.  For a modification of Franchise Agreement ..... $150.00 
5.  For any other relief ..... $150.00 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 5. - GRANT OF FRANCHISE. 
A.  The City may grant or renew a Franchise for a period not to exceed twenty (20) years in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the terms of a Franchise Agreement. 
B.  The grant or renewal of a Franchise may be conditioned upon completion of construction within times prescribed or upon performance of specific obligations as set forth in the Franchise Agreement. 
C.  In evaluating an Application for an initial Franchise, the City may consider, among other things, the following factors: the applicant's technical, financial, and legal qualifications to construct and operate the proposed System; the nature of the proposed facilities, equipment, and services; the applicant's experience in constructing and operating Systems and providing Cable Service in other communities, if any; the ability of City's Public Ways to accommodate the proposed System; the potential disruption to users of City's Public Ways and any resultant inconvenience to the public; and whether the proposal will meet reasonably anticipated community needs and serve the public interest. 
D.  The Application shall be reviewed by the City Manager and staff to determine whether the Application complies with all requirements of this Ordinance. If the Application is sufficient, the City Manager and the applicant shall negotiate the terms and conditions of the proposed Franchise Agreement. The proposed Franchise Agreement must be executed by the applicant and submitted to the Council. The proposed Franchise Agreement shall provide that it is subject to approval of the qualified electors of the City. The proposed Franchise Agreement shall further provide that the applicant acknowledges its acceptance of the proposed Franchise and the obligation of the applicant to comply with all the provisions of this Ordinance, the proposed Franchise Agreement and the terms and conditions of the applicant's proposal as submitted to the City as a part of the Application except to the extent such items are preempted or superseded by federal or state law. 
E.  The City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider the Application and the proposed Franchise Agreement. Based upon the Application and the proposed Franchise Agreement, the testimony presented at the public hearing, any recommendation of the City Manager or staff and any other information relevant to the Application, including the requirements of applicable federal or state law, the Council shall determine whether to approve or disapprove the proposed Franchise Agreement and whether to grant or deny the Franchise Application. 
F.  In the event a court of competent jurisdiction determines that federal law does not preempt the election requirement for Franchise Agreements as set forth in Oklahoma Constitution, Article 18, § 5(a), the Council shall direct submission of the grant of a Franchise to a vote of the qualified electors as required by the Oklahoma Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 6. - ELECTION AND COSTS THEREOF. 
To the extent required by applicable law, in order for a grant, extension or renewal of a Franchise, other than a revocable permit, to become effective, an election must be held. A majority of the qualified electors of the City voting on the question must vote in favor of the grant, extension or renewal of the Franchise. No election shall be called or conducted for the purposes provided herein, unless and until the applicant or Franchisee named therein shall have deposited with the City, in cash, an amount estimated by the City Clerk to be required for payment in full of those expenses of such election, directly related to the grant or renewal issue including, without limitation, the costs of printing and publishing. If the final total of the expenses and costs incurred by the City for the election exceeds the amount deposited by the Franchisee, Franchisee shall pay to the City all excess expenses and costs and the City shall refund to the Franchisee any overpayment of expenses and costs. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 7. - INSURANCE. 
A.  The Franchisee shall maintain throughout the term of the Franchise, at its own cost and expense, automobile insurance on all its vehicles and general comprehensive liability insurance, insuring the Franchisee and the City, the Council, its officers, private sub-contractors, agents and employees, whether elected or appointed, from and against all claims by any Person whatsoever for loss, injury or damage to Person or property, both real and personal, occasioned or caused by the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of the System. The insurance shall provide amounts of coverage not less than the following: 
General Liability Insurance 
Bodily Injury per Person 	$1,000,000.00 
Bodily Injury per Occurrence 	2,000,000.00 
Property Damage per Occurrence 	500,000.00 
Automobile Insurance 
Bodily Injury per Person 	$1,000,000.00 
Bodily Injury per Occurrence 	2,000,000.00 
Property Damage per Occurrence 	500,000.00 
 
In no event shall the coverage or amounts be less than those established as the City's liability limits under Oklahoma Governmental Tort Claims Act, as may be amended from time to time. 
B.  The Franchisee shall also provide workers' compensation coverage as required by the laws of the State of Oklahoma. 
C.  All insurance policies shall be with companies licensed to conduct business in the State of Oklahoma. 
D.  All insurance policies must name the City as an additional named insured and no cancellation shall be effective, except upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the City, and unless another policy is in effect on or before the date of cancellation. 
E.  The insurance coverage, as evidenced by the certificates of insurance shall be filed and maintained with the City. 
F.  Franchisee shall provide proof to the City of compliance with this Section no later than the effective date of the Franchise. 
G.  In the event the Franchisee fails to maintain the insurance required herein, the City may, at its option, obtain and keep such insurance in full force and effect. The Franchisee shall promptly reimburse the City for such insurance costs. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 8. - INDEMNIFICATION. 
A.  Except in the event of the City's, its employees' or agents' negligence or intentional acts, the Franchisee shall, at its cost and expense, indemnify, save, hold harmless and defend the City, its officials, boards, commissions, agents, consultants and employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, demands, penalties, liabilities, proceedings or judgments for damages or equitable relief filed by third parties resulting from or arising out of or through: 
1.  Franchisee's construction, installation, maintenance or operation of its System. 
2.  Any processes, or procedures, acts or omissions by Franchisee in connection with the consideration of an award to Franchisee of a Franchise and/or any amendments thereto. 
3.  The conduct of Franchisee's business, including without limitation, any acts or omissions of Franchisee, its servants, employees, or agents, whether or not such act or omission is authorized, required, allowed or prohibited by this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement. 
B.  This indemnification shall include all expenses, including but not limited to out of pocket expenses, reasonable attorneys fees and litigation expenses incurred by the City in defending itself from such claims and demands; provided if any action at law or suit in equity is instituted by a third party (a "Claim") with respect to which the City intends to seek indemnification under this section, the City shall promptly notify the Franchisee of such action or suit. Franchisee shall have the right to conduct and control any Claim through counsel of its own choosing, but the City may, at its election, participate in a defense of any such Claim at its sole cost and expense. 
C.  This indemnification shall also include, but not be limited to, claims based on invasion of right of privacy, libel, slander, copyright infringements, defamation, violation of trade name, service mark or patent rights. 
D.  In addition to the provisions of paragraph B of this Section, nothing in this section shall prohibit the City from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own separate counsel at its own costs. Compliance by Franchisee with these indemnity provisions shall not limit any other remedies available to the City, at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 9. - PERFORMANCE BOND. 
A.  The Franchise Agreement may provide that, prior to the initial commencement of any System construction, upgrade or other work in the streets or other Public Ways, the Franchisee shall establish and maintain a performance bond in favor of the City, in an amount specified in the Franchise Agreement or other authorization as may be necessary to ensure the Franchisee's faithful performance of each term and condition of this Ordinance, the Franchise Agreement and all applicable ordinances, statutes, rules or regulations relating to the performance of any construction, upgrade or other work which is required of the Franchisee. 
B.  In the event the Franchisee shall fail to fulfill the obligations as imposed, or breaches any such obligations, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally, from the principal and sureties, any damages or loss suffered by the City proximately resulting from the failure of the Franchisee to faithfully perform the provisions of this Ordinance and the Franchise Agreement, including the cost of removal of property of Franchisee, the cost of completing the obligations of the Franchisee, together with reasonable attorneys fees. 
C.  The Franchise Agreement may provide the amounts, terms and periods of maintenance of such performance bond. Upon completion of all construction, upgrade or other work in the streets or other Public Ways to the satisfaction of the City, the City may reduce the amount of the bond to an amount determined by the City sufficient to protect the City in the event of breach. Bond requirements may be also reasonably increased by the City to secure additional construction upgrade or other work. 
D.  Any performance bond required by this Section shall be issued by a surety authorized to conduct business in the State of Oklahoma. The performance bond shall contain a restriction prohibiting cancellation or lapse without thirty (30) days' written notice to the City from the surety or issuer of the performance bond of its intention to cancel or not renew. 
E.  The performance bond shall be filed and maintained with the City Clerk. 
F.  The rights available to the City pursuant to the performance bond are in addition to all other rights and remedies available to the City. The exercise of any such rights shall not be construed to excuse or waive unfaithful performance or breach by Franchisee, or limit the liability of the Franchisee to the City. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 10. - MINIMUM FACILITY AND SERVICE. 
The following are minimum requirements for facilities and service for all Franchises granted by the City. The City may agree in the Franchise Agreement to additional requirements, where the City and Franchisee determine that additional requirements are necessary to meet public needs, taking into account the cost thereof. 
1.  The System shall be capable of both one-way and two-way transmission and shall be capable of delivering 110 analog channels. 
2.  In instances of upgrade, the Franchisee shall exchange, upon request, at its own expense, existing Converters for Converters capable of receiving all available channels or services. 
3.  The Franchisee shall provide, upon written request of the City, one (1) outlet consisting of all cable channels except pay per view, pay per program or premium (such as, HBO, Showtime and Cinemax) channels, without installation or monthly charge to City Hall, fire stations, police stations, and any other facility owned or occupied by the City, subject to the buildout requirements set forth in Section 10.5. 
4.  The Franchisee shall provide the same service set forth in the preceding paragraph to all Moore public elementary, junior high and high school facilities located within the City of Moore, subject to the buildout requirements set forth in Section 10.5. 
5.  Cable Service shall be available to every dwelling and business within the City unless residents reside in a remote or relatively inaccessible area or in annexed areas already served by another cable operator. The Franchisee will build to these remote and inaccessible areas and extend service inside the City limits on the following schedule: For every one-fourth mile of cable plant required to serve a particular section of the City, ten (10) or more customers must have placed orders for service. Expenses associated with the provision of service to businesses beyond 125 feet from an existing subscriber tap shall be at a cost agreed upon by the Franchisee and such businesses. 
6.  The Franchisee shall provide a total of two (2) Access Channels as set forth below: 
(a)  The Franchisee shall make available for use by the City, free of charge, one (1) government access channel. 
(b)  The Franchisee shall make available for use by the public educational institutions, free of charge, one (1) educational Access Channel. 
(c)  The Franchisee shall be allowed to utilize any unused time on the Access Channels. 
7.  The System shall provide leased Access Channels as required by federal law. 
8.  To the extent required by applicable law, the System shall be designed to allow the City to interrupt Cable Service in an emergency or disaster declared by City Manager or his designee, and if necessary, use such facilities during the period of emergency or disaster. This shall include a telephone access system whereby voice announcements may be made simultaneously over all analog television channels. This is to be a 24-hour mechanism capable of preempting the sound on all analog channels. The mechanism is to be accessible to authorized City or Franchisee personnel only. 
9.  The System will provide standby power to be installed at locations as determined by Franchisee, but shall include back up power at the headend. The power system shall be capable of self activation at any time there is a loss of commercial power. 
10.  When constructing or reconstructing the System, the Franchisee shall place all cable, appurtenances, and transmission facilities in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Franchisee shall place its cable, appurtenances, and transmission facilities underground in those areas where transmission and distribution facilities of the existing telephone company and electric company are located underground. 
(2)  Franchisee shall promptly move, at its own expense, its cable, appurtenances, and transmission facilities underground in any area where, during the term of a franchise, the transmission and distribution facilities of the existing telephone company and electric company are moved underground. 
(3)  Where aerial cable is allowed, Franchisee shall not erect any new poles along any Public Way except as may be reasonably necessary to fill small gaps in the existing aerial utility systems and only then with approval of the City, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
11.  Franchisee shall make no pavement cuts in the installation, maintenance, or removal of its System, except upon written approval of the City and upon compliance with the Moore City Code. 
12.  All signals shall include any closed caption information for the hearing impaired, as required by the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 11. - SIGNAL QUALITY REQUIREMENTS. 
The Franchisee shall: 
1.  Produce a picture, whether in black and white or in color, that is undistorted, and accompanied with proper sound on a typical television set in good repair. 
2.  Transmit signals of adequate strength to produce undistorted picture with proper sound to all outlets without causing cross-modulation, hum or distortion in the System or otherwise interfering with other electrical or electronic systems. 
3.  Demonstrate, upon request and at no expense to the Subscriber, by instrument or otherwise, that a signal of adequate strength and quality is being delivered. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 12. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS. 
A.  The System shall meet or exceed the technical standards set forth in this Ordinance, the Franchise Agreement, FCC or other applicable local, federal or state technical standards as may now exist or as hereinafter amended or adopted. 
B.  Antennas, supporting structures and outside plant of the System shall be designed to comply with recommendations of the Electronics Industry on tower structures and outside plant, and with all federal, state or City laws, ordinances, or rules or regulations. 
C.  All construction, installation and maintenance shall comply with building, electrical codes or other applicable laws adopted by the City as now existing or as hereinafter amended or adopted. 
D.  The Franchisee shall, upon the request of the City, perform at its expense, proof of performance tests designed to demonstrate compliance with the technical requirements of this Ordinance, the Franchise Agreement and the then existing FCC requirements, provided, if the City requests such tests more than annually it shall pay all costs associated with such test. 
E.  The System shall not be designed or operated in any manner which will significantly interfere with any broadcast station, any electrical system or antennas for reception of television or other broadcast signals as detailed in the FCC rules regarding signal quality. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 13. - ERECTION, REMOVAL AND COMMON USE OF POLES. 
A.  No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the Franchisee without prior approval of the City. The Franchisee shall have no vested interest in the location of any pole or wire holding structure. Such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by Franchisee at its own expense whenever the City determines that public convenience would be enhanced thereby. 
B.  In the event poles or other wire-holding structures are already existing for use in serving the City and are available for use by the Franchisee, and the Franchisee does not make arrangements for such use, the City may require the Franchisee to use such poles or structures, upon reasonable terms and conditions, if the City determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby, and the terms of the use available to the Franchisee are just and reasonable. 
C.  Where a public utility serving the City desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the Franchisee, but an agreement therefor with the Franchisee cannot be reached, the City may require the Franchisee to permit such use for such consideration and on such terms as the City shall determine to be just and reasonable, taking into account pole rates charged Franchisee by the public utility and the pole rates established by FCC rules and regulations, if the City reasonably determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with operations of the Franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 14. - SAFETY REQUIREMENTS. 
A.  The Franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. 
B.  The Franchisee shall install and maintain its wires, cable, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the City and as the same may respectively be amended or replaced, and all applicable state and local laws codes and ordinances. 
C.  All structures and all lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys and Public Ways or places of the City, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 15. - REMOVAL OF FACILITIES UPON REQUEST. 
A.  Upon termination of service by any Subscriber, the Franchisee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such Subscriber upon his request. 
B.  The question of ownership of wiring installed inside the residence or business of a Subscriber shall be determined by the rules promulgated by the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 16. - SUBSCRIBER RATES, CHARGES AND REFUNDS. 
A.  Rate Regulations. 
1.  The rates and charges made to Subscribers for basic cable television service and related equipment shall be determined pursuant to the FCC Rules and Regulations, to the extent applicable. The Council shall have the authority to regulate such rates and charges in accordance with the FCC rules and regulations, which are incorporated by reference. 
B.  Rate and Charge Limitations. 
1.  The Franchisee may require Subscribers to pay for Cable Service one month in advance. No other advance payment, penalty or deposit other than a late fee imposed by Section 16.B.3. below shall be required by the Franchisee for Cable Service except where a particular Subscriber has a bona fide credit problem. 
2.  If in the future the state of Oklahoma regulates the rates of the Franchisee for the service provided for in a Franchise, this section shall be of no effect during such state regulation to the extent of any conflict herewith. 
3.  Franchisee may charge a fee for the recovery of costs incurred to collect late payments for Cable Services if the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The subscriber's bill sets forth when the fee will be assessed; 
(2)  The fee is not assessed any earlier than the tenth (10 th ) day after the due date as reflected on the subscriber's bill; and 
(3)  The bill sets forth the amount of the fee. 
Any fee imposed by Franchisee that does not exceed $6.00 in Year 2000 dollars (as adjusted annually for inflation based on the Consumer Price Index) shall be presumed reasonable to cover the costs associated with the delinquent payment. The assessment of a fee pursuant to this section shall not be construed as a limitation on Franchisee's right to charge any other lawful fees or charges. 
4.  Subscribers shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by the Franchisee, its employees, or contractors, to timely or correctly bill the Subscriber, or fail to properly credit the Subscriber for a payment timely made. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 17. - CUSTOMER SERVICE REQUIREMENTS. 
A.  The Franchisee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. The requirements established in this section shall be deemed minimum service standards and may be supplemented by terms of the Franchise Agreement or mutually agreed upon amendments to this Ordinance. 
B.  All employees of the Franchisee who are involved in field work which require the employee to enter onto private property shall wear, on the outside of clothing, a photograph identification badge. 
C.  Telephone availability requirements may be provided by equipment and personnel located at the regional office or other offices of the Franchisee. Compliance records shall be maintained for the operations within the City at Franchisee's regional office. 
D.  The Franchisee shall provide a listed local or toll free telephone number which will be available to Subscribers and members of the public twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week. 
E.  The Franchisee shall adhere to the Customer Service Standards mandated by the FCC, which are incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 18. - POLE AGREEMENTS; REGULATIONS. 
A.  All transmission and distribution structures, and equipment erected by the Franchisee within the City shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other Public Ways and places, and to the extent feasible, to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the said streets, alleys or other Public Ways and places, while allowing the Franchisee to adequately perform its requirements under the Franchise. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of the Franchisee to obtain the necessary pole attachment agreements from the City and/or private utility companies using poles within the City. 
1.  Upon request, all pole attachment agreements obtained from public and private utility companies shall be made available to the City Clerk. 
2.  All pole attachment agreements with the City shall be negotiated and approved by the Council. 
C.  If, at any time during the period of a Franchise, the City shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other Public Way, the Franchisee, upon reasonable notice by the City, shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense. 
D.  Any poles or other fixtures placed in any Public Way by the Franchisee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such Public Way. 
E.  The Franchisee shall, on the request of any Person holding a building moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its facilities to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of facilities to permit the moving of buildings shall be paid by the Person requesting the same, and the Franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Franchisee shall be given not less than seven (7) days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary facility changes. 
F.  A Franchisee shall not place its facilities, equipment or fixtures where they will unduly interfere with public utility facilities or equipment, nor obstruct or hinder the service of such utilities to the residents. 
G.  The City may issue such rules and regulations concerning the installation and maintenance of the System as may be consistent with this Ordinance, the Franchise Agreement and applicable law. 
H.  Upon completion of any work, the Franchisee shall restore all property to its former condition. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 19. - RESERVATION OF RIGHTS. 
A.  The right is hereby reserved to the Council to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its lawful police powers or powers granted to the City by federal or state law. However, such regulation, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable, of general applicability, and not in conflict with the material rights herein granted. 
B.  The City shall have the right to inspect the books, records, maps, plans, and other like materials of the Franchisee reasonably necessary to enforce any Franchise granted hereunder, at any time upon reasonable written notice and during Normal Business Hours. 
C.  The City shall have the right, during the life of a Franchise, to install and maintain for a fee, upon the poles of the Franchisee any wire and pole fixtures that do not interfere with the System of the Franchisee. 
D.  The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed, within public ways subject to the provisions of this nonexclusive Franchise and other pertinent provisions of the state and local law. In the event City inspection(s) reveal(s) that the Franchisee has failed, in the City's reasonable judgment, to fulfill its obligation under the terms of this nonexclusive Franchise, the City shall notify the Franchisee, in writing, of its specific deficiencies. Absent commencement of corrective action or filing of a request for review before the City Council by the Franchisee within thirty (30) days of receipt of said notification, the City may undertake the necessary repairs or restoration at the Franchisee's sole expense. 
E.  At the expiration of the term for which a Franchise is granted, or upon its termination as provided herein, and absent a Franchise renewal, the Council may require the Franchisee to continue operations for a period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of the Council's decision. In the event of non-renewal of the Franchise, the Franchisee shall have one hundred eighty (180) days from the date it ceases operations to remove, at its own expense, all portions of its System from all Public Ways within the City and to restore said Public Ways to a condition reasonably satisfactory to the City taking into account normal wear and tear. 
F.  Upon the non-renewal of a Franchise as provided for herein, the City, at its election, and upon the payment of a sum equal to the fair market value to the Franchisee as provided by Subsection (G), shall have the right to purchase and take over the System in its entirety. Upon the exercise of this option and the payment of the above sum by the City and its service of an official notice of such action upon the Franchisee, the Franchisee shall immediately transfer to the City possession and title to all facilities and property, real and personal, of the System, free from any and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the City in lieu of some portion of the purchase price set forth above; and the Franchisee shall execute such warranty deeds or other instruments of conveyance to the City as shall be necessary for this purpose. 
G.  Upon the exercise of the option by the City to purchase and take over the System in its entirety, the fair market value to the Franchisee of the System shall be determined by three (3) disinterested parties, one of such parties to be selected by the City, another to be selected by the Franchisee, and the two (2) parties so selected shall mutually agree upon a third party. When all three (3) parties have been selected, they shall proceed to appraise the System and determine the fair market value of the System as a going concern, but with no value allocated to the Franchisee itself, which determination shall be binding upon the City and the Franchisee. In the event the two (2) parties selected by the City and Franchisee are unable to agree upon a third party, then the presiding District Judge of Cleveland County, Oklahoma, or his designee shall serve as the third party. The party selected by the City shall be with approval of the Council. However, if the City no longer desires to acquire the System after its value is determined, the City may, without penalty or waiver of future rights to acquire the System, abandon its intention to acquire the System. The cost of the appraisal shall be shared equally between the City and Franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 20. - OWNERSHIP OF FACILITIES. 
A Franchisee shall at all times be the full and complete owner of all facilities and property, real and personal, of the System, except for customer premises equipment, unless mortgaged, leased, or pledged. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 21. - DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED. 
A.  A Franchisee shall have a rate structure which is uniform throughout its Cable Service Area to the extent required by applicable law. 
B.  No Franchisee may in its rates or charges, or in the availability of the services or facilities of its System, or in any other respect, make or grant undue preferences or advantages to any Subscriber, potential Subscriber, or group of Subscribers or potential Subscribers, nor subject any such Persons or group of Persons to any undue prejudice or any disadvantage; provided, however, a Franchisee may offer discounts or promotions in order to attract or maintain Subscribers provided that such discounts or promotions are offered on a non-discriminatory basis. A Franchisee shall not deny, delay, or otherwise burden service or discriminate against Subscribers or users on the basis of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, handicap, national origin, marital status, or political affiliation, except for discounts for the senior citizens, handicapped, or economical disadvantaged group which are applied in a uniform and consistent manner. 
C.  A Franchisee shall not deny Cable Service to any potential Subscriber because of the income of the residents of the area in which the Subscriber resides. 
D.  A Franchisee shall not refuse to employ, nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any Person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, handicap, national origin, marital status, or political affiliation. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 22. - LIQUIDATED DAMAGES. 
A.  Because failure of the Franchisee to comply with the material provisions of this Franchise may result in injury to the City, the extent of which will be difficult to estimate, the following liquidated damages shall apply to the injury specified: 
1.  For failure to substantially complete construction or rebuild in accordance with this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, Franchisee shall pay Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) a day for each day or portion thereof the violation occurs or continues. 
2.  For repeated failure to timely provide data, documents, reports or information as required, Franchisee shall pay Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) per day or a portion thereof, if the violation occurs or continues. 
3.  For repeated violation of subscriber service standards, Franchisee shall pay Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per day, or a portion thereof, if the violation occurs or continues. 
4.  For failure to comply with technical and System requirements, Franchisee shall pay One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per day, or a portion thereof, if the violation occurs or continues. 
5.  For failure to comply with any other material provision of this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement the Franchisee shall pay One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) per day, or a portion thereof, if the non-compliance continues. 
6.  For willful failure to comply with lawful orders or directives of the City, Franchisee shall pay One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per day, or a portion thereof, if the non-compliance continues. 
B.  Prior to the imposition of any liquidation damages by the City, the City shall comply with the procedures set forth in Section 23, below. 
C.  Payment of such damages shall not relieve the Franchisee of its obligation to comply with the terms of the Franchise. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 23. - FRANCHISE DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES. 
A.  In the event Franchisee violates or is in default of the material provisions of this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, the City shall notify the Franchisee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged violation or default. 
B.  Franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of a written notice of default to: (a) respond contesting the alleged assertion of default, or (b) cure such default or, in the event that, by the nature of the default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, institute reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the City or Council of the steps being taken and the projected date of compliance. 
C.  In the event the Franchisee contests the assertion of a default or fails to respond to a notice of default or the alleged default is not remedied or remedy commenced within the time required, the Council shall schedule a hearing to investigate the default. The Council shall notify the Franchisee of the time and place of such hearing and provide Franchisee with a full and fair opportunity to present witnesses and other evidence and be heard. 
D.  In the event the Council, after such hearing, finds or determines that the Franchisee has violated or is otherwise in default of a material provision of this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, which for purposes of subparagraph 3 below shall be a finding of a default of such material provision of this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, the City shall have the right to seek one of the following remedies: 
1.  Order Franchisee to cure default; or 
2.  Impose liquidated damages or penalties as provided in this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement which shall be paid within five (5) business days following such imposition. Payment of liquidated damages shall not relieve Franchisee of its obligation to comply with Franchise requirements; or 
3.  Revoke or terminate the Franchise following the procedures specified in this Ordinance. 
E.  In addition to such remedies, the City reserves to itself all other remedies which may be available at law or equity and may seek such relief from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
F.  Failure of the City to exercise its rights of enforcement for any violation by Franchisee shall not be deemed a waiver of the City to enforce any Franchise requirement or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies for subsequent violations of any nature. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 24. - FRANCHISE FEE. 
A.  As compensation for the use of valuable Public Ways and privileges granted to operate a System, and to defray the cost of the regulation, Franchisee shall pay to the City a Franchise fee of Franchisee's Gross Revenues received from the operation of its System to provide Cable Service within the City, based on the following schedule: 
1.  Three percent (3%) for revenue through December 31, 2003; 
2.  Four percent (4%) for revenue from January 1, 2004, through December 31, 2005; and 
3.  Five percent (5%) for revenue on and after January 1, 2006. 
B.  The Franchise fee shall be payable to the City on a monthly basis and shall be due no later than forty five (45) days after the end of the month for which the Franchise fee is being calculated. 
C.  In the event the Franchise fee payment is not received by the City on the due date, the Franchisee shall be assessed interest on any delinquency from the due date until paid in full at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum. In the event any Franchise fee shall be delinquent for more than 90 days, the Franchisee shall, after 10 days' written notice from the City, be deemed in material default and subject to the provisions of this Ordinance regarding termination of a Franchise. 
D.  The Franchisee shall submit with each payment a report showing the amount of Gross Revenues for the preceding quarter on which the Franchise fee is determined. Additionally, Franchisee shall submit to the City an annual revenue audit statement within three (3) months of the close of the fiscal year, setting forth the computation of Gross Revenues for the preceding year and an explanation of the method of computation. The required reports and annual revenue audit statement shall be prepared at the expense of the Franchisee on forms reasonably acceptable to the City and certified by the Franchisee's chief financial officer or authorized designee. The same reports shall be due within ninety (90) days of the termination of the Franchise. 
E.  Except as otherwise provided in the Cable Act and FCC Regulations, all payments required by this section shall be in addition to all other fees and payments required to be made by Franchisee to the City. 
F.  Acceptance by the City of any payment shall not be construed as an accord or satisfaction that such payment is correct, nor shall acceptance be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for additional sums which may be due. 
G.  The City shall have the right, at its cost and upon reasonable notice, to inspect and audit all books and records of the Franchisee which may be necessary for the determination of Gross Revenues and computation of Franchise fees due, such audit period not to exceed the prior 3 years. If it is finally determined that Franchise fees have been underpaid in an amount in excess of ten percent (10%), the cost of audit shall be paid by the Franchisee. The books and records necessary for such audit shall be maintained by the Franchisee at Franchisee's Regional office. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 25. - RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE. 
Renewal of a Franchise shall be conducted in a manner consistent with Franchise renewal provisions of the Cable Act, including without limitations Sections 626 and 627 of the Cable Act as may be amended, and to the extent consistent therewith, the following additional requirements shall apply: 
A.  Should the formal renewal process set forth in the Cable Act be invoked, the City shall, upon completion of the review and evaluation process, notify the Franchisee that it may file a renewal Application. The notice shall specify the information to be included in the renewal Application and the deadline for filing the Application, which shall be no earlier than sixty (60) calendar days following the date of the notice. Upon receipt of the renewal Application, the City shall publish notice of its receipt and make copies available to the public. The City may hold one or more public hearings on the renewal Application. 
B.  At the conclusion of the public hearings on the renewal Application, the Council will either: 
1.  Pass a resolution agreeing to renew the Franchise, subject to the negotiation of a Franchise Agreement reasonably satisfactory to the City and the Franchisee; or 
2.  Pass a resolution that makes a preliminary assessment that the Franchise should not be renewed. 
C.  If a preliminary assessment is made that a Franchise should not be renewed, at the request of the Franchisee or on its own initiative, the City will commence a proceeding, in accordance with the appropriate sections of the Cable Act, to address the issues set forth in the Cable Act. 
D.  The City and Franchisee may engage in informal renewal discussions at any time prior to or during the formal renewal process. Any request to initiate a renewal process or proposal for renewal not submitted within the time period set forth in the Cable Act, shall be deemed an informal proposal for renewal. The City may hold one or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on an informal proposal for renewal may be received. Following such public hearings or other procedures, the Council shall determine whether the Franchise should be renewed and the terms and conditions of any renewal. 
E.  If the Council grants a renewal Application, the City and the Franchisee shall agree on the terms of a Franchise Agreement, and comply with the procedures specified in this Ordinance, before such renewal becomes effective. 
F.  If renewal of a Franchise is denied, the City may acquire ownership of the System as provided in this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, or at the request of the Franchisee, effect a transfer of ownership of the System to another Person upon approval of the Council. Any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value, determined on the basis of the System valued as a going concern. 
G.  If renewal of a Franchise is denied and the City does not purchase the System or approve or effect a transfer of the System to another Person, the City may require the former Franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former Franchisee's expense. If the former Franchisee fails to do so within a 6 month period of time, the City may have the removal done at the former Franchisee's and/or surety's expense. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 26. - TRANSFER OF A FRANCHISE. 
A.  No Transfer of a Franchise shall occur without prior approval of the City, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed. 
B.  An Application for a Transfer of a Franchise shall provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee, to the extent required by FCC rules. 
C.  At least one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days prior to the contemplated effective date of a Transfer, Franchisee shall submit to the City an Application, together with any required FCC transfer forms, for approval of the Transfer. To the extent consistent with FCC rules, such Application and/or the FCC forms shall include the following: 
(1)  A statement of the reason for the contemplated transfer. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the proposed transferee. 
(3)  A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the proposed transferee, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  The names, business addresses, state of residence and country of citizenship of all general partners and corporate officers of the proposed transferee. 
(b)  The names, business addresses, state of residence and country of citizenship of all Persons and entities having, controlling, or being entitled to have or control ten percent (10%) or more of the ownership of the proposed transferee and the respective ownership share of each such Person or entity. 
(c)  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the proposed transferee and of any other business entity owning or controlling in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the proposed transferee. 
(d)  A detailed and complete financial statement, or annual report, of the proposed transferee, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from the proposed transferee's lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the proposed transferee and the City, setting forth a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the proposed transfer to construct, install, maintain and operate the proposed System in the City. 
(e)  A detailed description of all previous experience of the proposed transferee in operating Systems and providing Cable Services or related or similar services, including a statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable Franchise(s) awarded to the proposed transferee, its parent, subsidiaries, or affiliates currently operating or in the status of transfer; the status of said Franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof. 
(f)  Other information the City may reasonably request consistent with FCC regulations. 
D.  In making a determination on whether to grant an Application for a Transfer of a Franchise, the City Council, in good faith, shall consider the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the System; whether the incumbent Franchisee is in material compliance with its Franchise Agreement and this Ordinance and, if not, the Franchisee's or proposed transferee's commitment to cure such material noncompliance. 
E.  No Application for a Transfer of a Franchise shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this Ordinance and the Franchise Agreement, and that it will assume the obligations and liabilities of the previous Franchisee under this Ordinance and the Franchise Agreement. 
F.  Approval by the City of a Transfer of a Franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the City under this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 27. - MAPS, REPORTS AND RECORDS. 
A.  A Franchisee shall, within One Hundred Twenty (120) days of the execution of the Franchise Agreement, make available a map of the City showing the proposed construction schedule of the Franchisee. A Franchisee shall also, upon request, make available with the City Engineer a "route" map of the existing System. The maps shall be updated any time route changes are made in the System. 
B.  The City reserves the right to review complete detailed maps of the Franchisee's network on an as needed basis at the Regional office of the Franchisee. The City and its designees agree that information listed on the detailed maps is considered proprietary, and subject to non-disclosure to outside parties pursuant to confidentiality provisions of this Ordinance. 
C.  A Franchisee shall, upon request, file with the City an annual report reflecting the cable activities concerning the City that includes the following information: 
1.  A summary of the immediate past year's activities of the System, including for example, service initiated or discontinued, number of Subscribers, homes passed, miles of cable, a comparison of construction schedules, including upgrades, with projections previously provided the City, and a showing of any change in charges or rates. 
2.  A summary of Subscriber or consumer complaints, identifying the types of the complaints and the disposition. Where the complaints involve recurrent system problems, the summary shall state the nature of such problems and corrective measures taken. The City may require additional information. 
3.  If the Franchisee is a corporation, a list of all officers and members of the board of directors. If the stock or ownership interests of the corporation or any parent corporation are publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report shall be provided, together with the most recent financial reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
4.  If the Franchisee is a partnership, a list of the partners, including limited partners and their addresses. If the general partner is a corporation, a list of officers and members of the board of directors of the corporate general partners. Where such ownership interests are publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report. 
5.  If the Franchisee is a Limited Liability Company or similar legal entity, a list of members and their addresses. Where ownership of such entity is publicly traded, a copy of the most recent annual report. 
6.  A copy of the Franchisee's rules and regulations applicable to Subscribers and customers of the System. 
7.  A report indicating the types of discounts and promotions offered in the prior year. 
8.  A detailed description of all services and a schedule of all rates, fees and charges for all such services, including discounts and promotions. 
D.  In order to assure full disclosure, a Franchisee shall keep on file with the City Clerk, at least annually, a current list of officers, directors and the names of all partners or known stockholders holding 10 percent (10%) or more ownership in the Franchisee or any parent corporation. 
E.  A Franchisee shall maintain all books and records and supporting data for information in the annual report available for inspection by the City for purposes of ascertaining compliance with requirements of this Ordinance or Franchise Agreement. 
F.  Franchisee shall maintain a complete set of books and records, including plans, contracts, engineering, accounting, financial, statistical, Subscriber and service records for operations at its Regional office. The records shall be provided in a manner to permit complete inspection of the records of the Moore operation. 
G.  The City shall have the right to inspect at Franchisee's Regional office the books, maps and records specified in this Ordinance and such other records as may be reasonably required by the City to perform its regulatory responsibilities under the Ordinance and the Cable Act. The City agrees to carry out any such inspection at reasonable hours and upon reasonable notice. Access by the City to Franchisee's books and records shall not be denied on grounds that such books and records contain proprietary or confidential information, provided, the City agrees to maintain the confidentiality of any such information. 
H.  The City shall accord all books, maps and records that it inspects under this Section the maximum degree of confidentiality such books, maps and records are entitled to under this Ordinance, federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 28. - ADMINISTRATION. 
A.  The City Manager, either directly or through a duly appointed designee, shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-to-day administration of this Ordinance and Franchise Agreements. The City Manager shall be empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the City, except for those actions specified in this Ordinance that are reserved to the Council. The City Manager may recommend that the Council take certain actions with respect to the Franchise. The City Manager shall keep the Council apprised of developments in cable and provide the Council with assistance, advice and recommendations as appropriate. 
B.  A Franchisee shall have the right to appeal to the Council any decision of the City Manager relating to such Franchisee or its Franchise Agreement. Such appeal must be made by written request within fifteen (15) calendar days of the City Manager's written decision which the Franchisee seeks to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 29. - SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY. 
A.  A Franchisee shall protect the privacy of all Subscribers pursuant to the provisions of the Cable Act. A Franchisee shall not condition Subscriber service on the Subscriber's grant of permission to disclose information which, pursuant to local, federal or state law, cannot be disclosed without the Subscriber's explicit consent. 
B.  Except as permitted by Federal law the Franchisee, its agents and employees shall not, without the prior and specific written authorization of Subscriber involved, sell, or otherwise make available for commercial purposes personally identifiable information of any Subscriber or Subscribers, or any information which identifies the individual viewing habits of any Subscriber or Subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 30. - COMPLIANCE WITH FCC REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS. 
A.  A Franchisee shall comply with all FCC rules, regulations and technical standards adopted by the FCC which pertain to the operation of the System. 
B.  A Franchisee shall maintain at its city or regional office, and make available for the public inspection, copies of all reporting forms required to be filed by the FCC, including but not limited to FCC forms 325 and 395-A. A Franchisee shall provide the City a copy of all such reports, upon request, within thirty (30) days of the City's request. 
C.  A Franchisee shall file with the City, upon request, copies of all complaints, petitions, communications, and orders filed with or received from the FCC, SEC, EEOC, FAA or other federal or state regulatory commissions or agencies having jurisdiction over the Franchisee and its operation of a System. In addition, the Franchisee shall provide the same information on all lawsuits or proceedings in which the Franchisee is a named party and the proceedings, litigation or filing involves the Franchisee's operations within the City. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 31. - COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES. 
A.  A Franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the laws of the United States, the State of Oklahoma and City ordinances, and any amendments thereto. 
B.  The Franchisee shall, at all times during the life of a Franchise, be subject to all lawful powers of the State of Oklahoma and the City and to such reasonable regulations of general applicability as the State and City shall hereafter provide. 
C.  The Franchisee shall conform to all zoning and platting requirements of the City prior to the commencement of any and all construction work. 
D.  The Franchisee shall obtain building permits for all buildings constructed, pay all building permit fees, tap charge fees, and all other fees as required by the ordinances of the City and at the rates that are in full force and effect at the time of Application for building permits. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 32. - REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE. 
A.  In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the City by virtue of a Franchise or otherwise, the City reserves the right to revoke, terminate and cancel the Franchise and all rights and privileges of the Franchisee hereunder in the event that the Franchisee: 
1.  Violates any material provision of this Ordinance or a Franchise Agreement, or any material rule, order, or determination of the Council made pursuant to this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, except where such violation is without fault or through excusable neglect. 
2.  Executes an assignment for the benefit of creditors or is a party to an appointment of a receiver or trustee to control the business of the Franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding which indicate the Franchisee is insolvent or unable to pay its debts as they accrue; provided, if such assignee, receiver or trustee executes an agreement, approved by the court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and condition of this Ordinance and the Franchise Agreement the Council may approve the continuation of the Franchise during such appointment. 
3.  Practices any finally adjudicated fraud or deceit upon the City or its citizens. 
4.  Disposes of any of the facilities or property of its System to prevent the City from purchasing same, as provided for herein. 
5.  Is a party to foreclosure or other judicial sale of facilities, equipment or property of Franchisee unless the City approves the transfer of the Franchise to the successful bidder in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the successful bidder agrees with the City to be bound by this Ordinance and the Franchise Agreement. 
B.  Upon the occurrence of any event in this section or any other section providing for termination, the City Manager shall make written demand by registered mail that the Franchisee correct or cure such default. If the Franchisee fails, refuses or neglects to comply or commence compliance with the demand which is within the control of the Franchisee for a period of thirty (30) days following receipt of such written demand, the City Manager may place a request for revocation of the Franchise on a regular or special Council meeting agenda. The City Manager shall cause to be served upon the Franchisee, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such Council meeting, a written notice of his intent to request such revocation, and the time and place of the meeting. 
C.  The Council shall consider the request of the City Manager and shall, after notice, hear any Persons interested therein, including giving the Franchisee a full and fair opportunity to be heard, and shall determine, in its discretion, after due consideration of any and all evidence presented, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the Franchisee constitutes cause for revocation of the Franchise. Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the City, after such hearing, determines that Franchisee is in default of any material provision of this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, the City may: 
1.  Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; 
2.  Declare the Franchise to be terminated; or 
3.  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages or termination of the Franchise. 
The Franchisee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any provision of the Franchise by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance. Franchisee may appeal any determination of the City that Franchisee is in default to any court of competent jurisdiction. 
D.  The Franchisee shall not be held in default with any provision of its Franchise or this Ordinance, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such alleged default is caused by acts of God, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond the power of the Franchisee to control. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 33. - PERIODIC REVIEWS. 
A.  During the ninety (90) day period which commences on every five year anniversary date of the effective date of a Franchise, the City may commence a review of the System to determine the technological and economic feasibility of incorporating new technology into the design and/or upgrading channel capacity for the System; to review Subscriber service standards; to review the performance of the Franchisee as to compliance with the terms and conditions of its obligations under this Ordinance and the Franchise Agreement and to correct any defaults; to conduct inquiries into any issue deemed pertinent to the review by the Council; to review PEG channel use; the Franchise System design; and, if the FCC rules and regulations are eliminated and not replaced, to review and require standards as may be necessary. 
B.  A Franchisee shall provide the City with such records and information which may be reasonably necessary to conduct the review. 
C.  In the event the City commences a review of the System as provided in paragraph A of this Section 33, the City shall conduct public hearings to provide Franchisee and the public the opportunity to comment on the issues which are to be considered in said review, and shall consider whether a change in the Franchise requirements is appropriate to meet the reasonable cable related needs and interests of the community, after considering the costs of meeting those needs and interests. 
D.  At the conclusion of each performance evaluation, which shall be no later than ninety (90) days following commencement of the review, the City shall advise the Franchisee of any defaults or any obligations of the Franchisee and the requirements to cure as provided in this Ordinance. Further, the City may submit recommendations to the Franchisee for action to improve Cable Service. The City and the Franchisee may agree on changes in the Franchise Agreement necessary to correct problems existing at the time of the review. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 34. - DESCRIPTIVE HEADINGS. 
The headings of the sections of this Ordinance are descriptive only. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002)  
SECTION 35. - CHOICE OF LAW, VENUE AND ATTORNEYS FEES. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, this Ordinance and any Franchise Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the State of Oklahoma. The District Court of Cleveland County and the United States Court for the Western District of Oklahoma shall have venue and jurisdiction exclusively for any action in law or equity which may be instituted to enforce the terms of this Ordinance, the Franchise Agreement or other applicable laws, rules and regulation. 
B.  If any legal action is instituted by either party to enforce any terms of this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, the attorney fees, costs of the action including, but not limited to, court costs, expert witness fees and all other actual expenses incurred by the prevailing party, shall be paid by the losing party. 
(Ord. No. 398(02), 12-16-2002) 


MOORE LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CITY OFFICIALS 
CURRENT OFFICIALS of the CITY OF MOORE, OKLAHOMA 
____________ 
Glenn Lewis (Mayor) 
Adam Webb (Ward 1) 
Danielle McKenzie (Ward 1) 
Mark Hamm (Ward 2) 
Melissa Hunt (Ward 2) 
Jason Blair (Ward 3) 
Louie Williams (Ward 3) 
City Council 
____________ 
Brooks Mitchell 
City Manager 
____________ 
Randy Brink 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Vanessa Kemp 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the Moore Land Development Code. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1991 Land Development Code, as supplemented through November 4, 2013, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1991 Land Development Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    Notes refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Land Development Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Land Development Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE LDCD1:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES LDCCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE INDEX LDCDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Kim Ryder, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Randy Brink, City Attorney, Ms. Linda Stewart, City Clerk, and Ms. Elizabeth Weitman, Community Development Director for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Moore, Oklahoma. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 2018. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 871(17)  9- 5-2017 Omitted 872(17) 10-16-2017 Included 873(17)  2- 5-2018 Omitted 874(17)  1- 2-2018 Omitted 877(18)  2- 5-2018 Omitted 879(18)  5- 7-2018 Omitted 880(18)  6- 4-2018 Omitted 884(18)  7-16-2018 Omitted 886(18)  8- 6-2018 Omitted 889(18)  8-20-2018 Included 890(18)  9- 4-2018 Omitted 891(18)  9- 4-2018 Omitted 897(18) 12-17-2018 Omitted 900(19)  3- 4-2019 Included 902(19)  3- 4-2019 Omitted  
Part 12 - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
CHAPTER 1. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
ARTICLE A. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 12-101. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a planning commission of the city. The commission shall be composed of nine members, all of whom shall be residents of the city, appointed by the city council. The city manager and city engineer shall be ex officio members of the commission. Each appointed member shall hold office for a period of three years, or until his successor takes office. The appointed members of the commission shall be nominated and appointed solely with reference to their fitness and without reference to party affiliation and shall serve without compensation. Members may be removed by the city council only for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malefaction in office. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled only for the unexpired terms by the city council. The city manager shall receive no compensation for his service on the commission. The city engineer shall receive such compensation for his service on the commission as established by the city manager. Neither the city manager nor city engineer shall be entitled to vote upon questions arising before the commission. Any appointed member of the planning and zoning commission who shall, without cause as determined by the city council, hereafter fail to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the planning and zoning commission, shall automatically be removed from office on the commission. The vacancies thereby created shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term of office so vacated, by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-134; LDC 1991, § 12-101) 
State Law reference- Planning commissions, 11 O.S. § 45-101 et seq. 
Sec. 12-102. - Quorum. 
    Two-thirds of the appointed members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Any action taken shall be official when concurred in by not less than a majority of all appointed members of the planning commission entitled to vote. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-134; LDC 1991, § 12-102) 
Sec. 12-103. - Organization and rules. 
    The commission shall elect annually in August a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary, and may create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary. The term of the chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary shall be one year. The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this part. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-134; LDC 1991, § 12-103) 
Sec. 12-104. - Power to employ staff. 
    The planning commission, subject to approval of the city council, shall have the power and authority to employ planners, engineers, attorneys, clerks and other help deemed necessary within the limits of the appropriation fixed by the city council. The salary and compensation of such employees shall be fixed by the city council and shall be paid out of the city treasury as are other officers and employees. Necessary expenses incurred by the commission shall be paid from the city treasury as other legal expenses of the city. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-134; LDC 1991, § 12-104) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 45-103. 
Sec. 12-105. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall have the power to prepare and recommend to the city council for adoption a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city. In conducting its work, the planning commission may consider and investigate any subject matter tending to the development and betterment of the city and may make recommendations as it may deem advisable concerning the adoption thereof to the city council. The planning commission may make or cause to be made surveys, studies, maps and plans in the conduct of its activities. Before final action is taken by the city council on the location or design of any public building, statue, memorial, park, boulevard, street, alley, playground, public ground, bridge or change in any location of any street or alley, such question shall be submitted to the planning commission for investigation and report. In the preparation of the comprehensive plan, the planning commission may from time to time prepare and recommend to the city council for adoption parts thereof, which parts shall cover one or more major geographical divisions of the city or one or more major elements of the comprehensive plan. The planning commission may from time to time recommend extending, amending or changing any portion of the comprehensive plan. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-134; LDC 1991, § 12-105) 
Sec. 12-106. - Purposes of plan. 
    In the preparation of such plan, the planning commission may make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including, among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, and wise and efficient expenditure of public funds. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-106) 
Sec. 12-107. - Subdivision of land. 
    The planning commission may prepare and recommend to the city council for adoption rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city. All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in lots, plots, blocks, streets, alleys or other ways intended to be dedicated to public or private use within the corporate limits of the city may be referred to the planning commission by the city council for study and investigation and for approval or rejection by the commission; and the commission shall make recommendations with reference thereto to the city council. The disapproval of any such plan, plat or replat by the city council shall be deemed a refusal of the dedication shown thereon. No plat or replat of subdivision of land, or dedication of street or alley or other easement shall be entitled to record unless it bears the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, certifying the approval and acceptance thereof by the city council. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-134; LDC 1991, § 12-107) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 434-109. 
Sec. 12-108. - Zoning commission. 
    The planning commission shall also act as the zoning commission, which shall have the power to prepare and to recommend to the city council for adoption a zoning plan to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence and other purposes. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-108) 
Sec. 12-109. - Uniformity of regulations. 
    The planning commission may recommend the division of the city into districts of such number, size and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the zoning plan. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of buildings throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-109) 
Sec. 12-110. - Comprehensive plan, purpose of regulations and matters considered. 
    Zoning regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the over-crowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-110) 
Editor's note- The city's land use plan was adopted in 2017. The city adopted a parks and recreation master plan in 2012. 
Sec. 12-111. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The planning commission has the power to recommend to the city council the granting of uses permitted on review where specifically authorized by the zoning regulations and in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of the zoning regulations. The commission may recommend a use authorized as a use permitted on review in the zoning regulations, or a specifically designated element associated with a use, when the use or element is not permitted by right in a particular district because of potential adverse effect, controls are imposed in the particular instance as to its relationship to the neighborhood and to the general welfare. Such uses shall be granted in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of the zoning regulations and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general purpose of and intent of the zoning regulations. Uses permitted on review are so classified because such uses more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses permitted in the district; however, the nature of such uses may make it desirable that they be permitted to locate therein. The following procedure is established to integrate properly the uses permitted on review with the other land uses located on the district. The uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedure: 
(1)  An application shall be filed with the planning commission for review. The application shall show the location and intended use of the site, the names of all the property owners and existing land uses within 300 feet and any other material pertinent to the request which the planning commission may require; 
(2)  The planning commission shall hold one or more public hearings thereon; 
(3)  The planning commission, within 45 days of the date of application, shall study the effect of such proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utilities and other matters pertaining to the general welfare, and authorize or deny the issuance of a permit for the use of land or buildings as requested. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-111; Ord. No. 204, 1979) 
ARTICLE B. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Boards of adjustment, 11 O.S. § 44-101 et seq. 

Sec. 12-121. - Created. 
    There is hereby created within and for the city a board of adjustment with the powers and duties as provided herein. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-108; LDC 1991, § 12-121) 
Sec. 12-122. - Membership. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five members, residents of the city, each appointed by the mayor with confirmation by the city council. Appointments shall be for a term of three years. Not less than two members shall be appointed from the membership of the planning commission. In the event of death, resignation or removal of any such member before the expiration of his term, a successor shall be appointed by the mayor with confirmation by the city council to serve his unexpired term. All members of the board of adjustment shall serve as such without compensation. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall elect its own chairman and shall adopt rules or procedures consistent with the provisions of these regulations. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Four members of the board of adjustment shall constitute a quorum. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. 
(c)  The board of adjustment may, subject to the approval of the board and council, appoint such employees as may be necessary and may incur necessary expenses within the limits of the appropriations authorized by the city council. 
(Prior Code, app. B, §§ 16-108-16-112; LDC 1991, § 12-122) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. §§ 44-101, 44-102. 
Sec. 12-123. - Appeals to board. 
    Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by a public officer, department, board or bureau affected by any decision of the zoning administrative officer or building official in administering the zoning regulations. Such appeals shall be taken within 30 days of notice of the decision, by filing written notice with the board of adjustment and the administrative officer, stating the grounds thereof, and paying the applicable fee. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the board of adjustment the papers constituting the record upon which action appealed from was taken. An appeal to the board of adjustment shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken shall certify to the board of adjustment that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-114, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-123) 
State Law reference- Appeals to board of adjustment, 11 O.S. § 44-109. 
Sec. 12-124. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall have the power to: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals if it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Hear and decide special exceptions to the zoning ordinance to allow a use, or a specifically designated element associated with a use, which is not permitted by right in a particular district because of potential adverse effect, but which if controlled in the particular instance as to its relationship to the neighborhood and to the general welfare, may be permitted by the board of adjustment, where specifically authorized by the zoning ordinance, and in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of the zoning ordinance; 
(3)  Authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms, standards and criteria that pertain to an allowed use category within a zoning district as authorized by the zoning ordinance when such cases are shown not to be contrary to the public interest if, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done; provided, however, the board shall have no power to authorize variances as to use except as provided by subsection (a)(4) of this section; 
(4)  Hear and decide oil and/or gas applications or appeals unless prohibited throughout a municipality by municipal ordinance. The board of adjustment shall be required to make the findings prescribed by 11 O.S. § 44-107 in order to grant a variance as to use with respect to any such application or appeal. 
(b)  Exceptions and/or variances may be allowed by the board of adjustment only after notice and hearing as provided in 11 O.S. § 44-108. The record of the meeting at which the variance or special exception was granted shall show that each element of a variance or special exception was established at the public hearing on the question, otherwise said variance or special exception shall be voidable on appeal to the district court. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-113; LDC 1991, § 12-124) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 44-104. 
Sec. 12-125. - Special exceptions; application and procedures; mobile homes; and small wind energy systems. 
(a)  Special exceptions, other than uses permitted on review, may be granted to allow the location of certain uses while maintaining adequate protection of the surrounding area. If consideration is given to setting, physical features, compatibility with surrounding land uses, traffic and aesthetics, certain uses may be located in an area where they will be compatible with existing or planned land uses, even though they generally do not conform to the uses permitted in specific zoning districts. The board shall review each case on its own merits, apply the criteria herein, and, if appropriate, authorize the use by granting a special exception for it. The board is hereby empowered to permit the following exceptions: 
(1)  To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record; 
(2)  To interpret the provisions of the ordinance where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map fixing the several districts, which map is attached to and made a part of these regulations; 
(3)  To grant exceptions to the off-street parking requirements set forth herein, when it is determined that the size and shape of the lot to be built on is such that off-street parking provisions could not be complied with, and that the proposed use will not create undue traffic congestion in the adjacent streets; 
(4)  Mobile homes in the A-2, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, subject to the provisions of this section; 
(5)  A housing project consisting of a group of two or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least two acres not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impracticable to apply the requirements of these regulations to the individual buildings in such housing project, the application of such requirements to such housing project may be changed, in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, will ensure a density of land use no higher and a standard of open space at least as high as required by these regulations in the district in which the proposed project is to be located. In no case shall a use or building height or density of population be permitted which is less than the requirement of the district in which the housing project is to be located; 
(6)  A small wind energy system that is intended to convert wind energy by means of a rotor into electrical power for the primary purpose of meeting all or a part of a property's energy requirements, subject to the provisions of this section. A small wind energy system does not include electrical distribution or transmission lines, or electrical substations. A SWES in intended to produce electricity primarily for on-site consumption but excess electrical power may be transferred to a utility company power supply grid pursuant to utility company interconnection agreements. 
(b)  The property owner or his authorized agent shall file an application for special exception in accordance with the rules and regulations of the board. 
(c)  A complete site plan shall be filed with each application for special exception. The site plan shall show the location of all existing and proposed structures, and shall be of adequate detail to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Code, the development regulations of the applicable zoning district, and with any special provisions placed on the application by the board. The site plan shall indicate at least the following site design factors: 
(1)  The location and area of the main building and proposed accessory building on the site and their relationship; 
(2)  The number and arrangement of off-street parking spaces; 
(3)  The location of existing or proposed sight-proof screening; 
(4)  Evidence to indicate that surface water drainage will not have an adverse effect on adjacent properties; and 
(5)  Such other factors as may be necessary to secure and to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(d)  Prior to approval of an application for special exception, the board shall make a determination that the following standards have been met: 
(1)  The proposed use shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations; 
(2)  The proposed use shall not adversely affect the use of neighboring properties; 
(3)  The proposed use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic that is in conflict with the existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood; 
(4)  Adequate utility, draining, parking, access, and other necessary public facilities to serve the proposed use shall be available and shall meet all standards and provisions of this Code and applicable zoning district regulations; 
(5)  The board may impose specific conditions regarding location and design of the proposed use to ensure public safety and to prevent a nuisance, including, but not limited to, extraordinary setbacks, landscaping and installation of utilities. 
(e)  A special exception for a mobile home in the A-2, R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning district may be granted for a period of one or two years depending on the situation. When the time period expires, the applicant shall file a new application for special exception and have the case reviewed. The following conditions for approval shall also be met: 
(1)  The principal for whom the special exception is requested shall be a relative by blood or marriage of the owner of the property in question. The owner shall reside in the main structure on the subject lot; 
(2)  The extenuating conditions of the principal shall not be caused by the applicant; 
(3)  The special exception shall not be granted unless a medical hardship exists, caused by physical condition such as age or infirmity, or by mental condition of the principal; 
(4)  Only one mobile home shall be allowed accessory to a permanent single-family detached residential structure; 
(5)  The location of the mobile home shall conform to all lot area, setback, height, and off-street parking requirements of the district in which it is located, and shall be located only in the rear yard; 
(6)  Written approval of the proposed use of all landowners abutting on a side or rear property line or across an alley shall be required; 
(7)  The use of the mobile home shall terminate at any time when the hardship that led to granting of the original special exception ceases. When such hardship ceases, the mobile home shall be removed within 90 days, and the lot restored to its original condition. 
(f)  A special exception for a small wind energy system (SWES) may be granted for a lot with an approved existing structure. A SWES is incidental and accessory to the permitted principal use located on the lot. The following conditions for approval shall also be met: 
(1)  The minimum lot size for a small wind energy system shall be one acre. 
(2)  The minimum setback distance shall be equal to the height of the wind tower. The setback distance is the horizontal distance from the center of the supporting structure to the nearest property line, right-of-way, or utility easement. 
(3)  The bottom of the rotor blade sweep shall be no closer than 20 feet above the ground surface. 
(4)  No more than one wind tower for a small wind energy system shall be located on any one property. 
(5)  A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a copy of the FAA determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for the small wind energy system. 
(6)  All signs, both temporary and permanent, are prohibited on the SWES, except as follows: manufacturer's or installer's identification on the wind turbine where such signs shall not exceed two square feet in area; and appropriate warning signs and placards. 
(7)  A SWES, including tower, shall comply with all applicable construction and electrical codes, and the National Electrical Code. The SWES specifications, including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height, and tower type (freestanding, guyed, or lattice-type), shall be provided for review. 
(8)  The tower and all ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access. A six-foot-tall fence with locking gate is required around the perimeter of the tower site. 
(9)  The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of 12 feet above the ground. 
(10)  The tower and tower foundation drawings shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-113; LDC 1991, § 12-125; Ord. No. 539, 12-4-1990; Ord. No. 714(12), 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 12-126. - Variances, requirements. 
    A variance from the terms, standards and criteria that pertain to an allowed use category within a zoning district as authorized by the zoning ordinance may be granted, in whole, in part, or upon reasonable conditions as provided herein, only upon a finding by the board of adjustment that: 
(1)  The application of the ordinance to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship or result in exceptional practical difficulties; 
(2)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
(3)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of the ordinance or the comprehensive plan; and 
(4)  The variance, if granted, would be the minimum necessary to alleviate the unnecessary hardship. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-113; LDC 1991, § 12-126) 
Sec. 12-127. - Hearings, notice, fees. 
    The board of adjustment shall fix reasonable times for hearing appeals or other matters referred to it and give public notice as required by law. Any party may appear and be heard in person or by agent or by attorney at such hearings. Applicants for hearings or other matters to be heard by the board of adjustment shall pay a fee, in such sum as set by the city council by motion or resolution, for the hearing, publications and other costs associated with the hearing. The fee shall be paid upon filing the appeal or request for hearing. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-114; LDC 1991, § 12-127) 
Sec. 12-128. - Extent of relief. 
(a)  In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. In considering all appeals from rulings made under this article the board of adjustment, in making its findings on any specific case, shall determine the effect of the proposed change upon the supply of light and air to adjacent property, upon the congestion in the public streets, upon the public safety from fire and other hazards, upon the established property values within the surrounding area, and upon other factors relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare to the people of the city. Every ruling made upon any appeal to the board shall be accompanied by a written finding of act based upon the testimony received at the hearing afforded by the board of adjustment, and shall specify the reason for granting or denying the appeal. 
(b)  The concurring vote of at least four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement and decision or determination of any such administrative officer or to decide in favor of the applicant, or to decide any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article or to effect any variation in the regulations. 
(Prior Code, app. B, §§ 16-112, 16-114, 16-115; LDC 1991, § 12-128) 
Sec. 12-129. - Appeals to district court. 
(a)  An appeal to the district court from any decision, ruling, judgment or order of the board of adjustment may be taken by any person, firm or corporation, jointly or severally aggrieved thereby, or any department, board or an official of government, by filing with the clerk of the board of adjustment within ten days of the date of filing the decision of the board a notice of such appeal which shall specify the ground of the appeal. Upon filing of such notice, the clerk of the board of adjustment shall forthwith transmit to the clerk for the district court the originals or certified copies of all papers constituting the record in such case, altogether with the order, judgment or decisions of the board of adjustment. The appeal shall be heard and tried de novo in the district court. All issues in any proceedings under this section shall have preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. During the pendency of such an appeal, the effectiveness of a decision of the board of adjustment shall not be suspended unless a party applies to the district court for a stay pending the district court's determination of the merits of the appeal. Notice of such application shall be given by first class mail to all parties, to the district court appeal and to any applicant before the board of adjustment. Upon filing of an application for stay in the district court, all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from shall be temporarily stayed pending the outcome of a hearing regarding the stay, which shall be conducted within 30 days of application. The court shall determine whether to impose a stay by considering the following factors: 
(1)  The likelihood of success on the merits by the party seeking to impose the stay; 
(2)  Irreparable harm to the property interests of the party seeking to impose the stay if the stay is not imposed; 
(3)  Relative effect on the other interested parties; and 
(4)  Public policy concerns arising out of the imposition of the stay. 
(b)  If the court determines to impose a stay, the court shall require a bond or other security and such other terms as it deems proper to secure the rights of the parties and compensate for costs of delay. A bond or other security shall be posted within ten business days of the court's determination, provided that a municipal governing body shall not be required to post a bond. Subject to 12 O.S. § 990.3(A), a stay pursuant to this subsection shall automatically dissolve after a judgment, decree or final order resolving the merits of the appeal is filed with the court clerk. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, stays in appeals from the board of adjustment to the district court shall be obtained only as set forth in this section. The district court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision brought up for review. Costs shall not be allowed against the board of adjustment unless it shall appear to the district court that the board acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. An appeal shall lie from the action of the district court as in all other civil actions. A party may obtain a stay of the enforcement of the district court's judgment, decree or final order as provided by 12 O.S. § 990.4. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-117; LDC 1991, § 12-129) 
State Law reference- Appeals to district court, 11 O.S. § 44-110. 
Sec. 12-130. - Minor variances. 
(a)  A minor variance may be granted by the community development director, or his designee, for an encroachment upon any required building setback line when that encroachment represents approximately ten percent of the required yard, or involves only a minor portion of the structure. A minor variance shall only be granted where there has been a surveying error in the construction of the building. 
(b)  A fee established by the city shall be charged for each minor variance granted. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-130; Ord. No. 547(06), 6-19-2006) 
CHAPTERS 2-4. - ZONING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 12-201. - Citation. 
    This zoning ordinance, in pursuance of the authority granted by the state law, shall be known as the "zoning regulations of the City of Moore" or the "zoning regulations of the city," and may be cited as such. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-24; LDC 1991, § 12-201; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-202. - Purpose. 
(a)  The regulations contained herein are necessary to: 
(1)  Encourage the most appropriate uses of land; 
(2)  Maintain and stabilize the value of property; 
(3)  Reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the public health; 
(4)  Decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; 
(5)  Prevent undue concentration of population; and 
(6)  Create a stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan for transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, parks, public utilities, and other facilities. 
(b)  In interpreting and applying the provisions of these regulations, they shall be held to be necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-25; LDC 1991, § 12-202; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-203. - Nature and application. 
(a)  These regulations classify and regulate the use of land, buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the city, as hereinafter set forth. The regulations contained herein are necessary to promote the health, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants by dividing the city into zoning districts and regulating therein the use of the land and the use and size of buildings as to height and number of stories, and the coverage of the land by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, the location of buildings, and the density of population. 
(b)  Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land shall be used and no buildings, structure, or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in conformity with the regulations contained herein. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-26; LDC 1991, § 12-203; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-204. - Establishment of districts. 
    For the purpose of these regulations the following districts are hereby established for the city: 
Districts 
Symbol District Name A-1 Rural Agricultural District A-2 Suburban Agricultural District RE Residential Estates R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District R-3 General Residential District R-4 Multiple Family District R-5 Mobile Home District C-1 Office District C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District C-3 General Commercial District C-4 Planned Unit Shopping Center C-5 Automotive and Commercial Recreation District C-6 Central Business District I-1 Restricted Industrial District I-2 Light Industrial District I-3 Heavy Industrial District  
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-28; LDC 1991, § 12-204; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-205. - Zoning map adopted. 
    The city is hereby divided into districts as shown on the zoning districts map, filed with the city clerk. The zoning districts map, and all of the explanatory material thereon, is hereby made a part of these regulations. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-29; LDC 1991, § 12-205; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-206. - Use unit classifications. 
(a)  General provisions. The purpose of this section is to create use unit classifications. A use unit classification is a group of related individual uses having similar functions, products, or performances which provides a basis for their systematic assignment to specific zoning districts in accordance with criteria directly relevant to the health, safety, and public welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(1)  In the event of any questions as to the appropriate use classification of any existing or proposed use activity, the community development director shall have the authority to determine the appropriate classification, subject to the right of appeal to the board of adjustment. In making such determinations, the director shall consider the characteristics of the particular use in question, and shall consider any functional, product, service, or physical facility requirements common with or similar to uses cited as examples of use classifications. The director shall maintain a list of all such determinations, and shall periodically recommend to the planning commission additions, deletions, or revisions to the use classifications to reflect contemporary usage and terminology. A use, if specifically listed in a use unit classification, shall not by interpretation be included as a typical use within any other classification unless so listed. 
(2)  Use units shall be applied to the uses permitted and special use permits categories of the zoning ordinance for the purpose of determining which land uses are eligible in each zoning district. 
(3)  All land uses are hereby classified under the use units contained in the following index: 
a.  Agricultural use unit classifications. 
1.  Agricultural processing: limited; 
2.  Agricultural processing: general; 
3.  Animal raising: personal; 
4.  Animal raising: commercial; 
5.  Animal waste processing; 
6.  Horticulture; 
7.  Row and field crops. 
b.  Residential use unit classifications. 
1.  Single-family detached residential; 
2.  Two-family attached residential; 
3.  Townhouse; 
4.  Multifamily residential; 
5.  Manufactured home residential; 
6.  Group residential. 
c.  Public and quasi-public use unit classification. 
1.  Public service or utility: light; 
2.  Public service or utility: moderate; 
3.  Public service or utility: heavy; 
4.  Sanitary landfill; 
5.  Hazardous waste disposal; 
6.  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
7.  Moderate impact institutional; 
8.  High impact institutional; 
9.  Cultural exhibits; 
10.  Library services and community centers; 
11.  Community recreation: restricted; 
12.  Community recreation: general; 
13.  Group care facility; 
14.  Community-based group care facility. 
d.  Commercial use unit classifications. 
1.  Administrative and professional office; 
2.  Agricultural supplies and services; 
3.  Alcoholic beverage retail sales; 
4.  Animal sales and services: auctioning; 
5.  Animal sales and services: grooming; 
6.  Animal sales and services: horse stables; 
7.  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, restricted; 
8.  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, general; 
9.  Automotive and equipment: light; 
10.  Automotive and equipment: heavy; 
11.  Automotive sales and rentals: light; 
12.  Automotive and equipment sales and rentals: heavy; 
13.  Automotive and equipment: storage; 
14.  Building maintenance services; 
15.  Business support services; 
16.  Child care center; 
17.  Adult day care center; 
18.  Communications services: limited tower operations; 
19.  Communications services: towers; 
20.  Construction sales and services: light; 
21.  Construction sales and services: heavy; 
22.  Convenience sales and services; 
23.  Drinking establishments: sit-down, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted; 
24.  Eating establishments: drive-in; 
25.  Eating establishments: fast foods; 
26.  Eating establishments: sit-down; 
27.  Food and beverage retail sales; 
28.  Food and beverage retail sales: temporary or seasonal; 
29.  Funeral and interment services: animal; 
30.  Funeral and interment services: burial; 
31.  Funeral and interment services: undertaking; 
32.  Gasoline sales: light; 
33.  Gasoline sales: general; 
34.  Health clubs; 
35.  Laundry services; 
36.  Manufactured housing and travel trailers: sales and rentals; 
37.  Medical services: restricted; 
38.  Medical services: general; 
39.  Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor; 
40.  Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted; 
41.  Participant recreation and entertainment: outdoor; 
42.  Personal services: restricted; 
43.  Personal services: general; 
44.  Personal storage; 
45.  Repair services: consumer; 
46.  Research services; 
47.  Retail sales and services: adult entertainment; 
48.  Retail sales and services: restricted; 
49.  Retail sales and services: general; 
50.  Retail sales and services: outdoor swap meets; 
51.  Spectator sports and entertainment: restricted; 
52.  Spectator sports and entertainment: general; 
53.  Spectator sports and entertainment: high impact; 
54.  Tourist accommodations: campground; 
55.  Tourist accommodations: lodging; 
56.  Commercial parking; 
57.  Personal vehicle storage. 
e.  Industrial use unit classifications. 
1.  Custom manufacturing; 
2.  Light industrial: restricted; 
3.  Light industrial; 
4.  Moderate industrial; 
5.  Heavy industrial; 
6.  Hazardous industrial; 
7.  Scrap operations; 
8.  Wholesaling, storage, and distribution: restricted; 
9.  Wholesaling, storage, and distribution: general. 
f.  Transportation use unit classifications. 
1.  Transportation facilities: passenger; 
2.  Transportation facilities: freight, restricted; 
3.  Transportation facilities: freight, general; 
4.  Transportation facilities: aircraft. 
g.  Extractive use unit classifications. 
1.  Mining and processing: minerals and raw materials; 
2.  Mining and processing: oil and gas. 
(b)  Agriculture use unit classifications. Agriculture use types include the on-site production, harvesting and processing of plant and animal products. 
(1)  Agricultural processing: limited. Packing or processing of crops grown on the premises, including picking, cutting, sorting, and boxing; but not including canning, reduction, or similar activity; 
(2)  Agricultural processing: general. Packing or processing of crops and their byproducts raised on or off the premises, including picking, cutting, sorting, and boxing; but not including canning, reduction, or similar activity; 
(3)  Animal raising: personal. Premises where animals are fed or kept for personal use and for agriculturally related projects by the owner or occupant of the premises. On all tracts of land containing less than 40 acres the raising of hogs shall be prohibited, and on all other tracts the number of hogs shall not exceed 20 grain-fed or three garbage-fed hogs. Hogs shall not be located closer than 200 feet from the property line of the tract on which they are located; and all structures used for sheltering farm animals and poultry shall not be located closer than 200 feet from any property line. The raising of farm animals in platted subdivisions shall be limited to one farm animal per each two-acre tract; 
(4)  Animal raising: commercial. Premises where animals are fed or kept for commercial purposes or projects by the owner or occupant of the premises. Typical uses include beef ranches; sheep ranches; pig farms; chicken farms; and dairy farms, but exclude stockyards or commercial feedlots. On all tracts of land containing less than 40 acres the raising of hogs shall be prohibited, and on all other tracts the number of hogs shall not exceed 20 grain-fed or three garbage-fed hogs. Hogs shall not be located closer than 200 feet from the property line of the tract on which they are located; 
(5)  Animal waste processing. Processing of animal waste and byproducts, including, but not limited to, animal manure, animal bedding waste, and similar byproducts of an animal raising agricultural operation, for use as a commercial fertilizer or soil conditioner and including composting operations; 
(6)  Horticulture. Such uses are primarily devoted to the cultivation and storage of horticultural and floricultural specialties such as flowers, shrubs, and trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes on a wholesale or retail sales basis. Typical uses include plant nurseries; 
(7)  Row and field crops. Premises primarily devoted to the cultivation, primarily for sale rather than home consumption, of agriculture products grown in regular or scattered patterns such as wheat, field, forage, and other plant crops intended to provide food or fibers. 
(c)  Residential use unit classifications. Residential use unit classifications include the occupancy of living accommodations on a non-transient basis and shall specifically exclude those providing 24-hour hospital care and those providing forced residence, including detention and correction facilities. Use units included are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached residential. A building designed for occupancy by one family. It is located unattached to any other dwelling unit on a lot or building site that is unoccupied by any other dwelling unit or main building; 
(2)  Two-family attached residential. A building designed for two families living independently of each other. The two units are placed adjacent to one another, with structural parts touching. Typical uses include duplexes, in which two units are located on one lot, or two-family dwellings, where each unit is located on a separate lot; 
(3)  Garage apartment. A single-family dwelling unit co-located within an accessory building where motor vehicles are normally and will continue to be stored and having a roof or wall in common. Garage apartments shall be located on the same lot as the main dwelling and shall not exceed 50 percent of the size of the main dwelling and at no time shall the main dwelling and garage apartment exceed the coverage allowable under the applicable zoning district. There shall be no more than one main dwelling unit and garage apartment on one lot. Main dwellings with garage apartments shall meet the minimum lot size for two-family attached residences under the applicable zoning districts; 
(4)  Townhouse. A building designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. The three or more units are placed adjacent to one another, with structural parts touching. Each of the units, however, are located on a separate lot; 
(5)  Multifamily residential. A building designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. All of the units, however, are located on one lot under one ownership. Typical uses would include apartments or condominiums where only the units have been sold and not the land; 
(6)  Manufactured home residential. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, but contains no less than 320 square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis, and which is designed to be used as a yearround residential dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; 
(7)  Group residential. The residential occupancy of living units by a number of occupants not constituting a family or otherwise related by occupying the structure on a nontransient basis. Typical uses include occupancy of fraternity or sorority houses, dormitories, boardinghouses, lodginghouses. 
(d)  Public and quasi-public use unit classifications. Public and quasi-public classifications include the performance of utility, educational, religious, recreational, cultural, medical, governmental and other uses which are strongly vested with public or social importance. 
(1)  Public service or utility: light. Public services needing locations near the area to be served but not requiring incidental storage of equipment or vehicles. These uses have minimal land needs and no negative impact upon surrounding land uses. Typical uses include directional, warning, safety, historical, and informational signs, elevated water tanks, water of sewage plumbing stations, stormwater control facilities, bus and transit stops, utility facilities, and pressure control stations for gas or liquid pipelines, excluding storage or service stations; 
(2)  Public service or utility: moderate. Public services involving direct citizen contact as well as incidental storage and maintenance of necessary equipment or vehicles including public protection or essential utility services. Said services may have technical and locational requirements necessitating proximity to the area served but should have a minor impact on surrounding uses. Typical uses include ambulance service, fire protection facilities, public and quasi-public maintenance facilities, civil defense shelters and facilities, and electric transmission stations; 
(3)  Public service or utility: heavy. Public services and utilities which may have a substantial impact due to attendant hazards, nuisance characteristics, traffic generation characteristics, or maintenance and operational characteristics. Typical uses include sewage disposal facilities, water treatment plants, water storage reservoirs, refuse transmission stations, and solid waste disposal facilities, excluding sanitary landfills; 
(4)  Sanitary landfill. The use of land for the permanent disposal of non-hazardous solid waste, in accordance with applicable state and municipal standards governing solid waste disposal; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal. The disposal of any waste or refuse that by its nature or volume pose a threat to public health and safety or to property. Explosives, acids, caustics, poisons, drugs, radioactive materials and other substances recognized by state or federal regulations or by the director of community development that are considered to pose a hazard shall be classified in this unit; 
(6)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related. Quasi-public or private activities which may have minor impact on surrounding uses, and are occupied on an intermittent basis. Such uses are necessary to serve common functions within a residential area, and are not designed to provide lodging. Typical uses include elementary schools and churches; 
(7)  Moderate impact institutional. Quasi-public and private institutional activities which may have a significant impact on surrounding uses. Typical uses include fraternal organizations, middle schools, and high schools; 
(8)  High impact institutional. Public, quasi-public, or private facilities, which due to their area requirements, traffic generation, light or noise generation, or the nature of intended activities, have the potential for major impact on surrounding land uses. Typical uses include hospitals, vocational schools, colleges, universities, and military installations; 
(9)  Cultural exhibits. Museum-like preservation and exhibition of objects of artistic, cultural, scientific interest, and gallery exhibition of works of art for study and pleasure. Typical uses include aquariums, museums, planetariums, and observatories; 
(10)  Library services and community centers. Uses that directly serve a residential neighborhood or a cluster of neighborhoods and provide a gathering and collecting site for residents to meet, read, study, and partake of book collections, manuscripts, and lessons; 
(11)  Community recreation: restricted. Recreational, social and multipurpose uses that operate during daylight hours and generally are available for public use. Typical uses include golf courses with accessory clubhouses and buildings, and unlighted swim centers, tennis courts, playgrounds, playfields and public parks; 
(12)  Community recreation: general. Recreational, social or multipurpose open or enclosed uses and accessory buildings, which have no fixed seats. Typical uses include golf courses, clubhouses, swim centers, tennis centers, playgrounds, playfields, marinas, boat docks, country clubs, and public parks. Any use which has outdoor lights for illuminating night time activities shall be included in this use unit; 
(13)  Group care facility. Public, quasi-public or private care facilities that because of the nature and scale of their programs are compatible in a residential setting. Individual residents may occupy the facility on a permanent or temporary basis. Residents may be handicapped, aged, disabled, or undergoing rehabilitation. Residents may be assigned to facilities by a court, but not as a result of being adjudged a criminal, delinquent, or mentally ill. Typical uses include group homes for mentally or physically handicapped, convalescent homes, homes for the elderly, and homes for dependent and neglected children, orphanages; 
(14)  Community-based care facility. Public, quasi-public or private care facilities that because of the nature and scale of their operation have the potential for impacting surrounding land uses. Typical uses include drug or alcohol treatment centers and halfway houses, forced detention, or correction facilities, work release facilities, transitional residential facilities for residents who have been released from mental institutions, community shelters and feeding sites, and battered spouse shelters. 
(e)  Commercial use unit classifications. Commercial use unit classifications include the distribution, sale or rental of goods; and the provision of services other than those classified as civic uses. 
(1)  Administrative and professional office. Offices of firms or organizations providing professional and executive management or administrative services. Typical uses include advertising agencies, law offices, real estate offices, architectural and engineering offices, financial institutions, corporate offices and call centers; 
(2)  Agricultural supplies and services. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail or wholesale sales from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizer, pesticides and similar goods as well as the provision of agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical uses include feed and grain stores, crop dusting supply stores, and tree service firms; 
(3)  Alcoholic beverage retail sales. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sales of alcoholic beverages and low-point beer. All requirements of 37 O.S. § 163.1 and all applicable sections of this Code shall be met. Typical uses include liquor stores and beer stores; 
(4)  Animal sales and services: auctioning. Auctioning of livestock on a wholesale or retail basis with incidental on-site storage of animals on a temporary basis not to exceed 48-hour periods. Typical uses include animal auctions or livestock auctions or livestock auction yards; 
(5)  Animal sales and services: grooming. Grooming of dogs, cats, and small animals. Typical uses include dog bathing and clipping salons, pet grooming shops or pet shops. No medical, training, or boarding services are provided; 
(6)  Animal sales and services: horse stables. Boarding, breeding, or raising of horses not owned by the occupants of the premises or riding of horses by other than the occupants of the premises. Typical uses include boarding stable or public stables; 
(7)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, restricted. Kennel and veterinary services for small domestic animals, such as dogs, cats, or other household pets, with all operations and storage conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include animal or veterinary hospitals, boarding or breeding kennels, pet motels, and animal training centers; 
(8)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, general. Kennel and veterinary services for domestic animals, with incidental outdoor storage and runs permitted. Typical uses include animal and veterinary hospitals, boarding or per motel, breeding kennels, and animal training; 
(9)  Automotive and equipment: light. Establishments or places of business engaged in the washing, polishing, and light repairing of automobiles; and installation and servicing of automobile equipment and parts and automobile sales. Typical uses include automated car washes; utilities for manual washing; and light repairing and maintenance of automobiles such as muffler shops, tune-up shops, including oil change services, auto glass shops, tire stores, and brake repair shops; 
(10)  Automotive and equipment: heavy. Repair of motor vehicles such as aircraft, boats, recreational vehicles and trucks, as well as the sale, installation, and servicing of automotive equipment and parts together with body repairs, painting and steam cleaning, and engine rebuilding. Typical uses included are new and used automobile dealerships with showroom, sales lot, service facility, and those establishments engaged primarily in automobile painting, transmission repair, and engine repair shops; 
(11)  Automotive sales and rentals: light. Sale or rental from the premises of automobiles and light panel trucks, boats, trailers, or delivery vehicles, together or independently together, with incidental maintenance, including paint and body repair facilities which are a part of the agency. Typical uses included are a new and used automobile dealership with showroom, sales lot, and service facility; 
(12)  Automotive and equipment sales and rentals: heavy. Sales and rental from the premises of heavy farm or construction equipment, trucks, buses, aircraft, or similar heavy mobile equipment, together with incidental maintenance; 
(13)  Automotive and equipment: storage. Storage of vehicles used regularly in business operations and not available for sale of long-term storage, and facilities or structures for the storage, and facilities or structures for the storage of non-operating vehicles. Typical uses include new car dealer's off-site auto storage lots, taxi fleets, truck storage facilities or yards, auto storage garages, and tow away or impound yards, but excluding junk or salvage yards; 
(14)  Building maintenance services. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale, rental, or repair of equipment and supplies used by office, professional, and service establishments primarily to other firms, rather than to individuals, but excluding automotive, construction, petroleum, and farm equipment. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, janitorial services, disinfecting and exterminating services, vending machines sales and services, and window cleaning services; 
(15)  Business support services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services of a clerical, employment, protective or minor processing nature and where the storage of goods or equipment other than as samples or as necessary for daily operation is prohibited. Typical uses include secretarial services, telephone answering services, security services, blue print services, reproduction services, detective and protective services, and employment services; 
(16)  Child care and adult day care center. 
a.  Child care center. Any day nursery, nursery school, foster home, preschool, day care center, or any place or institution which receives eight or more children under the age of 16 years and not of common parentage for either full-time or part-time care for children apart from their natural parents, legal guardians, or custodians, when such care is received for regular periods of time for compensation; 
b.  Adult day care center. A facility, except for nursing homes, retirement centers, and senior citizens centers, which provides basic day care services to four or more unrelated impaired adults for more than four hours in a 24-hour period. A center shall be a distinct entity either freestanding or a separate program of a larger organization. A licensed center shall have a separately verifiable staff, space, budget and participant; 
(17)  Communications services: limited tower operations. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephone mechanisms, but excluding those classified as major impact services and utilities. Typical uses include television/radio studios, and telecommunication service centers; 
(18)  Communication services: towers. Radio and television broadcast towers, satellite communication facilities, microwave antennas, or business dispatching or receiving antennas, and all other antennas similarly suited whether mounted on top of a building or rooftop or mounted on top of a monopole/tower. Where a broadcast tower is permitted, a broadcast studio is permitted to locate on the same site; 
(19)  Construction sales and services: light. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sales of construction materials, where all materials are stored inside. The installation of building materials may be incidental to the retail establishment. Outdoor display is for new retail items only, and is approved prior to construction by the community development director. This includes the retail, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures, but excluding equipment and uses found in the automotive and heavy equipment use classifications. Typical uses include lumber yards and building materials stores, tools and equipment rental or sales, hardware stores, paint stores, and glass stores; 
(20)  Construction sales and services: heavy. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in construction activities and incidental outdoor storage and display on lots other than construction sites. This includes sale, installation and repair of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures, but excluding equipment and uses found in the automotive and heavy equipment use classifications. Typical uses include electrical contractors, plumbing contractors and air conditioning or heating contractors, and general contractors and developers that may store equipment and materials outside; 
(21)  Convenience sales and services. Establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of frequently needed, day-to-day retail commercial goods and services. Such uses are designed and intended to serve a limited local market, and to be generally within short walking or short driving distance of a residential area. Furthermore, only uses that do not create increased traffic, noise, or such other impacts considered incompatible with a residential use will be permitted. Sales of low-point beer as defined in 37 O.S. § 163.2 shall be allowed. All requirements of the above sections and any applicable sections of this Code shall be met. Typical uses include small grocery stores, drug stores, candy stores, ice cream parlors (without accessory uses), dry cleaning establishments, self-service laundry, bakeries, floral and gift shops, and key and lock shops; 
(22)  Drinking establishments: sit-down, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted. Establishments or places of business where customers are seated and served, and which are primarily engaged in the sale, mixing, or dispensing of beverages containing more than 0.5 percent alcohol by weight for consumption on the premises. All requirements of 37 O.S. and any applicable sections of this Code shall be met. In addition, lots shall not abut residentially developed properties on the side, shall front only onto an arterial street, and shall have no vehicular access onto any local or collector street unless approved by waiver through special use permit as provided within this Code. Typical uses include taverns, dance halls and mixed beverage establishments in which food items are served but as accessory to the drinking establishment. Live entertainment shall be permitted as allowed in this Code; 
(23)  Eating establishments: drive-in. Establishments or places of business with little or no inside seating where prepared food and beverages are consumed within a motor vehicle on the premises or are carried outside by the purchaser to tables. These uses are normally adjacent to high volume vehicular movement areas and are characterized by either remote ordering of food from within the vehicle and delivery by attendants, or by carryout packages for consumption on or off the premises; 
(24)  Eating establishments: fast foods. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale of prepared food and beverages for both on- and off-premises consumption. These uses are normally adjacent to high volume pedestrian and/or vehicular movement areas, and are characterized by pre-packaged and pre-cooked foods and by a central ordering and serving point within the establishment. Typical uses include delicatessens and chain restaurants; 
(25)  Eating establishments: sit-down. Establishments or places of business where customers are seated and served, and that are primarily engaged in the sale of prepared foods and beverages for on-premises consumption. This includes establishments that are engaged in the sale, mixing or dispensing of alcoholic beverages or low-point beer containing more than 0.5 percent alcohol by weight for consumption on the premises as accessory to a restaurant operation. All requirements of 37 O.S. and any applicable sections of this Code shall be met. They are located at high capacity/high volume sites that are easily accessed by pedestrians and vehicles. Typical uses include restaurants, short order eating places, cafeterias, and coffee shops. Live entertainment shall be permitted as allowed within this Code; 
(26)  Food and beverage retail sales. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food and beverages for home consumption. Sales of low-point beer as defined in 37 O.S. § 163.2 shall be allowed. All requirements of this Code shall be met. Typical uses include grocery stores, delicatessens, ice cream and dairy products with accessory uses, meat markets, fish and seafood markets, and fruits and vegetables; 
(27)  Food and beverage retail sales: temporary or seasonal. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food and beverages for home consumption on a temporary or seasonal basis only. These establishments are characterized by utilizing portable buildings or roadside stands on the seller's premises or on a detached location. All sections of this Code must be met. Typical uses include a roadside stand selling fruits and vegetables and snow cone stands; 
(28)  Funeral and interment services: animals. Interring services involving the permanent disposition of animal bodies. Typical uses include animal cemeteries; 
(29)  Funeral and interment services: burial. Interring services involving the permanent disposition of human bodies. Typical use is a cemetery, which may not include on-site structures for such accessory uses as columbarium, crematoriums, funeral homes, and mausoleums; 
(30)  Funeral and interment services: undertaking. Undertaking services such as preparing the dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes, mortuaries, and crematoriums; 
(31)  Gasoline sales: light. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the on-site retail sale of petroleum products with incidental sale of tires, batteries, and replacement items, lubricating services and minor repair services for automobiles. Other incidental uses may include the sale of food and beverages. Typical uses include automobile service stations; 
(32)  Gasoline sales: general. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the on-site retail sale of petroleum products with incidental sale of tires, batteries, and replacement items, lubricating services and minor repair services for both automobiles and trucks. Other incidental uses may include the sale of prepared foods and beverages for on-premises consumption, along with sleeping and showering facilities. Typical uses include truck stops; 
(33)  Health clubs. Establishments or places of business engaged in providing exercising and recreation facilities. Typical uses include health spas, gymnasiums, and dance exercise facilities. Spectator provisions are incidental to the participant activity; 
(34)  Laundry services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, dry cleaning or dyeing services for multiple collection/distribution outlets, other than those classified as convenience sales and services and employ five or fewer full-time employees. Typical uses include laundry agencies, diaper services, or linen supply services; 
(35)  Manufactured housing and trailers: sales and rentals. Sale or rental from the premises of manufactured housing and travel trailers together with incidental maintenance which is a part of the agency. Typical uses include manufactured housing sales, mobile home sales, travel trailer sales, camper sales, boat sales, recreational vehicle sales, and trailer sales and rentals; 
(36)  Medical services: restricted. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of personal health services, including prevention, diagnosis and treatment or rehabilitation services provided by physicians, dentists, nurses, and other health personnel as well as the provision of medical testing and analysis services. Typical uses include medical offices, dental offices, dental laboratories, clinics or health maintenance organizations; but not including any sales facilities, hospitals, convalescent centers, or nursing homes; 
(37)  Medical services: general. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of personal health services, including related retail sales activities. Typical uses include medical offices, dental offices, dental laboratories, clinics, or health maintenance facilities with related sale facilities such as opticians or pharmacies in the same structure; but not including hospitals, convalescent centers, or nursing homes; 
(38)  Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor. Those participant recreation and entertainment uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, skating rinks, arcades and family amusement centers. Any spectators would be incidental to the participant activity. The sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited; 
(39)  Participant recreation and entertainment; indoor, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted. Those participant recreation and entertainment uses conducted within an enclosed building. Any spectators would be incidental to the participant activity. The sale, mixing, or dispensing of alcoholic beverages or low-point beer containing more than 0.5 percent alcohol by weight for consumption on the premises as accessory to the operation. All requirements of 37 O.S. and any applicable sections of this Code shall be met. The gross sales of alcoholic beverages and low-point beer as defined above shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross sales of the eating establishments. Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, skating rinks, arcades and family amusements centers; 
(40)  Participant recreation and entertainment: outdoor. Those participant recreation and entertainment uses conducted in open facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges or miniature golf courses, go cart tracks, drive-in theatres, and amusement parks; 
(41)  Personal services: restricted. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, and personal improvements and similar services which are able to be located in an office-type building. Typical uses include photography and art studios, travel agencies, automobile driving schools, reducing salons, barbershops, beauty parlors, dancing and music academies, and classrooms for business schools. Excluded are services which would be classified under spectator sports and entertainment, participant recreation and entertainment, or transient accommodation; 
(42)  Personal services: general. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services to customers or clients which have one or more of the following characteristics: high customer volume, hand-carried parcel delivery or mailing facilities, overnight parking for small service or delivery, or sale of non-mercantile items such as postage stamps, or public event tickets. Typical uses include a catering establishment, post office, direct mail advertising, theatre ticket office, or a utility company business office, and all activity takes place within a completely enclosed building; 
(43)  Personal storage. Buildings containing enclosed individual rental storage facilities not exceeding 800 square feet per unit. These facilities are not used for sales purposes or storage of highly combustible materials. Typical uses include mini-warehouses or mini-storage and storage for recreational vehicles, boats, or trailers. This category does not allow any outside storage; 
(44)  Repair services: consumer. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals and households rather than to firms. Typical uses include appliance repair; apparel repair; musical instrument repair; electrical repair; shoe repair; jewelry repair shops; sewing machine repair; and watch or clock repair; 
(45)  Research services. Administrative offices plus research facilities of a technical or scientific nature which are located within a completely enclosed building. There is no product manufacturing and no outside storage, display or activity. Typical uses include electronics or medical research facilities, product testing laboratory, or a pharmaceutical laboratory; 
(46)  Retail sales and services: adult entertainment. Amusements or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized be an emphasis on acts of material depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, including, but not limited to, topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment. Typical uses include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theatres, adult motels, massage parlors, sexual encounter centers, and adult motion picture arcades: 
(47)  Retail sales and services: restricted. Establishments engaged in the sale or rental of goods and services where storage and warehousing space could be a necessity. The characteristics of these establishments may not be appropriate in certain retail locations. Typical uses include appliance repair, used furniture sales and rentals, used clothing sales, food banks, pawnshops, blood and/or plasma donation centers, including similar donation centers, surplus stores, and tattoo and/or body piercing parlors; 
(48)  Retail sales and services: general. Establishments engaged in the sale or rental of goods and services, both retail and wholesale of commonly used goods, merchandise, and services. Typical uses include antique shops, appliance stores, clothing stores, artist supplies, book or stationary stores, camera shops, furniture stores, hardware stores, jewelry stores, music and instrument stores, radio, television, and/or computer stores, shoe stores, tailor shops, toy stores, frame shops, department stores, newsstands, auto part supply stores, swimming pool supplies and equipment, record or tape stores, leather goods shops, monument sales, general stores, floor covering stores, bicycle stores, and tobacco shops; 
(49)  Retail sales and services: outdoor swap meets. The display, exchange, barter or sale of new or used common household items or office equipment and furnishings, carried out on any open lot. Typical uses include flea markets where clothing, personal effects, household furnishings, and household appliances are sold or otherwise exchanged; 
(50)  Spectator sports and entertainment: restricted. Establishments of places engaged in the provision of cultural, entertainment, athletic, and other events to spectators as well as providing space for social or fraternal gatherings. These uses are conducted within an enclosed building with a capacity of 500 or less people and including retail sales and storage facilities that are incidental to the operation of such uses. Typical uses include small theaters or amusement places; 
(51)  Spectator sports and entertainment: general. Establishments or places engaged in the provision of cultural, entertainment, athletic, and other events to spectators as well as providing space for social or fraternal gatherings. These uses are conducted in an enclosed building with a capacity of more than 500 people or in open facilities, and including retail sales, storage facilities, and other activities incidental to the operation. Typical uses include large theatres or amusement places; 
(52)  Spectator sports and entertainment: high impact. Establishments or places engaged in the provision of cultural, entertainment, athletic, and other events to spectators as well as providing space for social or fraternal gatherings. These uses are conducted in an enclosed building with a capacity of more than 500 people or in open facilities which may generate significant noise, odor, traffic or other impacts and including retail sales, storage facilities, and other activities incidental to the operation. Typical uses include drag strips, racetracks, fairgrounds, rodeo grounds, large exhibition halls, sports stadiums, and trade expositions; 
(53)  Tourist accommodations: campground. Campground services involving temporary accommodations areas for travelers, recreational vehicles, or tents, including food, drink, and other sales and services intended for the convenience of guests. Typical uses include recreational vehicle parks, and campgrounds; 
(54)  Tourist accommodations: lodging. Lodging services involving room accommodations for travelers, including food, drink, and other sales and services intended for the convenience of guests. Typical uses include hotels; motels; and transient boardinghouses. The size and location of all retail facilities shall be subject to all the zoning district regulations in which the use unit is located; 
(55)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Commercial parking. A sealed surface area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in area for the parking of vehicles together with one or more sealed surfaced driveways connecting the area to a dedicated street or alley to permit ingress and egress of vehicular traffic. A charge for use of the parking lot is paid by the users of the lot. Any structure incidental to the use (i.e., gate/guard houses) may be located in front of the setback line but no structure shall be permitted on street rights-of-way. Commercial parking areas shall not be used for personal vehicle storage. All provisions of the city's landscaping requirements shall be complied with; 
b.  Personal vehicle storage. A sealed surface area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in area for the parking of vehicles together with one or more sealed surface driveways connecting the area to a dedicated street or alley to permit ingress and egress of vehicular traffic. Area is used for individual vehicle storage for which a charge for use of the storage area is paid by the users. These areas are not used for sales purposes or storage of highly combustible materials. Typical uses include storage of recreational vehicles, campers, boats, or trailers. All provisions of the city's landscape requirements shall apply. Accessory parking, commercial parking, and personal vehicle storage shall comply with all applicable city ordinances. 
(f)  Industrial use unit classifications. Industrial use unit classifications include the on-site storage, manufacture, assembly or processing of products and goods not otherwise classified as agricultural or extractive. 
(1)  Custom manufacturing. Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing which involves only the use of hand tools or small mechanical equipment not exceeding five horsepower or three kilowatts not exceeding eight kilowatts each and the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods produced on-site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle making shops or custom jewelry manufacturers; 
(2)  Light industrial: restricted. Establishments engaged in the manufacture, assembly, research, collection and compression or processing of products and foods with all operations and processes entirely within an enclosed structure, requiring no outdoor industrial wastewater treatment systems, producing no airborne emissions, objectionable noise, glare, odor, vibrations, smoke or dust associated with the industrial operation. There is no outdoor storage of raw materials and products. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, bakery employing more than five employees; book binder; cabinet shop; clothing manufacturing; furniture upholstering; ice plant; laundry and dry cleaning plant employing more than five full-time people; printing plant; engraving plant; instrument and meter manufacture; mattress renovation; optical goods manufacture; photographic equipment manufacture; and collection and compression of aluminum cans and glass for recycling; 
(3)  Light industrial. Establishments engaged in the manufacture, assembly, research, or processing of products and goods with operations and processes entirely within an enclosed structure, requiring no outdoor industrial wastewater treatment system, and producing no airborne emissions, objectionable noise, dust, glare, odor, vibrations, smoke or dust associated with the industrial operation. Outdoor storage of raw materials and products is permitted with proper screening. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, bottling plant; candy manufacture; cosmetic manufacture; rubber stamp manufacture; pottery and figuring manufacturing; machine shop; and stone and monuments works; 
(4)  Moderate industrial. Establishments engaged in the manufacture, assembly, research, or processing of storage, operations and processes meeting applicable federal, state and municipal standards for wastewater and airborne industrial emissions, noise, vibrations, smoke, dust and odor that do not produce any adverse effects. Outdoor storage of raw materials and products is permitted with proper screening. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, candle manufacture; cotton gin; cotton seed oil manufacture; dyestuff manufacture; soap manufacture other than liquid soap; soda and compounds manufacture; tobacco (chewing) manufacture or treatment; wool pulling or scouring; blacksmith's shop; dying or storage yard; emery cloth or sandpaper manufacture; fish smoking or curing operations; cold rolled steel mills; glass manufacture or processing; and planing mill; 
(5)  Heavy industrial. Establishments engaged in the manufacture, assembly, research, or processing of products and goods with outside storage, operations and processes meeting applicable federal, state, and municipal standards for wastewater and airborne industrial emissions. Even though these standards are met, noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, and odor may cause adverse impacts. Outdoor storage of raw materials and products is permitted. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, slaughterhouse and packing plants; smelting to tin, copper foundries; boiler works; tire or rubber manufacture; paint manufacture; fat rendering; fertilizer mixing; glue manufacture; blast furnace; brick, tile, pottery or terra cotta manufacture other than manufacture of handcrafted products only; celluloid manufacture or treatment; central mixing plant for concrete or cement mortar, plaster or paving materials; coke oven; creosote manufacture or treatment; distillation of bones, coal, or wood; stove polish manufacture; tallow, grease, or lard manufacturing or refining from, or of animal fat; tanning, curing or storage of rawhides or skins; tar roofing or water proofing manufacture; vinegar manufacture; potash manufacture; automotive manufacture or assembly; lampblack manufacture; bag cleaning; match manufacture; oilcloth or linoleum manufacture; pickle manufacture; pyroxlin manufacture; rock crusher; sauerkraut manufacture; shoe polish manufacture; 
(6)  Hazardous industrial. Establishments engaged in operations, research, or processes involving explosives, radioactive materials, caustic or toxic substances, or other material posing a potential threat to public safety and health or to property. Outdoor storage of raw materials and products is permitted as long as appropriate state and federal health and safety standards are met. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, acetylene gas manufacture or storage; acid manufacture; alcohol manufacture; ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture; cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture; fertilizer manufacture; gas manufacture; refining of petroleum or its products; asphaltic mixing plants and/or asphalt plants; disinfectant manufacture; pesticides, herbicides, or poison manufacture and/or storage; explosives manufacture or storage; and refining, recycling or processing of radioactive materials; 
(7)  Scrap operations. Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or processing of used or waste materials that are not intended for reuse in their original form. Typical uses include automotive wrecking operations, scrap or junkyards, and paper or material salvage yards; 
(8)  Wholesaling, storage and distribution: restricted. Wholesaling, storage and warehousing services within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors; storage warehouses or moving and storage firms; and meat or food lockers; 
(9)  Wholesaling, storage and distribution: general. Open-air storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment. Typical uses include monument or stone yards, oil field pipe storage, grain elevators or open storage yards where activity may generate noise and dust. 
(g)  Transportation use unit classification. Transportation use types include facilities for the movement of people or goods by either public or private organizations. 
(1)  Transportation facilities: passenger. Surface facilities which contribute to the movement of people on a local or cross-country basis. Typical uses include inter-city bus or railroad passenger terminals; 
(2)  Transportation facilities: freight, restricted. Facilities which contribute to the surface movement of inner-city freight, including processing, loading, and transferring. All freight goods are stored within enclosed buildings and outside activity is restricted to loading of these goods. Typical uses include cross country truck lines and their distribution warehouses, with supplementary parking of tractors and trailers; 
(3)  Transportation facilities: freight, general. Facilities which contribute to the surface movement of inter-city freight and heavy equipment, including processing, loading, and transferring. Freight goods and materials may be stored outside. Typical use is a railroad classification or marshalling yard with supplementary containerized or raw material loading facilities and storage of rolling stock; 
(4)  Transportation facilities: aircraft. Permanent and temporary facilities which provide access to airborne transport for people and goods. Typical uses include airport, landing strip, heliport, and helicopter landing pad; 
(h)  Extractive use unit classification. Extractive use unit classifications include the on-site production of mineral products by extractive method. 
(1)  Mining and processing: minerals and raw materials. Places primarily devoted to surface or subsurface mining, excavation, or extraction of metallic and nonmetallic materials with essential on-site processing of such products. Typical uses are a borrow pit, sandpit, quarry, or mine; 
(2)  Mining and processing: oil and gas. Places primarily devoted to subsurface mining of oil and gas. Typical uses are oil and gas drilling operations. All provisions of this Code shall be met. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-206; Ord. No. 217, 1-5-1998; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 303(00), 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 314(01), 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 539(06), §§ 1-3, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 556(06), 9-18-2006) 
ARTICLE B. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
Division 1. - Generally 

Sec. 12-211. - List of zoning districts. 
    The following are zoning districts within the city: 
(1)  A-1 Rural Agricultural District. 
(2)  A-2 Suburban Agricultural District. 
(3)  RE Residential Estates. 
(4)  R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District. 
(5)  R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District. 
(6)  R-3 General Residential District. 
(7)  R-4 Multiple Family District. 
(8)  R-5 Manufactured Home District. 
(9)  C-1 Office District. 
(10)  C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District. 
(11)  C-3 General Commercial District. 
(12)  C-4 Planned Shopping Center District. 
(13)  C-5 Automotive and Commercial Recreation District. 
(14)  C-6 Central Business District. 
(15)  I-1 Light Industrial District. 
(16)  I-2 Medium Industrial District. 
(17)  I-3 Heavy Industrial District. 
Division 2. - A-1 Rural Agricultural District 

Sec. 12-221. - General description. 
    This district is intended to provide an area primarily for agricultural uses or the extraction of the various products such as oil, minerals, rock and gravel from the earth. The rural nature and low density of population in this district requires only that the buildings and extraction facilities related to the uses of this district have a reasonable setback from the streets and highways. It is the purpose of this district to protect such uses from unplanned urbanization so long as the land therein is devoted primarily to agriculture or extraction minerals. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-30; LDC 1991, § 12-210; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-222. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in an A-1 Rural Agriculture District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Agricultural processing: limited; 
(2)  Agricultural processing: general; 
(3)  Animal raising: personal; 
(4)  Horticulture; 
(5)  Row and field crops; 
(6)  Single-family detached residential; 
(7)  Public service or utility: light; 
(8)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(9)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(10)  Moderate impact institutional; 
(11)  Library services and community centers; 
(12)  Community recreation: restricted; 
(13)  Community recreation: general. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-24; LDC 1991, § 12-211; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 508, 5-7-1990; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-223. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in an A-1 Rural Agricultural District on review: 
(1)  Animal raising: commercial; 
(2)  Animal waste processing; 
(3)  Manufactured home residential; 
(4)  Public service or utility: heavy; 
(5)  High impact institutional; 
(6)  Agricultural supplies and services; 
(7)  Animal sales and services: auctioning; 
(8)  Animal sales and services: grooming; 
(9)  Animal sales and services: horse stables; 
(10)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, restricted; 
(11)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, general; 
(12)  Communications services: limited tower operations; 
(13)  Communications services: towers; 
(14)  Food and beverage retail sales: temporary or seasonal; 
(15)  Funeral and interment services: animal; 
(16)  Funeral and interment services: burial; 
(17)  Funeral and interment services: undertaking; 
(18)  Tourist accommodations: campgrounds; 
(19)  Transportation facilities: aircraft; 
(20)  Mining and processing: minerals and raw materials; 
(21)  Mining and processing: oil and gas. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-32; LDC 1991, § 12-212; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-224. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within an A-1 Rural Agricultural District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 50 feet with a minimum of 75 feet on section line roads; 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersection streets are improved with buildings, all of which gave an average setback line of greater than 50 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no buildings shall be erected closer than the minimum setback so established by existing buildings; and 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be met on both streets; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall 25 feet on both sides; and 
b.  The minimum depth of a side yard for churches and schools shall be 35 feet; 
(3)  Rear yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of a rear yard shall be 20 percent of the depth of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is smaller; and 
b.  Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear lot line; 
(4)  Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 320 feet; provided, however, that right-of-way dedications may be included in calculating lot frontage; 
(5)  All lots shall have not less than five acres of land, including street dedications, and not more than one principal building shall be placed on any one lot; 
(6)  Not more than 25 percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision; and 
(7)  No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-33; LDC 1991, § 12-213; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 3. - A-2 Suburban Agricultural District 

Sec. 12-231. - General description. 
    This district is intended to provide a location for the land situated on the fringe of the urban area that is used for agricultural purposes, but which will be undergoing urbanization in the near future. Many tracts in this district will be in close proximity to residential and commercial uses. Therefore, the agricultural activities conducted in this area should not be detrimental to residential, commercial, or industrial development than is authorized in other districts. The types of uses, required area, and the intensity of use of land permitted in this district are designed to encourage and protect agricultural uses so long as the land therein is devoted primarily to agriculture. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-34; LDC 1991, § 12-220; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-232. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in an A-2 Suburban Agricultural District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Agricultural processing: limited; 
(2)  Animal raising: personal; 
(3)  Horticulture; 
(4)  Row and field crops; 
(5)  Single-family detached residential; 
(6)  Public service or utility: light; 
(7)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(8)  Moderate impact institutional; 
(9)  Library services and community centers; 
(10)  Community recreation: restricted; 
(11)  Community recreation: general. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-35; LDC 1991, § 12-221; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 194(97), 7-7-1997; Ord. No. 217 (97), 1-5-1998; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-233. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in an A-2 Suburban Agricultural District on review: 
(1)  Agricultural processing: general; 
(2)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(3)  Public service or utility: heavy; 
(4)  High impact institutional; 
(5)  Animal sales and services: grooming; 
(6)  Animal sales and services: horse stables; 
(7)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, restricted; 
(8)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, general; 
(9)  Communications services: limited tower operations; 
(10)  Communications services: towers; 
(11)  Food and beverage retail sales: temporary or seasonal; 
(12)  Funeral and interment services: animal; 
(13)  Funeral and interment services: burial; 
(14)  Funeral and interment services: undertaking; 
(15)  Tourist accommodations: campgrounds; 
(16)  Transportation facilities: aircraft. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-36; LDC 1991, § 12-222; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-234. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within an A-2 Suburban Agricultural District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 50 feet with a minimum of 75 feet on section line roads; and 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersection streets are improved with buildings, all of which gave an average setback line of greater than 50 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no buildings shall be erected closer than the minimum setback so established by existing buildings; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 15 feet on each side; and 
b.  The minimum depth of a side yard for churches and schools shall be 35 feet; 
(3)  Rear yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of a rear yard shall be 25 feet; and 
b.  Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear lot line; 
(4)  Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 100 feet; provided, however, that right-of-way dedications may be included in calculating lot frontage; 
(5)  All lots shall have not less than two acres of land, including street dedications, and not more than one principal building shall be placed on any one lot; 
(6)  Not more than 25 percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision; and 
(7)  No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-37; LDC 1991, § 12-223; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-235. - Subdivision allowed within A-2 Suburban Agriculture District. 
    There is hereby established and allowed within the city, a subdivision within A-2 Suburban Agricultural District, which subdivision shall comply in all respects with the area regulations as are set forth in section 12-234 and all design principles of subdivision standards. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-38; LDC 1991, § 12-224; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 4. - RE Residential Estates 

Sec. 12-241. - General description. 
    This district is intended to provide for the intermediate stage between the two-acre lot of the suburban agricultural district and the 6,000 square feet lot of the low-density residential zoning. This zoning district will provide for single-family housing and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive residential area. These residential areas are intended to be defined and protected from encroachment of uses which are not appropriate to residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of the different uses. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-230; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-242. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a RE Residential Estates District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached residential dwelling; 
(2)  Public service utility: light; 
(3)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(4)  Moderate impact institutional; 
(5)  Library services and community centers; 
(6)  Community recreation: restricted. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-231; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-243. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a RE Residential Estates District on review: 
(1)  Animal raising: personal; 
(2)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(3)  High impact institutional; 
(4)  Community recreation: general. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-232; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-244. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within a RE Residential Estates District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet with a minimum of 75 feet on section line roads; 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersection streets are improved with buildings, all of which have an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street than the minimum setback so established by existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard depth of greater than 40 feet; and 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be met on both streets; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  For interior lots, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be ten feet; 
b.  For corner lots: 
1.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 15 feet if the lot is backing up to the rear of another corner lot; and 
2.  In all other cases, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 20 feet; 
c.  For churches and schools, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 35 feet; 
(3)  Rear yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 20 percent of the depth of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is smaller; and 
b.  Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear lot line; 
(4)  Lot width requirements are as follows: 
a.  Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 60 feet when measured at the front building line; and 
b.  Each lot must abut on the street for a minimum of 35 feet; 
(5)  Intensity of use requirements are as follows: 
a.  For a one-family dwelling, each lot must contain a minimum of three-quarter-acre to two acres; and 
b.  Schools must contain a minimum of three acres; 
(6)  Coverage requirements are as follows: 
a.  Not more than 35 percent of the lot area shall be covered by the dwelling; and 
b.  Not more than 20 percent of the rear yard shall be covered by accessory buildings; 
(7)  No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-233; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 5. - R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District 

Sec. 12-251. - General description. 
    This is the most restrictive residential district. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive residential area. These residential areas are intended to be defined and protected from encroachment of uses which are not appropriate to residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of the different uses. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-43; LDC 1991, § 12-240; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-252. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached residential; 
(2)  Public service or utility: light; 
(3)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(4)  Moderate impact institutional; 
(5)  Library services and community centers; 
(6)  Community recreation: restricted. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-44; LDC 1991, § 12-241; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-253. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District on review: 
(1)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(2)  High impact institutional; 
(3)  Community recreation: general. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-45; LDC 1991, § 12-242; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 195(97), 7-7-1997; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-254. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within the R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet; 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersection streets are improved with buildings, all of which have an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street than the minimum setback so established by existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard depth of greater than 40 feet; and 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be met on both streets; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  For interior lots, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be five feet on each side; 
b.  For corner lots: 
1.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 15 feet if the lot is backing up to the rear of another corner lot; and 
2.  In all other cases, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 20 feet; 
c.  For churches and schools, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 35 feet; 
(3)  Rear yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 15 feet; and 
b.  Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear lot line; 
(4)  Lot width requirements are as follows: 
a.  Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 55 feet when measured at the front building line; and 
b.  Each lot must abut on the street for a minimum of 35 feet; 
(5)  Intensity of use requirements are as follows: 
a.  For a one-family dwelling, each lot must contain a minimum of 6,000 square feet; and 
b.  Schools must contain a minimum of three acres; 
(6)  Coverage requirements are as follows: 
a.  Not more than 40 percent of the lot area shall be covered by the dwelling; and 
b.  Not more than 20 percent of the rear yard shall be covered by accessory buildings; 
(7)  No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-46; LDC 1991, § 12-243; Ord. No. 6, 11-18-1991; Ord. No. 153, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 167, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 200, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 6. - R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District 

Sec. 12-261. - General description. 
    This is a residential district to provide for a slightly higher population density but with basic restrictions similar to the R-1 district. The principal use of land is for single-family and two-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide a balanced and attractive residential area. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through the consideration of the proper functional relationship of the different uses. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-47; LDC 1991, § 12-250; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-262. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached residential; 
(2)  Two-family attached residential; 
(3)  Public service of utility: light; 
(4)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(5)  Moderate impact institutional; 
(6)  Library services and community centers; 
(7)  Community recreation: restricted. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-48; LDC 1991, § 12-251; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-263. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District on review: 
(1)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(2)  High impact institutional; 
(3)  Community recreation: general. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-49; LDC 1991, § 12-252; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-264. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within a R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet with a minimum of 75 feet on section line roads; 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersection streets are improved with buildings, all of which have an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street than the minimum setback so established by existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard depth of greater than 40 feet; and 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be met on both streets; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  For interior lots, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be five feet on each side; 
b.  For corner lots: 
1.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 15 feet if the lot is backing up to the rear of another corner lot; and 
2.  In all other cases, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 20 feet; 
c.  For churches and schools, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 35 feet; 
(3)  Rear yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 15 feet 
b.  Accessory buildings and garage apartments shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear lot line; 
(4)  Lot width requirements are as follows: 
a.  For a single-family dwelling, each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 55 feet when measured at the front building line and must abut the street for at least 35 feet; 
b.  For a two-family dwelling, each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 75 feet when measured at the front building line and must abut the street for at least 40 feet; 
c.  For a single-family dwelling with a garage apartment, each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 75 feet when measured at the front building line and must abut the street for at least 40 feet; 
(5)  Intensity of use requirements are as follows: 
a.  For a single-family and two-family dwelling, each lot must contain a minimum of 6,000 square feet; 
b.  For a two-family dwelling or single-family dwelling with a garage apartment, each lot shall have a minimum of 7,500 square feet; and 
c.  Schools must contain a minimum of three acres; 
(6)  Coverage requirements are as follows: 
a.  Not more than 40 percent of the lot area shall be covered by the dwelling; and 
b.  Not more than 20 percent of the rear yard shall be covered by accessory buildings; 
(7)  No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-50; LDC 1991, § 12-253; Ord. No. 6, 11-18-1991; Ord. No. 154, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 167, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 200, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 7. - R-3 General Residential District 

Sec. 12-271. - General description. 
    This residential district is intended to provide for multiple-family developments which may have a relatively intense concentration of dwelling units served by large open spaces, including common area and facilities, thereby resulting in low gross densities. The principal use of land may be for one of several dwelling types ranging from single-family to low-rise multifamily dwellings, and including garden apartments, condominiums and townhouses. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-51; LDC 1991, § 12-260; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-272. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a R-3 General Residential District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached; 
(2)  Two-family attached residential; 
(3)  Townhouse; 
(4)  Multifamily residential; 
(5)  Group residential; 
(6)  Public service or utility: light; 
(7)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(8)  Moderate impact institutional; 
(9)  Library services and community centers; 
(10)  Community recreation: restricted. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-52; LDC 1991, § 12-261; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-273. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a R-3 General Residential District on review: 
(1)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(2)  High impact institutional; 
(3)  Community recreation: general; 
(4)  Group care facility; 
(5)  Community-based care facility. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-53; LDC 1991, § 12-262; Ord. No. 442, 2-16-1988; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-274. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within a R-3 General Residential District, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet with a minimum of 75 feet on section line roads; 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersection streets are improved with buildings, all of which have an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street than the minimum setback so established by existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard depth of greater than 40 feet; and 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be met on both streets; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  For interior lots, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be five feet on each side; 
b.  For corner lots: 
1.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 15 feet if the lot is backing up to the rear of another corner lot; and 
2.  In all other cases, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 25 feet; 
c.  For churches and schools, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 35 feet; 
(3)  Rear yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 20 percent of the depth of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is smaller; and 
b.  Accessory buildings and garage apartments shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear lot line; 
(4)  Lot width requirements are as follows: 
a.  For a single-family dwelling, each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 55 feet when measured at the front building line and must abut the street for at least 35 feet; 
b.  For a two-family dwelling, each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 75 feet when measured at the front building line and must abut the street for at least 40 feet; 
c.  For a multifamily dwelling, each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 75 feet increased by ten feet for each additional dwelling unit over two, but not exceeding 150 feet when measured at the front building line. It must abut on the street for a minimum of 50 feet; 
(5)  Intensity of use requirements are as follows: 
a.  For a single-family dwelling, each lot must contain a minimum of 6,000 square feet; 
b.  For a two-family dwelling or single-family dwelling with a garage apartment, each lot shall have a minimum of 7,500 square feet; 
c.  For a multifamily dwelling, each lot shall contain a minimum of 3,000 square feet per unit; and 
d.  Schools must contain a minimum of three acres; 
(6)  Coverage requirements are as follows: 
a.  Not more than 35 percent of the lot area shall be covered buildings and improvements; and 
b.  Not more than 20 percent of the rear yard shall be covered by accessory buildings; 
(7)  No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-54; LDC 1991, § 12-263; Ord. No. 6, 11-18-1991; Ord. No. 167, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 8. - R-4 Multiple Family District 

Sec. 12-281. - General description. 
    This is a residential district to provide for densities of dwelling units up to 15 dwelling units per acre. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings, townhouses, low-rise multifamily dwellings, and garden apartments. Religious and educational uses normally located to service residential uses are also permitted to provide the basic elements of convenient, balanced, and attractive living areas. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-54.1; LDC 1991, § 12-270; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-282. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a R-4 Multiple Family District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached residential; 
(2)  Two-family attached residential; 
(3)  Townhouse; 
(4)  Multifamily residential; 
(5)  Group residential; 
(6)  Public service or utility: light; 
(7)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(8)  Community recreation: restricted. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-54.2; LDC 1991, § 12-271; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-283. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a R-4 Multiple Family District on review: 
(1)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(2)  Moderate impact institutional; 
(3)  High impact institutional; 
(4)  Library services and community centers; 
(5)  Community recreation: general; 
(6)  Food and beverage retail sales: temporary and seasonal. 
(Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; LDC 1991, § 12-272; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-284. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within a R-4 Multiple Family District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet with a minimum of 75 feet on section line roads; 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersection streets are improved with buildings, all of which have an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street than the minimum setback so established by existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard depth of greater than 40 feet; and 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be met on both streets; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  For interior lots, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 15 feet on each side; 
b.  For corner lots: 
1.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 15 feet if the lot is backing up to the rear of another corner lot; and 
2.  In all other cases, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 25 feet; 
c.  For churches and schools, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 35 feet; 
(3)  Rear yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 20 percent of the depth of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is smaller; 
b.  Accessory buildings and garage apartments shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear lot line; and 
c.  Garage apartments shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear lot line; 
(4)  Lot width requirements are as follows: 
a.  For a single-family dwelling, each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 55 feet when measured at the front building line and must abut the street for at least 35 feet; 
b.  For a two-family dwelling, each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 75 feet when measured at the front building line and must abut the street for at least 40 feet; 
c.  For a multifamily dwelling, each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 75 feet increased by ten feet for each additional dwelling unit over two, but not exceeding 150 feet when measured at the front building line. It must abut on the street for a minimum of 50 feet; 
(5)  Intensity of use requirements are as follows: 
a.  For a single-family dwelling, each lot must contain a minimum of 6,000 square feet; 
b.  For a two-family dwelling, each lot shall contain a minimum of 7,500 square feet; 
c.  A garage apartment on the same lot as a duplex or multifamily dwelling requires an additional 1,700 square feet; 
d.  For a multifamily dwelling, a minimum of 9,000 square feet is required with an additional 1,700 square feet for each unit over three; and 
e.  Schools must contain a minimum of three acres; 
(6)  Coverage requirements are as follows: 
a.  Not more than 35 percent of the lot area shall be covered buildings and improvements; and 
b.  Not more than 20 percent of the rear yard shall be covered by accessory buildings; 
(7)  No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 54.3; LDC 1991, § 12-273; Ord. No. 167, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 167(96), 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 9. - R-5 Manufactured Home District 

Sec. 12-291. - General description. 
    This is a restrictive residential district. The principal use of land is a manufactured home used as a single residence. The purpose of this district is to provide a grouping of home sites within the setting of a residential subdivision for manufactured homes, which are not compatible with conventional housing. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-54.4; LDC 1991, § 12-280; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-292. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a R-5 Manufactured Home District shall be used only for the following uses: 
(1)  Manufactured home residential; 
(2)  Public service utility: light. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-54.5; LDC 1991, § 12-281; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-293. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a R-5 Manufactured Home District on review: public service or utility: moderate. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-282; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-294. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within a R-5 Manufactured Home District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way line to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet; 
b.  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersection streets are improved with buildings, all of which have an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street than the minimum setback so established by existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard depth of greater than 40 feet; and 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be met on both streets; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  For interior lots, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 15 feet on one side and five on the other; 
b.  For corner lots: 
1.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 15 feet if the lot is backing up to the rear of another corner lot; and 
2.  In all other cases, the minimum depth of a side yard shall be 25 feet; 
(3)  Rear yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 20 percent of the depth of the lot or 20 feet, whichever is smaller; 
b.  Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear lot line; and 
c.  Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 55 feet when measured at the front building line, and each lot must abut on the street for a minimum of 35 feet; 
(4)  Intensity of use requirements are as follows: 
a.  For mobile home parks, the minimum lot size shall be 4,000 square feet; 
b.  For travel trailer parks, the minimum lot size shall be 2,500 square feet; 
(5)  Coverage requirements are as follows: 
a.  Not more than 25 percent of the lot area shall be covered buildings and improvements; and 
b.  Not more than 20 percent of the rear yard shall be covered by accessory buildings; 
(6)  Parking requirements are as follows: 
a.  For mobile home parks, two clearly defined parking spaces per mobile home space in a mobile home park; and 
b.  For travel trailer park, at least one clearly defined parking space for each travel trailer; 
(7)  A buffer strip ten feet wide with sight-proof fence or shrubbery of six feet in height shall be required; and 
(8)  No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-54.6; LDC 1991, § 12-283; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 10. - C-1 Office District 

Sec. 12-301. - General description. 
    This district is for the conduct of general and professional office and related activity to meet the needs of the community in such a manner as to not be offensive to a general neighborhood containing residential, religious, recreational and educational elements. It is intended that this district be located so as not to introduce traffic onto solely residential streets or an intrusion into a residential district, but to serve as a buffer between residential and more intensive commercial activities. This classification will be used primarily for that type of business activity which will not add heavy traffic, foot or vehicle, into an area outside of normal operating business hours. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-55; LDC 1991, § 12-290; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-302. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a C-1 Office District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Public service or utility: light; 
(2)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(3)  Cultural exhibits; 
(4)  Library services and community centers; 
(5)  Administrative and professional office; 
(6)  Business support services; 
(7)  Personal services: restricted; 
(8)  Research services. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-56; LDC 1991, § 12-291; Ord. No. 64(93), 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-303. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a C-1 Office District on review: 
(1)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(2)  Medical services: restricted; 
(3)  Medical services: general. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-292; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-304. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within a C-1 Office District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall 25 feet; 
b.  No object shall be constructed that restricts the view within 15 feet of an edge of an existing or proposed street; 
c.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be met on both streets; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 20 feet on each side; 
b.  A zero lot line may be used if adjacent to another commercial area with a minimum firewall of at least two hours. This requirement is subject to approval of the fire chief; 
(3)  Minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 20 feet; 
(4)  No minimum lot size is required; 
(5)  No minimum lot width is required; 
(6)  Not more than 30 percent of the lot may be covered by buildings or other improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of these regulations; 
(7)  No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot; and 
(8)  A six-foot screening is required if adjacent to residential land use or residential zoning. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-57; LDC 1991, § 12-293; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 11. - C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District 

Sec. 12-311. - General description. 
(a)  This district is intended for a unified grouping in one or more buildings of retail shops and stores and personal services of limited size and service area that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods where retail shops and personal services are not otherwise readily available. 
(b)  It is intended that this neighborhood commercial center be developed as a unit with adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees and with appropriate landscaping and screening. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-58; LDC 1991, § 12-300; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-312. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District shall be used only for the following uses: 
(1)  Public service or utility: light; 
(2)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(3)  Cultural exhibits; 
(4)  Library services and community centers; 
(5)  Administrative and professional office; 
(6)  Alcoholic beverage retail sales; 
(7)  Animal sales and services: grooming; 
(8)  Animal sales and services: veterinary and kennel, restricted; 
(9)  Business support services; 
(10)  Child care center; 
(11)  Adult day care center; 
(12)  Convenience sales and services; 
(13)  Eating establishments: sit-down; 
(14)  Food and beverage retail sales; 
(15)  Funeral and interment services: undertaking; 
(16)  Health clubs; 
(17)  Medical services: restricted; 
(18)  Medical services: general; 
(19)  Personal services: restricted; 
(20)  Research services; 
(21)  Retail sales and services: general. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-59; LDC 1991, § 12-301; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-313. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District on review: 
(1)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(2)  Retail sales and services: restricted. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-302; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-314. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within a C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet; 
b.  No object shall be constructed that restricts the view within 15 feet of an edge of an existing or proposed street; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 20 feet on each side; 
b.  A zero lot line may be used if adjacent to another commercial area with a minimum firewall of at least two hours. This requirement is subject to approval of the fire chief; 
(3)  Intensity of use requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet; 
b.  The maximum lot size shall be 21/2 acres; 
c.  The maximum gross floor area of a neighborhood commercial center shall be 16,000 square feet; 
(4)  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 20 feet; 
(5)  No minimum lot width is required; 
(6)  Not more than 40 percent of the lot may be covered by buildings or other improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of these regulations; 
(7)  No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot; and 
(8)  A six-foot screening is required if adjacent to residential land use or residential zoning. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-60; LDC 1991, § 12-303; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 12. - C-3 General Commercial District 

Sec. 12-321. - General description. 
    This district is established for major retail and service activity removed from the central business district with major thoroughfare access and provided with adequate open space and parking. Outside storage is allowed as an incidental use only upon approval of the community development director. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-61; LDC 1991, § 12-310; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-322. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a C-3 General Commercial District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Public service or utility: light; 
(2)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(3)  Cultural exhibits; 
(4)  Library services and community centers; 
(5)  Community recreation: restricted; 
(6)  Community recreation: general; 
(7)  Administrative and professional office; 
(8)  Alcoholic beverage retail sales; 
(9)  Animal sales and services: grooming; 
(10)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, restricted; 
(11)  Automotive and equipment: light; 
(12)  Business support services; 
(13)  Child care center; 
(14)  Adult day care center; 
(15)  Construction sales and services: light; 
(16)  Convenience sales and services; 
(17)  Eating establishments: drive-in; 
(18)  Eating establishments: fast foods; 
(19)  Eating establishments: sit-down; 
(20)  Food and beverage retail sales; 
(21)  Food and beverage retail sales: temporary or seasonal; 
(22)  Funeral and interment services: undertaking; 
(23)  Gasoline sales: light; 
(24)  Health clubs; 
(25)  Medical services: restricted; 
(26)  Medical services: general; 
(27)  Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor; 
(28)  Personal services: restricted; 
(29)  Personal services: general; 
(30)  Repair sales and services: consumer; 
(31)  Research services; 
(32)  Retail sales and services: general; 
(33)  Spectator sports and entertainment: restricted; 
(34)  Spectator sports and entertainment: general; 
(35)  Tourist accommodations: lodging. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-62; LDC 1991, § 12-311; Ord. No. 442, 2-16-1988; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 64(93), 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 68(93), 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 176(96), 12-2-1996; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 539(06), § 1, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 558(06), § 1, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 12-323. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a C-3 General Commercial District on review: 
(1)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(2)  Moderate impact institutional; 
(3)  High impact institutional; 
(4)  Group care facility; 
(5)  Community-based care facility; 
(6)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, general; 
(7)  Communications services: limited tower operations; 
(8)  Drinking establishments: sit-down, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted; 
(9)  Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted; 
(10)  Personal storage; 
(11)  Retail sales and services: adult entertainment; 
(12)  Commercial parking; 
(13)  Transportation facilities: passenger; 
(14)  Retail sales and services: restricted; 
(15)  Construction sales and services: heavy. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-62; LDC 1991, § 12-312; Ord. No. 442, 2-16-1988; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 64(93), 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 68(93), 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 176(96), 12-2-1996; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 539(06), § 3, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 558(06), § 2, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 12-324. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within a C-3 General Commercial District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet; 
b.  No object shall be constructed that restricts the view within 15 feet of an edge of an existing or proposed street; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 25 feet on each side; 
b.  A zero lot line may be used if adjacent to another commercial area with a minimum firewall of at least two hours. This requirement is subject to approval of the fire chief; 
(3)  The minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet; 
(4)  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 20 feet; 
(5)  The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet; 
(6)  Not more than 50 percent of the lot may be covered by buildings or other improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of these regulations; 
(7)  When abutting any residential zoning or use, no improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot; 
(8)  When abutting a nonresidential zoning or use, additional height shall be permitted on a ratio of one additional foot of building setback from all property lines for each 11/2 additional foot of building height, with approval of the fire marshal. All current building and municipal codes shall apply; 
(9)  When located within the I-35 corridor as designated by the city comprehensive plan, and when not abutting residential zoning or use, there shall be no limitations on height, with approval of the fire marshal. All other applicable city codes shall apply; 
(10)  A six-foot screening is required if adjacent to residential land use or residential zoning. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-63; LDC 1991, § 12-313; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 593(07), § 1, 6-18-2007) 
Sec. 12-325. - Off-street parking. 
    The off-street parking requirements applicable to businesses in a C-3 General Commercial District shall be a permanent common off-street parking facility for all uses within the shopping center, provided that the lot contains the requisite number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements; provided, however, that in no case shall the amount of off-street parking area, including driveways required for ingress and egress and circulation, be less than 31/2 times the gross floor area used for retail trades in the shopping center. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-64; LDC 1991, § 12-314; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-326. - Shopping center development, administrative procedures. 
    An application for rezoning to C-3 for use as a general commercial district shall include the following, in addition to the administrative requirements set forth in these regulations: 
(1)  The developer shall submit site plans of the proposed development which shall be in adequate detail to determine compliance with the provisions of this section; and which shall show the arrangement of buildings, types of shops and stores, design and circulation pattern of the off-street parking area, landscaped yards, ornamental screening, service courts, and utility and drainage easements and facilities; and the relationship of the shopping center development to adjacent areas which it may affect; 
(2)  Evidence that indicates, to the satisfaction of the city council and planning commission, the ability and intent of the developer to carry out the development of the shopping center in accordance with plans submitted in accordance with subsection (1) of this section. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-65; LDC 1991, § 12-315; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 13. - C-4 Planned Shopping Center District 

Sec. 12-331. - General description. 
(a)  This district is intended for a unified grouping, in one or more buildings, of retail shops, stores and offices which are planned and developed as an operating unit and under single or multiple ownership. A development will typically contain such features as shared parking, driveways, and common facilities, adequate setbacks and landscaping, and sufficient on-site parking for customers and employees. Outdoor storage and display is not permitted. 
(b)  A site plan shall be developed in accordance with the city's landscaping and parking requirements. All required landscaping and parking shall be shown on the site plan. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-66; LDC 1991, § 12-320; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-332. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a C-4 Planned Shopping Center District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Public service or utility: light; 
(2)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(3)  Community recreation: restricted; 
(4)  Community recreation: general; 
(5)  Administrative and professional office; 
(6)  Alcoholic beverage retail sales; 
(7)  Animal sales and services: grooming; 
(8)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, restricted business; 
(9)  Business support services; 
(10)  Child care center; 
(11)  Adult day care center; 
(12)  Construction sales and services: light; 
(13)  Convenience sales and services; 
(14)  Eating establishments: drive-in; 
(15)  Eating establishments: fast foods; 
(16)  Eating establishments: sit-down; 
(17)  Food and beverage retail sales; 
(18)  Food and beverage retail sales: temporary or seasonal; 
(19)  Funeral and interment services: undertaking; 
(20)  Health clubs; 
(21)  Medical services: restricted; 
(22)  Medical services: general; 
(23)  Personal services: restricted; 
(24)  Personal services: general; 
(25)  Repair services: consumer; 
(26)  Research services; 
(27)  Retail sales and services: general; 
(28)  Spectator sports and entertainment: restricted; 
(29)  Spectator sports and entertainment: general. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-67; LDC 1991, § 12-321; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 543, 2-19-1991; Ord. No. 64(93), 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 68(93), 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 539(06), § 1, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 12-333. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a C-4 Planned Shopping Center District on review: 
(1)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(2)  Moderate impact institutional; 
(3)  Cultural exhibits; 
(4)  Library services and community centers; 
(5)  Drinking establishments: sit-down, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted; 
(6)  Gasoline sales: light; 
(7)  Retail sales and services: adult entertainment; 
(8)  Retail sales and services: restricted; 
(9)  Commercial parking; 
(10)  Transportation facilities: passenger. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-67; LDC 1991, § 12-322; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 543, 2-19-1991; Ord. No. 64(93), 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 68(93), 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-334. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within a C-4 Planned Shopping Center District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet; 
b.  No object shall be constructed that restricts the view within 15 feet of an edge of an existing or proposed street; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 20 feet; and 
b.  A zero lot line may be used if adjacent to another commercial area with a minimum firewall of at least two hours. This requirement is subject to approval of the fire chief; 
(3)  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 20 feet; 
(4)  The parcel of land on which a restricted commercial activity is located shall not be less than four acres; 
(5)  The minimum lot width shall 300 feet when measured at the front building line; 
(6)  Not more than 25 percent of the lot may be covered by buildings or other improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of these regulations; 
(7)  No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot; 
(8)  When abutting any residential zoning or use, no improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot; 
(9)  When abutting a nonresidential zoning or use, additional height shall be permitted on a ratio of one additional foot of building setback from all property lines for each 11/2 additional foot of building height, with approval of the fire marshal. All current building and municipal codes shall apply; 
(10)  When located within the I-35 corridor as designated by the city comprehensive plan, and when not abutting residential zoning or use, there shall be no limitations on height, with approval of the fire marshal. All other applicable city codes shall apply; and 
(11)  The property owner in C-4 zoning district shall be responsible for landscaping and maintaining the area within the street right-of-way line and the curbline. This area shall not be hard surfaced, other than a permitted driveway or sidewalk; it shall not be used for the location of any permanent or temporary accessory or non-accessory signs other than permitted accessory directional signs. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-68; LDC 1991, § 12-323; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 593(07), § 2, 6-18-2007) 
Sec. 12-335. - Off-street parking. 
    The off-street parking requirements applicable to business in a C-4 district shall be a common off-street parking facility for all of the uses within the shopping center, provided that the lot contains the requisite number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements; provided, however, that in no case shall the amount of off-street parking area, including driveways required for ingress and egress and circulation, be less than 31/2 times the gross floor area of the shopping center. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-69; LDC 1991, § 12-324; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-336. - Administrative procedures for shopping center development. 
    An application for rezoning to C-4 for use for a planned shopping center shall include the following, in addition to the administrative requirements set forth in these regulations: 
(1)  The developer shall submit the site plans of the proposed development which shall be in adequate detail to determine compliance with the provisions of this section, and which shall show the arrangement of buildings, types of shops and stores, design and circulation pattern of the off-street parking area, landscaped yards, ornamental screening, service courts, and utility and drainage easements and facilities; and the relationships of the shopping center development to adjacent areas which it may affect; and 
(2)  Evidence that indicates, to the satisfaction of the city council and planning commission, the ability and intent of the developer to carry out the development of the shopping center in accordance with the plans submitted. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-70; LDC 1991, § 12-325; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 14. - C-5 Automotive and Commercial Recreation District 

Sec. 12-341. - General description. 
    This district is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for establishments offering accommodations, supplies or services to motorists, and for certain specialized uses such as retail outlets, extensive commercial amusement and service establishments which serve the entire community but do not and should not necessarily locate in more restrictive commercial districts. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-71; LDC 1991, § 12-330; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-342. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a C-5 Automotive and Commercial Recreation District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Public service or utility: light; 
(2)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(3)  Low impact institutional: neighborhood related; 
(4)  Cultural exhibits; 
(5)  Community recreation: restricted; 
(6)  Community recreation: general; 
(7)  Agricultural sales and services; 
(8)  Automotive and equipment: light; 
(9)  Building maintenance services; 
(10)  Business support services; 
(11)  Construction sales and services: light; 
(12)  Construction sales and services: heavy; 
(13)  Eating establishments: drive-in; 
(14)  Food and beverage retail sales; 
(15)  Gasoline sales: light; 
(16)  Gasoline sales: general; 
(17)  Health clubs; 
(18)  Laundry services; 
(19)  Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor; 
(20)  Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted; 
(21)  Participant recreation and entertainment: outdoor; 
(22)  Personal services: general; 
(23)  Personal storage; 
(24)  Repair services: consumer; 
(25)  Retail sales and services: restricted; 
(26)  Retail sales and services: general; 
(27)  Spectator sports and entertainment: restricted; 
(28)  Spectator sports and entertainment: general; 
(29)  Tourist accommodations: lodging; 
(30)  Transportation facilities: passenger. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-72; LDC 1991, § 12-331; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 541, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 543, 2-19-1991; Ord. No. 68(93), 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 539(06), §§ 1, 2, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 662(09), 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 12-343. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a C-5 Automotive and Commercial Recreation District on review: 
(1)  Moderate impact institutional; 
(2)  Library services and community centers; 
(3)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, general; 
(4)  Automotive and equipment: heavy; 
(5)  Automotive and equipment: storage; 
(6)  Automotive sales and rentals: light; 
(7)  Automotive and equipment sales and rentals: heavy; 
(8)  Communication services: limited tower operations; 
(9)  Communication services: towers; 
(10)  Drinking establishments: sit-down, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted; 
(11)  Food and beverage retail sales: temporary or seasonal; 
(12)  Manufactured housing and travel trailers: sales and rentals; 
(13)  Retail sales and services: adult entertainment; 
(14)  Retail sales and services: outdoor swap meets; 
(15)  Spectator sports and entertainment: high impact; 
(16)  Commercial parking; 
(17)  Personal vehicle storage; 
(18)  Wholesaling, storage, and distribution: restricted. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-72; LDC 1991, § 12-332; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 541, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 543, 2-19-1991; Ord. No. 68(93), 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 662(09), 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 12-344. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within a C-5 Automotive and Commercial Recreation District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet; 
b.  No object shall be constructed that restricts the view within 15 feet of an edge of an existing or proposed street; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 25 feet; and 
b.  A zero lot line may be used if adjacent to another commercial area with a minimum firewall of at least two hours. This requirement is subject to approval of the fire chief; 
(3)  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 20 feet; 
(4)  The parcel of land on which a C-5 use is located shall be at least 12,000 square feet; 
(5)  The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet when measured at the front building line; 
(6)  Not more than 30 percent of the lot may be covered by buildings or other improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of these regulations; 
(7)  When abutting any residential zoning or use, no improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot; 
(8)  When abutting a nonresidential zoning or use, additional height shall be permitted on a ratio of one additional foot of building setback from all property lines for each 11/2 additional foot of building height, with approval of the fire marshal. All current building and municipal codes shall apply; 
(9)  When located within the I-35 corridor as designated by the city comprehensive plan, and when not abutting residential zoning or use, there shall be no limitations on height, with approval of the fire marshal. All other applicable city codes shall apply; and 
(10)  A six-foot screening, by ornamental walls, fences, or evergreen plants, is required if adjacent to residential land use or residential zonings. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-73; LDC 1991, § 12-333; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 593(07), § 3, 6-18-2007) 
Sec. 12-345. - Open display uses permitted. 
(a)  The following uses, even though not in an enclosed building, shall be permitted in the C-5 district, provided they comply with the additional provisions of this section: 
(1)  Automotive sales and rentals: light; 
(2)  Manufactured housing and travel trailers: sales and rentals; 
(3)  Retail sales and services: general. 
(b)  All open storage display of merchandise, material and equipment which are not completely assembled or which are not immediately and actively being offered for sale shall be so screened by ornamental fence or by permanent buildings so that it cannot be seen from a public street or be a person standing on ground level adjacent to the side or rear of the lot on which the open storage or display occurs, provided that such screening shall not be required to be in excess of seven feet in height. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-74; LDC 1991, § 12-334; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Division 15. - C-6 Central Business District 

Sec. 12-351. - General description. 
    This district is designed for the conduct of personal and business service and the general retail trade of the community. It is designed to accommodate a wide variety of commercial uses in the central business district or areas of mixed business enterprises. It will not normally be applied in the case of new commercial areas. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-75; LDC 1991, § 12-340; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-352. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in a C-6 Central Business District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Public service or utility: light; 
(2)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(3)  Community recreation: restricted; 
(4)  Community recreation: general; 
(5)  Cultural exhibits; 
(6)  Administrative and professional office; 
(7)  Alcoholic beverage retail sales; 
(8)  Animal sales and services: grooming; 
(9)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, restricted; 
(10)  Automotive and equipment: light; 
(11)  Business support services; 
(12)  Child care center; 
(13)  Adult day care center; 
(14)  Construction sales and services: light; 
(15)  Convenience sales and services; 
(16)  Eating establishments: fast foods; 
(17)  Eating establishments: sit-down; 
(18)  Food and beverage retail sales; 
(19)  Funeral and interment services: undertaking; 
(20)  Gasoline sales: light; 
(21)  Gasoline sales: general; 
(22)  Health clubs; 
(23)  Laundry services; 
(24)  Medical services: restricted; 
(25)  Medical services: general; 
(26)  Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor; 
(27)  Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted; 
(28)  Personal services: restricted; 
(29)  Personal services: general; 
(30)  Repair services: consumer; 
(31)  Research services; 
(32)  Retail sales and services: restricted; 
(33)  Retail sales and services: general; 
(34)  Spectator sports and entertainment: restricted; 
(35)  Spectator sports and entertainment: general; 
(36)  Commercial parking; 
(37)  Transportation facilities: passenger. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-76; LDC 1991, § 12-341; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 68(93), 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 539(06), § 1, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 12-353. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in a C-6 Central Business District on review: 
(1)  Moderate impact institutional; 
(2)  Library services and community centers; 
(3)  Community recreation: restricted; 
(4)  Agricultural supplies and services; 
(5)  Automotive sales and rentals: light; 
(6)  Automotive and equipment: storage; 
(7)  Building maintenance services; 
(8)  Communication services: limited tower operations; 
(9)  Communication services: towers; 
(10)  Drinking establishments: sit-down, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted; 
(11)  Eating establishments: drive-in; 
(12)  Food and beverage retail sales: temporary or seasonal; 
(13)  Retail sales and services: adult entertainment; 
(14)  Tourist accommodations: lodging; 
(15)  Personal vehicle storage; 
(16)  Custom manufacturing; 
(17)  Wholesaling, storage and distribution: restricted; 
(18)  Construction sales and services: heavy. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-76; LDC 1991, § 12-342; Ord. No. 538, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 68(93), 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-354. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within a C-6 Central Business District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  There are no specific yard setback requirements; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 25 feet; and 
b.  A zero lot line may be used if adjacent to another commercial area with a minimum firewall of at least two hours. This requirement is subject to approval of the fire chief; 
(3)  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 25 feet; 
(4)  There are no minimum or maximum requirements or regulations on intensity of use, lot width or coverage; 
(5)  When abutting any residential zoning or use, no improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot; 
(6)  When abutting a nonresidential zoning or use, additional height shall be permitted on a ratio of one additional foot of building setback from all property lines for each 11/2 additional foot of building height, with approval of the fire marshal. All current building and municipal codes shall apply; 
(7)  When located within the I-35 corridor as designated by the city comprehensive plan, and when not abutting residential zoning or use, there shall be no limitations on height, with approval of the fire marshal. All other applicable city codes shall apply; 
(8)  No screening is required for any use in a C-6 zone; 
(9)  All buildings and improvements in a C-6 zone must comply with the city's building and fire code requirements for fire prevention; and 
(10)  The property owner in C-6 zoning districts shall be responsible for landscaping and maintaining the area within the street right-of-way line and the curbline. This area shall not be hard surfaced, other than a permitted driveway or sidewalk; it shall not be used for parking; and it shall not be used for the location of any permanent or temporary accessory or non-accessory signs other than permitted accessory signs. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-77; LDC 1991, § 12-343; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 593(07), § 4, 6-18-2007) 
Division 16. - I-1 Light Industrial District 

Sec. 12-361. - General description. 
    This district is intended primarily for manufacturing and assembly plants and warehousing that are conducted so that noise, odor, dust and glare of each operation is completely confined within an enclosed building. These industries may require direct access to rail, air or street transportation facilities; however, the size and volume of the raw materials and finished products involved should not produce the volume of freight generated by the uses of the light and heavy industrial districts. Buildings in this district should be architecturally attractive and surrounded by landscaped yards. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-78; LDC 1991, § 12-350; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-362. - Uses permitted. 
(a)  Property and buildings in an I-1 Light Industrial District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Public service or utility: light; 
(2)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(3)  Administrative and professional office; 
(4)  Agricultural supplies and services; 
(5)  Alcoholic beverage retail sales; 
(6)  Animal sales and services: grooming; 
(7)  Animal sales and services: kennels and veterinary, restricted; 
(8)  Automotive and equipment: light; 
(9)  Business support services; 
(10)  Construction sales and services: light; 
(11)  Convenience sales and services; 
(12)  Gasoline sales: light; 
(13)  Gasoline sales: general; 
(14)  Health clubs; 
(15)  Laundry services; 
(16)  Medical services: restricted; 
(17)  Medical services: general; 
(18)  Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor; 
(19)  Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted; 
(20)  Personal services: general; 
(21)  Personal storage; 
(22)  Repair services: consumer; 
(23)  Research services; 
(24)  Commercial parking; 
(25)  Custom manufacturing; 
(26)  Light industrial: restricted; 
(27)  Light industrial; 
(28)  Wholesaling, storage and distribution: restricted; 
(29)  Transportation facilities: passenger. 
(b)  All of the uses permitted under this section shall have their primary operation conducted entirely within enclosed buildings and shall not emit any dust or smoke, or noxious odor or fumes outside of the building housing the operation, or produce a noise level at the property line that is greater than the average noise level occurring on the adjacent street. Any article or material stored temporarily outside of an enclosed building as an incidental part of the primary operation shall be so screened by ornamental walls and fences or evergreen plants that is at least six feet high. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-79; LDC 1991, § 12-351; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 539(06), § 1, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 12-363. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in an I-1 Light Industrial District on review: 
(1)  Automotive and equipment sales and services: heavy; 
(2)  Automotive and equipment: storage; 
(3)  Communication services: limited tower operations; 
(4)  Communication services: towers; 
(5)  Food and beverage retail sales: temporary or seasonal; 
(6)  Eating establishments: fast foods; 
(7)  Eating establishments: sit-down; 
(8)  Personal vehicle storage; 
(9)  Transportation facilities: aircraft; 
(10)  Mining and processing: oil and gas; 
(12)  Construction sales and services: heavy. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-79; LDC 1991, § 12-352; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 539(06), § 3, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 12-364. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within an I-1 Light Industrial District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet; 
(2)  Side yard setbacks are as follows: 
a.  The minimum depth of a side yard shall be 25 feet; and 
b.  A zero lot line may be used if adjacent to another industrial area with a minimum exterior wall rating of two hours. This requirement shall be subject to approval of the fire chief, or his designee. At no time shall rear access be obstructed by permanent structures; 
(3)  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 25 feet; 
(4)  There shall be no regulation on the lot width; 
(5)  Not more than 80 percent of the lot shall be covered by improvements. Off-street parking and loading facilities are considered improvements in an I-1 Light Industrial District; 
(6)  When abutting any residential zoning or use, no improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot; 
(7)  When abutting a nonresidential zoning or use, additional height shall be permitted on a ratio of one additional foot of building setback from all property lines for each 11/2 additional foot of building height, with approval of the fire marshal. All current building and municipal codes shall apply; 
(8)  When located within the I-35 corridor as designated by the city comprehensive plan, and when not abutting residential zoning or use, there shall be no limitations on height, with approval of the fire marshal. All other applicable city codes shall apply; and 
(9)  A six-foot screening by ornamental walls, fences or evergreen plants is required if adjacent to residential land use or residential zoning. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-80; LDC 1991, § 12-353; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 340(01), 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 593(07), § 5, 6-18-2007) 
Division 17. - I-2 Medium Industrial District 

Sec. 12-371. - General description. 
    This district is intended primarily for the conduct of manufacturing, assembling and fabrication. These uses do not depend primarily on frequent personal visits of customers or clients, but usually require good accessibility to major rail, air or street transportation facilities. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-81; LDC 1991, § 12-360; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-372. - Uses permitted. 
(a)  Property and buildings in an I-2 Medium Industrial District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Agricultural processing: limited; 
(2)  Public service or utility: light; 
(3)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(4)  Agricultural supplies and services; 
(5)  Automotive and equipment: light; 
(6)  Automotive and equipment: heavy; 
(7)  Automotive and equipment sales and rentals: heavy; 
(8)  Automotive and equipment: storage; 
(9)  Building maintenance services; 
(10)  Business support services; 
(11)  Construction sales and services: light; 
(12)  Construction sales and services: heavy; 
(12)  Gasoline sales: general; 
(13)  Laundry services; 
(14)  Personal storage; 
(15)  Custom manufacturing; 
(16)  Light industrial: restricted; 
(17)  Light industrial; 
(18)  Moderate industrial; 
(19)  Wholesaling, storage and distribution: restricted; 
(20)  Wholesaling, storage and distribution: general; 
(21)  Transportation facilities: passenger; 
(22)  Transportation facilities: freight, restricted; 
(23)  Transportation facilities: freight, general. 
(b)  The uses permitted under this section shall be conducted in such a manner that no noxious odor, fumes, or dust will be emitted beyond the property line of the lot on which the use is located. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-82; LDC 1991, § 12-361; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 541, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 27(92), 6-15-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 539(06), §§ 1, 2, 6-5-2006) 
Sec. 12-373. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in an I-2 Medium Industrial District on review: 
(1)  Animal raising: commercial; 
(2)  Communication services: towers; 
(3)  Transportation facilities: aircraft; 
(4)  Mining and processing: oil and gas. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-82; LDC 1991, § 12-362; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 541, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 27(92), 6-15-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-374. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within an I-2 Medium Industrial District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet; 
(2)  The minimum depth of the side yard shall be 25 feet; 
(3)  The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 25 feet; 
(4)  There shall be no regulation on the lot width; 
(5)  Not more than 80 percent of the lot shall be covered by improvements. Off-street parking and loading facilities are considered improvements in an I-2 Medium Industrial District; 
(6)  When abutting any residential zoning or use, no improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot; 
(7)  When abutting a nonresidential zoning or use, additional height shall be permitted on a ratio of one additional foot of building setback from all property lines for each 11/2 additional foot of building height, with approval of the fire marshal. All current building and municipal codes shall apply; 
(8)  When located within the I-35 corridor as designated by the city comprehensive plan, and when not abutting residential zoning or use, there shall be no limitations on height, with approval of the fire marshal. All other applicable city codes shall apply; and 
(9)  A six-foot screening by ornamental walls, fences or evergreen plants is required if adjacent to residential land use or residential zoning. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-83; LDC 1991, § 12-363; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 593(07), § 6, 6-18-2007) 
Division 18. - I-3 Heavy Industrial District 

Sec. 12-381. - General description. 
    This district is intended to provide for heavy industrial uses not otherwise provided for in the districts established by these regulations. The intensity of uses permitted in this district makes it most desirable that they be located down wind and separated from commercial and residential uses. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-84; LDC 1991, § 12-370; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-382. - Uses permitted. 
    Property and buildings in an I-3 Heavy Industrial District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Agricultural processing: limited; 
(2)  Agricultural processing: general; 
(3)  Animal waste processing; 
(4)  Public service or utility: light; 
(5)  Public service or utility: moderate; 
(6)  Administrative and professional offices; 
(7)  Agricultural supplies and services; 
(8)  Animal sales and services: auctioning; 
(9)  Automotive and equipment: heavy; 
(10)  Automotive and equipment sales and rentals: heavy; 
(11)  Automotive and equipment: storage; 
(12)  Building maintenance services; 
(13)  Business support services; 
(14)  Communications services: limited tower operations; 
(15)  Gasoline sales: general; 
(16)  Laundry services; 
(17)  Spectator sports and entertainment: high impact; 
(18)  Custom manufacturing; 
(19)  Light industrial: restricted; 
(20)  Light industrial; 
(21)  Moderate industrial; 
(22)  Heavy industrial; 
(23)  Wholesaling, storage and distribution: restricted; 
(24)  Wholesaling, storage and distribution: general; 
(25)  Transportation facilities: passenger; 
(26)  Transportation facilities: freight, restricted; 
(27)  Transportation facilities, freight, general. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-85; LDC 1991, § 12-371; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-383. - Uses permitted on review. 
    The following uses may be permitted in an I-3 Heavy Industrial District only on review by the planning commission: 
(1)  Animal raising: commercial; 
(2)  Public service or utility: heavy; 
(3)  Sanitary landfill; 
(4)  Hazardous waste disposal; 
(5)  Communications services: towers; 
(6)  Hazardous industrial; 
(7)  Scrap operations; 
(8)  Transportation facilities: aircraft; 
(9)  Mining and processing: mineral and raw materials; 
(10)  Mining and processing: oil and gas. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-86; LDC 1991, § 12-372; Ord. No. 445, 4-4-1988; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-384. - Area and height regulations. 
    All lots and improvements within an I-3 Heavy Industrial District shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet; 
(2)  Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  If adjacent to a residentially zoned or residentially used area, the minimum depth of the side yard shall be 100 feet; and 
b.  If adjacent to any other land use, the minimum depth of the side yard shall be 25 feet; 
(3)  Rear yard requirements are as follows: 
a.  If adjacent to a residentially zoned or residentially used area, the minimum depth of the side yard shall be 100 feet; and 
b.  If adjacent to any other land use, the minimum depth of the side yard shall be 25 feet; 
(4)  There shall be no regulation on the lot width; 
(5)  There shall be no regulation on intensity of use; 
(6)  Not more than 80 percent of the lot shall be covered by improvements. Off-street parking and loading facilities are considered improvements in an I-3 Heavy Industrial District; 
(7)  When abutting any residential zoning or use, no improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot; 
(8)  When abutting a nonresidential zoning or use, additional height shall be permitted on a ratio of one additional foot of building setback from all property lines for each 11/2 additional foot of building height, with approval of the fire marshal. All current building and municipal codes shall apply; 
(9)  When located within the I-35 corridor as designated by the city comprehensive plan, and when not abutting residential zoning or use, there shall be no limitations on height, with approval of the fire marshal. All other applicable city codes shall apply; and 
(10)  A six-foot screening by ornamental walls, fences or evergreen plants is required if adjacent to residential land use or residential zoning. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-87; LDC 1991, § 12-373; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 593(07), § 7, 6-18-2007) 
ARTICLE C. - GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLYING TO ALL OR TO SEVERAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 12-391. - Application of regulations to the uses of a more restricted district. 
    Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit the uses of a more restricted district, such uses shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district, unless otherwise specified. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-88; LDC 1991, § 12-380; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-392. - Uses permitted. 
    It is intended that these regulations be interpreted as not permitting a dwelling unit to be located on the same lot with or within a structure used or intended to be used primarily for nonresidential purposes. However, this section does not apply to C-3 General Commercial District zoning, so long as the dwelling unit meets all building codes of the city and all ordinances of the city are complied with, and the residential use is secondary to the nonresidential use. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-89; LDC 1991, § 12-381; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-393. - Uses permitted on review. 
    Any use permitted on review in any zoning district by the planning commission of the city may be reopened after the use permitted has ceased or been discontinued 180 days or less without having to apply for and secure permission from the planning commission for any use authorized in any zoning district according to the city's zoning regulations. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-382; Ord. No. 431, 4-6-1987; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-394. - Open space. 
(a)  The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set forth in the foregoing divisions: 
(1)  An open space or lot area required for an existing building or structure shall not be counted as open space for any other building or structure; 
(2)  Open eaves, cornices, windowsills, and belt courses may project into any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet. Open uncovered porches or open fire escapes may project into a front yard or rear yard a distance not to exceed five feet. Fences, walls or hedges in residential districts may be erected in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, provided that no fence, wall or hedge located in front of the building line shall exceed four feet in height and no other wall or fence shall exceed seven feet in height. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences, pools and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(b)  Where the dedicated street right-of-way is less than 50 feet, the front yard depth shall be determined by measuring from a point 50 feet back from the centerline of the street easement. 
(c)  No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least one street, at least 50 feet in width, for at least 35 feet. A street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means of ingress and egress. A garage apartment may be built to the rear of a main dwelling if there is compliance with all other provisions of these regulations. 
(d)  No minimum lot sizes and open spaces are prescribed for some commercial and industrial uses. It is the intent of these regulations that lots of sufficient size be used by any business or industry to provide adequate parking and loading and unloading space required for operation of the enterprise. 
(e)  On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, structure or any plant growth which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two feet, six inches and four feet above any portion of the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be maintained in a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of 25 feet along the front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a right triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection. 
(f)  An attached or detached private garage which faces on a street shall not be located closer than 20 feet to the street easement line. 
(g)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced and no accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also being used. 
(h)  Whenever one or more residential, institutional, commercial or industrial buildings are proposed to be located in a cluster or grouping which has a different arrangement, orientation or other site planning variation from that of other buildings, structures, or uses in the area or on buildings shall be planned so as not to adversely affect the use of adjacent or other properties in the area, as determined by the planning commission. 
(i)  No fence shall be erected on any lot within a R-1 or R-2 zoning district until the construction of the primary structure has commenced on that same lot, unless the lot can be legally combined as part of an adjacent lot fronting the same street. Approval from the community development director is required for fences located on vacant lots in the R-1 and R-2 zoning districts. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-90; LDC 1991, § 12-383; Ord. No. 189, 6-2-1997; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 302(00), 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 12-395. - Height. 
    The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set forth herein: 
(1)  Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers and other projections not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit; and 
(2)  Churches, schools, hospitals, sanitariums and other public and semi-public buildings may exceed the height limitation of the district if the minimum depth of rear yards and the minimum width of one side yard's requirements in the district are increased one foot for each two feet by which the height of such public or semi-public structures exceeds the prescribed height limit. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-91; LDC 1991, § 12-384; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-396. - Architectural design of accessory buildings and fences. 
(a)  The architectural design and materials used for the construction of accessory buildings and fences shall harmonize with the main building to which the building or fence is accessory. 
(1)  The following restrictions shall apply to accessory buildings in residentially zoned or residentially used lots under three-quarter-acre in size: 
a.  The maximum square footage of all accessory buildings, either permanent or temporary, on a residential lot under three-quarter-acre in size shall not exceed 600 square feet; 
b.  The maximum number of accessory buildings, either permanent or temporary, on any lot shall not exceed a total of three; 
c.  No accessory building, either permanent or temporary, shall exceed ten feet in wall height as measured from ground level to the top of the side wall fascia, and shall not exceed an overall height of 15 feet when measured from ground level to the roof ridge; 
d.  If a permanent accessory building is constructed on the front or side building line that is visible from the street, at least 50 percent of the facade facing the street shall be covered with brick or rock veneer, or other material approved by the community development director satisfying the intent of this section, to match or complement the existing architectural design of the main structure, excluding doors and windows. 
(2)  Steel shipping containers shall not be used as a permanent or temporary accessory building within any residential zoning district. Steel shipping containers consist primarily of a steel exterior and are manufactured to transport goods. 
(3)  Any officer or employee of this city who discovers or receives a report of a noncomplying building, shall report such conditions to the community development director or designee. 
(4)  The community development director or designee may cause noncomplying buildings within the city limits to be torn down or removed, in accordance with the following procedure: 
a.  At least ten days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property before the city takes action or holds a hearing as provided herein. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to be affected. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent by mail to the property owner at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to any mortgage holder as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk to the last-known address of the mortgagee. At the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property, or by publication, as defined by 11 O.S. § 1-102. Such notice may be published once not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action to be taken pursuant to this section; 
b.  A hearing shall be held by the community development director or designee to determine whether the building is in compliance with the regulations of this section; 
c.  If the community development director or designee finds that the building is not in compliance, the community development director or designee may cause the building to be torn down and removed, and shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement and completion of the work. The city clerk shall immediately file a notice of lien with the county clerk describing the property, the findings of the community development director or designee at the hearing, and stating that the city claims a lien on the property for the destruction and removal costs and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date if filing of the notice; 
d.  The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the city council from an order of the community development director or designee, and as provided by law. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within ten days after the administrative order is rendered. 
(5)  If the work is not performed by the property owner within the dates fixed by the community development director or designee, the community development director or designee shall direct the tearing down and removal be done by one of the following methods: 
a.  By the city; 
b.  On a private contract basis, in which case it shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. 
(6)  After the building has been torn down and removed, the community development director or designee shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of buildings and any other expenses as may be necessary in conjunction therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The city clerk shall forward a statement of such actual cost attributable to the dismantling and removal and a demand for payment by mail to the property owner at the address specified in this section. In addition, a copy of the statement shall be mailed of the statement costs to any property owner or mortgage holder; the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. 
(7)  If payment is not made within six months from the date of the mailing of the statement, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the county treasurer of the county in which property is located. The city shall have a lien on the property for such costs, together with interest thereon, and the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid as provided by law. 
(8)  When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city shall file a release of lien or part thereof. 
(9)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes. 
(b)  The term "sight-proof or screening fence" is intended to denote a fence of a permanent nature which begins at the level of the ground and extends to such height that it cannot be seen by a person standing at ground level at any place immediately adjacent to the lot which the fence surrounds, provided that the fence shall not be required to be in excess of seven feet in height, except salvage yards which shall be eight feet in height. All such fences shall be kept painted and in good repair and appearance at all times. The following types of construction shall qualify as sight-proof or screening fences: 
(1)  Masonry construction. Masonry fences shall require a concrete footing. There shall be no openings in a masonry fence, including decorative blocks, of more than three-eighths inches in width; 
(2)  Metal fences. All posts for metal fences will be metal and set in concrete. There shall be no openings of more than three-eighths inches in width. Colors shall be in keeping with the surroundings; 
(3)  Wood fences. All posts for wooden fences shall be metal or wooden and set in concrete. There shall be no openings of more than three-eighths inches in width, and the material shall be of conventional fence type material, such as redwood, stockade, etc.; 
(4)  Gates and entrances. All gates and entrances shall correspond to the fence and shall be sight-proof; and 
(5)  Shrubbery. Shrubbery may supplement, but not take the place of, sight-proof fencing. 
(c)  Private swimming pools may be constructed as an accessory use, but shall be completely enclosed by a permanent wall or fence not less than four feet in height, and shall meet the requirements set out in the building code. 
(d)  Every salvage yard or junkyard or salvage storage yard within the city shall be enclosed by a sight-proof fence which shall be kept painted and in good repair and appearance at all times. Salvage yards or junkyards now existing as nonconforming uses and all other salvage yards and junkyards within the city shall comply with the terms of these regulations within six months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-93; LDC 1991, § 12-386; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 428(03), 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 743(13), 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 12-397. - Animals. 
    Animals in any district shall be kept only in accordance with the ordinances of the city. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-94; LDC 1991, § 12-387; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-398. - Storage of liquefied petroleum gases and flammable liquids. 
    The use of land or buildings for the commercial wholesale or retail storage of liquefied petroleum gases and flammable liquids shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the city and the regulations of the liquefied petroleum administration of the state. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-95; LDC 1991, § 12-388; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-399. - Trailer park regulations. 
    Travel trailer parks and manufactured home parks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the city. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-96; LDC 1991, § 12-389; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-400. - Parking requirements. 
(a)  These regulations provide that adequate parking, loading, and maneuvering facilities will be a part of all land uses within the city. These regulations establish standards and review procedures intended to ensure that the demand created by each land use will be satisfied by facilities that are functionally adequate and aesthetically pleasing. 
(b)  Off-street parking or loading space shall be a part of the required open space associated with the permitted use and shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(c)  Permanent off-street parking and area in the amount specified by this section for each use shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased, in the amount required for the enlargement or increase in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats, or floor area; or before conversion from one type of use or occupancy to another. 
(d)  Use of right-of-way prohibited. 
(1)  No portion of any required off-street space shall occupy or use any public street, right-of-way, alley, or other public property. 
(2)  Parking spaces which use any street or public right-of-way as a direct means of access without the intermediate use of service aisles and entrances of at least the minimum standards specified by this section shall be prohibited. A public alley shall not be the only public right-of-way area permitted for maneuvering space to reach a required parking stall. 
(e)  The off-street parking lot shall be located within 200 feet, exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal land use. 
(f)  Whenever two or more uses are located together in a common building, shopping center, or other integrated building complex, the parking requirements may be complied with by providing a permanent common parking facility, cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements. Spaces provided for permanent residents of dwellings shall be clearly designated and separated from spaces provided for employees, customers and service. 
(g)  The land upon which the off-street parking is located shall be owned or controlled by the same entity which owns or controls the land on which the principal use is located. 
(h)  A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet in width and at least 18 feet in length exclusive of access drives or aisles, and conform to the following: 
(1)  All maneuvering, except parallel parking, shall be designed so that a vehicle may enter an off-street parking space in one forward motion and may exit in one reverse and one forward motion; 
(2)  Circulation within a parking area shall be designed so that a car entering the parking area need not enter a street to reach another aisle; 
(3)  All required parking spaces shall be clearly outlined on the surface of the lot with paint or other easily distinguishable material; 
(4)  Handicapped parking shall conform to all requirements of this Code and A.N.S.I. Code; 
(5)  Minimum one-way service aisles shall be 14 feet wide. Minimum two-way service shall be 24 feet wide. 
(i)  On any corner lot formed by two intersecting streets, no parking shall be permitted, and no wall, fence, sign, structure or plant growth shall have a height in excess of three feet above the elevation of the crown of the adjacent roadway. Surface shall be maintained in a triangle formed by measuring a distance of 30 feet along the said front and side lot lines, from their point of intersection, and connecting the points so established to form a triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection. 
(j)  Handicapped parking. 
(1)  Parking spaces for vehicles with handicapped drivers shall be per the following Table 1: 
Table 1 
Total Parking in Lot Required Number of Accessible Spaces Up to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2% of total Over 1,000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000  
(2)  The size of a parking space for vehicles with handicapped drivers shall be a minimum of 121/2 feet by 18 feet. 
(k)  Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in all districts in accordance with the schedule found in Table 2. For any use not accounted for in the table, the community development director shall make a determination of the parking demand to be created by the proposed use, and the amount of parking this determined shall be the off-street parking requirements for the permitted use. This decision can be appealed to the planning commission. 
Table 2 
Agriculture Use Unit Classifications Agricultural processing: limited Director approval Agricultural processing: general Director approval Animal raising: personal Director approval Animal raising: commercial Director approval Animal waste processing: limited Director approval Horticulture See Table 3, retail, for building area(exclusive of greenhouse); for greenhouse,see Table 3, warehouse Row and field crops Director approval Residential Use Unit Classifications Single-family detached residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit Two-family attached residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit Townhouse 2 spaces per dwelling unit Multifamily residential:   Efficiency and one bedroom 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit   Two or more bedrooms 2 spaces per dwelling unit Manufactured home residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit Group residential Director approval Public and Quasi-Public Use Unit Classifications Public service or utility: light Director approval Public service or utility: moderate Director approval Public service or utility: heavy Director approval Sanitary landfill Director approval Hazardous waste disposal Director approval Low impact institutional: neighborhood related:   Elementary school 1 space per 10 classroom seats   Churches, temples, synagogues 1 space per 3 seats in the major place of assembly Moderate impact institutional:   Junior high schools 1 space per 10 classroom seats   High schools 1 space per 4 classroom seats   Fraternal organizations 1 space per 100 square feet of floor area used for assemble or recreation High impact institutional:   General college and university 1 space per 4 classroom seats   Vocational schools 1 space per 2 classroom seats   Hospitals and sanitariums 2 spaces per bed plus 1 space per 500 square GFA of emergency room and outpatient care (where such care is specifically provided) Cultural exhibits 1 space per 400 square feet of GFA Library services and community centers:   Libraries 1 space per 300 square feet of GFA   Community centers 1 space per 300 square feet of GFA Community recreation: restricted:   Golf course 5 spaces per green plus 1 space per 200 square feet GFA of public building area   Swim centers 1 space per 150 square feet of pool surface area and accessory area   Game courts: tennis, squash, racquetball, handball 5 spaces per court   Playgrounds, playfield, public park Director approval Community recreation: general:   Golf courses 5 spaces per green   Clubhouses 1 space per 100 square feet GFA   Swim centers 1 space per 150 square feet of pool area   Game courts: tennis, squash, racquetball, handball 5 spaces per court   Playgrounds, playfield, marina, boat dock, public park Director approval Group care facility Director approval Community-based care facility Director approval Commercial Use Unit Classifications Administrative and professional office See Table 3, office Agricultural supplies and services See Table 3, retail Alcoholic beverage sales See Table 3, retail Animal sales and services: auctioning See Table 3, retail Animal sales and services: grooming See Table 3, retail Animal sales and services: horse stables Director approval Animal and sales and services: kennels and veterinary sales, restricted See Table 3, retail Animal and sales and services: kennels and veterinary sales, general See Table 3, retail Automotive and equipment: light 1 space per 150 square feet GFA: 5 spaces minimum (interior bays may be counted toward meeting this requirement) Automotive and equipment: heavy 1 space per 150 square feet GFA: 5 spaces minimum (interior bays may be counted toward meeting this requirement) Automotive sales and rentals: light:   For showroom area See Table 3, retail   For outside lot 1 space per 5,000 square feet   For service area and body shop See Automotive and equipment: light Automotive and equipment sales and rentals: heavy:   For showroom area See Table 3, retail   For outside lot 1 space per 5,000 square feet   For service area and body shop See Automotive and equipment: heavy Automotive and equipment: storage Director approval Building maintenance service See Table 3, retail Business support services See Table 3, office Child care center 1 space per 10 children enrolled plus 1 space per 2 employees and 1 space per vehicle used in the operation or the center Adult day care center A base of 3 parking spaces for staff plus 2 spaces for the first 8 participants, plus an additional 1 space for each additional 8 participants over the first shall be required Communications services: limited tower operations See Table 3, office Communications services: towers Not applicable Construction sales and services:   For showroom area See Table 3, office   For outside lot See Table 3, warehousing (substitute lot area for GFA) Convenience sales and services See Table 3, retail Drinking establishments: sit-down, alcoholic beverages and lot-point beer permitted A minimum of 12 spaces plus 1 space per 100 square feet GFA Eating establishments: drive-in A minimum of 12 spaces plus 1 space per 100 square feet GFA, excluding cold storage Eating establishments: fast foods A minimum of 12 spaces plus 1 space per 100 square feet GFA, excluding cold storage Eating establishments: sit-down 1 space per 100 square feet GFA Food and beverage retail sales See Table 3, retail Food and beverage retail sales: temporary or seasonal Director approval Funeral and interment services: animal 1 space per 4 seats in chapel and 1 space per 300 square feet of nonassembly area within building Funeral and interment services: burial 1 space per 4 seats in chapel and 1 space per 300 square feet of nonassembly area within building Funeral and interment services: undertaking 1 space per 4 seats in chapel and 1 space per 300 square feet of nonassembly area within building Gasoline sales: light See Table 3, retail (for spaces in addition to adequate queuing and access space) Gasoline sales: general Director approval Health clubs See Table 3, retail Laundry services See Table 3, retail Manufactured housing and trailers: sales and rentals:   For showroom area See Table 3, retail   For outside lot See Table 3, warehousing (substitute lot area for GFA)   For service area and body shop See Table 3, industrial and manufacturing Medical services: restricted The greater of either 7 spaces per doctor on duty and 2 spaces per 3 employees or that which is required in Table 3, offices Medical services: general The greater of either 7 spaces per doctor on duty and 2 spaces per 3 employees or that which is required in Table 3, retail Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor:   Bowling alleys 5 spaces per lane   Billiard parlors See Table 3, retail   Dance halls 1 space per 50 square feet of club area and 1 space per 100 square feet of remaining GFA   Skating rinks Director approval   Arcades See Table 3, retail   Theatres 1 space per 3 seats Participant recreation and entertainment: indoor, alcoholic beverages and low-point beer permitted:   Bowling alleys 5 spaces per lane   Billiard parlors See Table 3, retail   Dance halls 1 space per 50 square feet of club area and 1 space per 100 square feet of remaining GFA   Skating rinks Director approval   Arcades See Table 3, retail   Theatres 1 space per 3 seats Participant recreation and entertainment: outdoor Director approval Personal services: restricted See Table 3, office Personal services: general See Table 3, office Personal storage 1 space per 5,000 square feet of storage area Repair services: consumer See Table 3, retail Research services See Table 3, office Retail sales and services: general See Table 3, retail Retail sales and services: adult entertainment See Table 3, retail Retail sales and services: outdoor swap meets Director approval Spectator sports and entertainment: restricted Director approval Spectator sports and entertainment: general Director approval Spectator sports and entertainment: high impact Director approval Tourist accommodations: campgrounds Director approval Tourist accommodations: lodgings 1 space per rental plus 1 space per 200 square feet GFA of restaurant area (including kitchen) plus 1 space per 100 square feet GFA of club area (excluding office and meeting rooms) plus 1 space per 200 square feet for any retail area Industrial Use Unit Classifications Custom manufacturing See Table 3, manufacturing and industrial Light industrial: restricted See Table 3, manufacturing and industrial Light industrial See Table 3, manufacturing and industrial Moderate industrial See Table 3, manufacturing and industrial Heavy industrial See Table 3, manufacturing and industrial Hazardous industrial See Table 3, manufacturing and industrial Scrap operations 1 space per 15,000 square feet of outdoor storage area Wholesaling, storage and distribution: restricted See Table 3, warehousing Wholesaling, storage and distribution: general See Table 3, warehousing (substitute total site area for GFA) Transportation Use Unit Classifications Transportation facilities: passenger Director approval Transportation facilities: freight, restricted See Table 3, warehouse plus supplementary parking for tractors and trailers as needed Transportation facilities: freight, general Director approval Transportation facilities: aircraft Director approval Extractive Use Unit Classifications Mining and processing: mineral and raw materials 3 spaces per employee on largest shift Mining and processing: oil and gas 3 spaces per employee on largest shift  
Table 3 
Retail For the First 5,000 sq. ft. GLA From 5,001-12,000 sq. ft. GLA From 12,001-30,000 sq. ft. GLA From30,001-50,000 sq. ft. GLA Over 50,000 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/150 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/200 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/225 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/250 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/300 sq. ft. GLA Office For the first 12,000 sq. ft. GLA From 12,001-48,000 sq. ft. GLA Over 48,000 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/250 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/300 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/350 sq. ft. GLA Manufacturing and Industrial For the first 20,000 sq. ft. GLA Over 20,000 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/500 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/1,000 sq. ft. GLA Warehousing For the first 20,000 sq. ft. GLA Over 20,000 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/1,000 sq. ft. GFA 1 space/5,000 sq. ft. GFA  
Notes for Table 3: 
GLA = Gross Leasable Area. 
GFA = Gross Floor Area. 
1.  For mixed uses containing any combination of retail, office, manufacturing and industrial, or warehousing activity, parking requirements shall be tabulated separately for each use within the development using the list of specific standards or Table 3. When types of uses are not known at the time of development, then the director shall make the determination as to the type of parking (i.e., retail) which will be required. Mixed uses regulated under separate parking requirements shall not be combined to achieve a larger square footage total that would result in a reduced parking requirement. Where any part of a mixed use is converted to another use category then the parking requirements shall be recalculated based on the new square footage. 
2.  Where a manufacturing and industrial use has more than one working shift of employees, parking facilities shall be adequate to accommodate overlap requirements during transition periods. 
3.  Where a multiple purpose retail or industrial building is proposed to be occupied by a use which can be demonstrated by the occupant to require less parking than the standards contained herein, the director may permit paving of a smaller parking area to meet the estimated need; provided, however, that the balance of the land required by these regulations shall be held in reserve as an unpaved area to meet future needs generated by an expansion of the business or a change in land use. 
(l)  All parking spaces shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in a manner that no dust will result with continued use. 
(m)  Whenever off-street parking lots for more than six vehicles are to be located within or adjacent to a residential district, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All sides of the lot within or abutting the residential district shall be enclosed with an opaque ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge having a height of not less than five or six feet. Such fence, wall or hedge shall be maintained in good condition; 
(2)  No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line established 15 feet back of the property line of interior and corner lots wherever the parking lot is located in a residential district or immediately abuts the from yard of a residential unit. In all other cases, no setback is required; 
(3)  All yards shall be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained in good condition yearround; 
(4)  Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall not exceed 25 feet in width, exclusive of curb returns; 
(5)  All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continued use; 
(6)  Whenever lighting is provided, the intensity of light and arrangement of reflectors shall be such as not to interfere with residential district uses; and 
(7)  No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used to guide traffic and to state the condition and terms of the use of the lots. Only non-intermittent white lighting of signs shall be permitted. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-97 thru 104; LDC 1991, § 12-390; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-401. - Truck, bus parking restricted in residential subdivisions. 
    It is unlawful for any truck or bus to be parked or stored on public or private property within an area zoned for residential use or in other zoning districts within 300 feet of residential subdivisions except for purposes of loading or unloading. The following are exempt from the 300-foot restriction set forth herein: 
(1)  Any truck or bus used in business lawfully established within commercial or industrial zoning districts; 
(2)  Trucks used for farming by the owner or occupant in agricultural zoning districts; or 
(3)  Buses owned and operated by public or private schools and school districts and church buses from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-391; Ord. No. 507, 2-8-1990; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-402. - Use restrictions, residential structures in commercial industrial districts. 
    Use of residential structures intended for, or previously or presently used for, either single-family or two-family residential purposes or dwellings, located in an industrial or commercial district, shall comply with the provisions of this section. Whenever a building or structure designed for residential or dwelling purposes is located in a commercial or industrial district, no commercial or industrial use shall be permitted on the lot on which the residence or dwelling is situated until the residence or dwelling has been completely removed; and no residential structure, residence or dwelling building shall be used for any commercial and industrial use. Any structure, residence or dwelling may be retained on the lot and used for a commercial or industrial purpose when the zoning is in conformity with the intended use, when the structure conforms to or exceeds all plumbing, electrical and all other building codes and when plans have been submitted to alter the structure to enhance the aesthetic beauty of those structures in the immediate area and to alter the structure compatible to a structure of the commercial or industrial use to which the building is intended in the general area. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-105; LDC 1991, § 12-392; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-403. - Reversion of unplatted commercial districts. 
    The owner, developer, or person securing a commercial zoning for an unplatted commercial district shall apply for and secure a building permit and begin construction upon area commercially zoned within two years after the effective date of rezoning; and if the permit has not been obtained and construction commenced within the two years, the planning commission shall review the status of the development; this fact, and the reasons thereof, shall be reported to the city council, who may, at its discretion, rezone the commercial district to a zoning district classification consistent with the general plan or to the original zoning classification prior to the last rezoning approved by the city council. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-105A; LDC 1991, § 12-393; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-404. - Platting requirements. 
    For the purposes of providing proper arrangements of streets and assuring the adequacy of open spaces for traffic, utilities and access of emergency vehicles, commensurate with the intensification of land use customarily incident to a change of zoning, a platting requirement is established as follows: 
(1)  For any land which has been rezoned upon application of a private party, no building permit shall be issued until that portion of a tract on which the permit is sought has been included within a subdivision plat or replat, as the case may be, submitted to and approved by the city council upon the recommendation of the planning commission, and filed on record in the office of the county clerk where the property is situated, provided that the city council, upon the recommendation of the planning commission, pursuant to their jurisdiction of subdivision plats, may remove the platting requirement upon the determination that the above stated purposes have been achieved by previous platting or could not be achieved by a plat or replat. All residential structures in the A-1 and A-2 zoning districts may be exempted from this requirement upon approval from the community development director; 
(2)  No building permit shall be issued for any structure located on an unplatted lot as defined by city codes; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to the erection of structures in the A-1 and A-2 zoning districts, or as determined by the community development director. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-394) 
Sec. 12-405. - Medical, health care, nursing facilities, group homes, and living centers. 
(a)  It is the finding of the city that certain public, quasi-public and private activities involving medical, mental health, psychiatric, nursing home and group homes facilities, by their very nature, generate sufficient traffic, noise or light and other major impacts on surrounding land uses that such activities should be subject to review and regulation in furtherance of the general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult living center or group home means any building, house, facility, or retreat where persons who are unrelated by blood or marriage are brought together to reside by virtue of any public or private, for-profit or non-profit, program which provides or organizes such a living arrangements to assist persons with mental, emotional, physical, health, age or other handicaps to live independently outside of either: 
(1)  A larger or more formal institution; or 
(2)  Other places where care is unavailable for any reason. 
    Drug, alcohol or rehabilitation center means any hospital, school, building, house, facility or other place where medical care, counseling or treatment is offered or provided to persons in need of such services on account of alcohol, drug or any other chemical problems, such as, without limitation, use, abuse, or dependency. 
    Hospital means any institution, place, building or agency, public or private, whether organized for profit or not, devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care of patients admitted for overnight stay or longer in order to obtain medical care, surgical care, obstetrical care or nursing care for illness, disease, injury, infirmity or deformity. All places where pregnant females are admitted and receive care incident to pregnancy, abortion or delivery shall be considered to be a hospital within the meaning of this section, regardless of the number of patients received or the duration of their stay. The term "hospital" includes general and specialized hospitals, tuberculosis sanatoria, maternity homes, lying-in homes, and homes for unwed mothers in which care is given during pregnancy or delivery. 
    Mental health facility or psychiatric center means any hospital, school, building, house, clinic, retreat or other place where in-patient or out-patient, day or over-night, mental psychological treatment or group therapy are provided to the mentally ill, mentally retarded or those persons in need of such mental health facilities. 
    Nursing homes or convalescent care facility means any building, house, retreat or facility, not defined in the above definition of the term "drug, alcohol or rehabilitation center," "hospital," or "mental health facility," in which nursing care or convalescent care and living is provided or intended to be provided to ten persons or more who are not members of the same family by blood or marriage. 
(c)  No use defined in subsection (b) of this section may be operated in the city regardless of zoning without having all appropriate and applicable licenses or approvals of the state. Such use shall operate under the respective state rules and regulations, if any. Uses defined in subsection (b) of this section which are in lawful operation as of February 16, 1988, may continue in operation. 
(d)  Any use defined in subsection (b) of this section shall only be operated in a C-3 General Commercial District or R-3 General Residential Zoning District, and shall be authorized only as a use permitted on review. 
(e)  Any use defined in subsection (b) of this section shall be open for inspection by the director of the health department, fire marshal and officials of the applicable state department licensing the facility, or their designees. 
(f)  Enforcement of this section shall be mandatory and the responsibility of the code enforcement officer of the city and the city attorney. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-107; LDC 1991, § 12-395; Ord. No. 442, 2-16-1988; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-406. - Miscellaneous aesthetic requirements. 
    The following requirements are intended to provide guidelines for construction of metal buildings when utilized as the primary structure in zoning districts RE, R-1 through R-4 and C-1 through C-6: 
(1)  If a metal building is utilized for the primary structure on a lot in a C-1 through C-4 zoning district, or any lot which fronts the I-35 corridor (any lot within 600 feet of the centerline of the I-35 right-of-way), 75 percent of the structure must be covered with brick or rock veneer, or a material approved by the community development director satisfying the intent of this article, excluding windows and doorways. 
(2)  If a metal building is utilized for the primary structure in a C-5 or C-6 zoning district or for the nonresidential primary structure in a R-1 through R-4 zoning district, at least 50 percent of the facade of the structure facing a public street must be covered with brick or rock veneer, or a material approved by the community development director satisfying the intent of this article, excluding windows and doorways. 
(3)  If a metal building is utilized for the residential dwelling structure in a R-1 through R-4, or RE zoning district, at least 50 percent of the facade of the structure must be covered with brick or rock veneer, or a material approved by the community development director satisfying the intent of this article, excluding windows and doorways. No portion of exterior facade of the structure shall be covered with metal siding. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-396; Ord. No. 226(98), 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 306(01), 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 368(02), 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 12-407. - Site development standards. 
    No structure or use in any commercial or industrial zoning district shall be erected or commenced which does not have a gravity-flow connection to the public sewer system. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-398; Ord. No. 732(12), 12-17-2012) 
ARTICLE D. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 12-411. - Purposes. 
(a)  A planned unit development (PUD) is intended to maximize flexibility and innovation in residential development by utilizing area-sensitive site planning and design to achieve a desirable mixture of compatible land use patterns that include efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic systems and streetscapes, enhanced residential amenities, and allowances for the provision of usable open space. 
(b)  As with all land use approvals, the governing body will utilize its discretion of power to review proposals to develop under this article. 
(c)  A PUD shall address the following land use objectives: 
(1)  Minimize adverse impacts on surrounding property. 
(2)  Provide for the revitalization and/or redevelopment of areas where decline of any type has occurred. 
(3)  Encourage infill development that is compatible and harmonious with adjacent uses, both existing and planned. 
(4)  Provide development that is compatible with the city's goals and objectives as defined in the city's comprehensive plan and contributes to the general prosperity, health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-106; LDC 1991, § 12-410; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 630(08), 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 12-412. - Minimum standards for planned unit developments. 
(a)  Residential. At a minimum, a residential PUD shall include amenities not normally considered part of a residential development without the use of a PUD. The amenities included shall do more than improve the marketability of the property to perspective buyers or tenants, but also contribute to improving the quality of life in the community and enhance the unique characteristics of the property. Each proposed residential PUD submission shall include the following: 
(1)  A detailed site plan that is drawn to an acceptable engineering scale that shows the placement of all buildings, green spaces, parking areas, and amenities that are proposed as part of the PUD. 
(2)  A detailed landscaping plan that is drawn to an acceptable engineering scale that includes a summary of the amount of trees and shrubs to be included, the species and size, and the placement. A summary of common area green space square footage shall also be provided. For repetitive design themes and/or subdivision entryway treatments, a typical colored perspective and/or elevation is encouraged. 
(3)  Open space areas that are conveniently located, accessible, and visible for the occupants of the development shall be provided. This open space may contain such elements as splash pads, playground equipment, ponds, various buildings or structures intended for recreational use, fountains, landscaped medians, multi-use trails, or other open space features as approved by the community development director. Particular attention should be paid to open space and landscaping where attached units result in a large amount of concrete or asphalt parking areas and/or driveways. The open areas and landscaping should work together to minimize any adverse effects from the increased paving, providing shade, urban wildlife habitat, and aesthetic interruption from the pavement. 
(4)  Transitioning shall be required for all residential PUD applications where the property is abutting a use of lesser density/intensity. Transitioning considerations include a range of design features related to existing and proposed development, such as, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Height. 
b.  Density. 
c.  Appropriate buffers, such as greenbelts and/or masonry fencing. 
d.  Pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation. 
e.  Parking configurations and location where common parking areas are utilized. 
(5)  The following items should not generally be considered amenities when included within a residential PUD proposal; provided, however, that extraordinary circumstances support the use of such items, and the planning commission and city council deem them appropriate amenities: 
a.  Stockade or metal fencing. 
b.  Open areas that are used for drainage and/or hidden from view. Any open area of five percent slope or more shall not be considered an amenity. 
c.  Subdivision entry signs. 
d.  Decorative mailboxes. 
(6)  The residential PUD is strongly encouraged to utilize permanent amenities that require minimal maintenance, except that which is prudent and necessary in the lifetime of the material. Residential PUD amenities shall emphasize the quality of life for those residents residing in the project area by achieving visual interest, a pedestrian-friendly community, and other recreational conveniences. Suggested PUD amenities are as follows: 
a.  Recessed garages. 
b.  Alternating elevation designs. These designs shall be turned in with the design statement and consist of a minimum of four separate elevations. 
c.  Side-entry garages. 
d.  Bicycle or pedestrian off-road pathway systems within the development that goes above and beyond the required sidewalks. 
e.  Traffic calming devices, including stamped concrete or pavers, curb extensions, landscaping islands, and others as approved by the community development director. 
f.  Increased use of landscaping in an innovative and unique way to create a more enjoyable living experience. The landscaping shall be located in common areas or city rights-of-way, as approved by the community development director. Examples include tree-lined streets, accessible nature habitat areas, and/or clustered landscaping as the community focal point. Any landscaping to be counted as an amenity shall be serviced by automatic sprinkler systems. 
(b)  Commercial. The commercial PUD shall focus on the transitioning and buffering between abutting land uses, the functionality and safety of the development, as well as the aesthetics as it relates to the streetscape. The amenities included should not only promote the business on the site, but work to create a people-orientated development. Although the end user may not be identified at this stage in development, the PUD application should create site-specific perimeters in which any user shall abide, and include common parking areas and common ingress/egress points to enhance traffic safety. The following design guidelines are intended to achieve the overall purpose of the PUD. The requirements established below shall be shown on the site development plans submitted for consideration with the design statement. Each proposed commercial PUD submission shall include the following: 
(1)  A detailed site plan that is drawn to an acceptable engineering scale that shows the placement of all buildings, green spaces, parking areas, and amenities that are proposed as part of the PUD. If buildings and/or parking areas are unknown at the time of submittal, the site plan can be accepted with those exclusions; however, the green spaces and other amenities shall be indicated. 
(2)  General open space requirements shall be designated in the commercial PUD, and a summary of the open space square footage shall be required. The open space shall be designed for pedestrians, and may contain such elements as ponds, fountains, landscaped medians, and/or pedestrian courtyards with benches. A typical colored perspective and/or elevation of open space treatments is encouraged. 
(3)  General landscaping requirements shall be designated in the commercial PUD. The landscaping shall be above and beyond what is normally required of commercial developments, and the requirements shall be stated specifically in the design statement. If a landscaping layout is known, it shall be submitted on a separate plan drawn to an appropriate scale, with a summary of landscaping materials to be used. Any landscaping to be counted as an amenity shall be serviced by automatic sprinkler systems. 
(4)  Transitioning shall be required for all commercial PUD applications where the property is abutting a residential use. Transitioning considerations include a range of design features related to existing and proposed development, such as, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Height. 
b.  Density. 
c.  Appropriate buffers, such as greenbelts and/or masonry fencing. 
d.  Pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation, including truck traffic patterns and loading docks. 
e.  Parking configurations and location. 
(5)  The following items shall not generally be considered amenities when included within a commercial PUD proposal; provided, however, that extraordinary circumstances support the use of such items, and the planning commission and city council deem them appropriate amenities: 
a.  Stockade or metal fencing. 
b.  Open areas that are used for drainage and/or hidden from view. Any open area of five percent slope or more shall not be considered an amenity. 
c.  Landscaping that meets, but not exceeds, requirements of this Code. 
(6)  The commercial PUD is strongly encouraged to utilize permanent amenities that require minimal maintenance, except that which is deemed prudent and necessary in the lifetime of the material. Commercial PUD amenities shall emphasize the pedestrian streetscape by achieving visual interest, people-orientated environment, and traffic management techniques. Suggested PUD amenities are as follows: 
a.  Signage limited to monument signs by height and size. 
b.  Limited or shared curb cuts. 
c.  Traffic calming devices, including stamped concrete or pavers, curb extensions, landscaping islands, and others as approved by the community development director. 
d.  Architecturally distinctive store fronts and other architectural elements not typically found in commercial construction. 
e.  In the case of a building with two street frontages, the sides of buildings facing public streets shall incorporate architecturally consistent windows, doorways, and other design elements. 
f.  Masonry screening for all loading docks that face a public street. 
g.  Increased use of landscaping in an innovative and unique way to create a more enjoyable human-scaled environment. The landscaping may be located in common areas or city rights-of-way, as approved by the community development director. Examples include tree-lined streets, accessible nature habitat areas, and/or clustered landscaping as focal point, such as a patio or pocket park. Any landscaping to be counted as an amenity shall be serviced by automatic sprinkler systems. 
h.  Functional use of hardscape and/or furniture in a cohesive manner to encourage human interaction. This may include items such as benches, water features, and bike racks. 
(c)  Industrial. The industrial PUD shall focus on the buffering between abutting land uses, the functionality and safety of the development, as well as the aesthetics as it relates to the streetscape. The amenities included should not only promote the business on the site, but work to protect the surrounding properties from any adverse impacts and improve the streetscape. Although the end user may not be identified at this stage in development, the PUD application should create site-specific perimeters in which any user shall abide. The following design standards and guidelines are intended to achieve the overall purpose of the PUD. The requirements established below shall be shown on the site development plans submitted for consideration with the design statements. Each proposed industrial PUD submission shall include the following: 
(1)  General open space requirements shall be designated in the PUD. The open space shall be designed for aesthetics as seen from the street. This open space may contain such elements as ponds, fountains, landscaped medians, or other open space feature as approved by the community development director. 
(2)  General landscaping requirements shall be designated in the PUD. The landscaping shall be a percentage above what is normally required of industrial developments, and the requirements shall be stated specifically in the design statement. If a landscaping layout is known, it shall be submitted on a separate plan drawn to an appropriate scale, with a summary of landscaping materials to be used. Any landscaping to be counted as an amenity shall be serviced by automatic sprinkler systems. 
(3)  Transitioning shall be required for all PUD applications where the property is abutting a use of lesser intensity. Transitioning considerations include a range of design features related to existing and proposed development, such as, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Height. 
b.  Density. 
c.  Appropriate buffers, such as greenbelts and/or masonry fencing. 
d.  Pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation, including truck traffic patterns and loading docks. 
e.  Parking configurations and location. 
(4)  The following items shall not generally be considered amenities when included within an industrial PUD proposal; provided, however, that extraordinary circumstances support the use of such items, and the planning commission and city council deem them appropriate amenities: 
a.  Stockade or metal fencing. 
b.  Open areas that are used for drainage and/or hidden from view. Any open area of five percent slope or more shall not be considered an amenity. 
c.  Landscaping that meets, but not exceeds, requirements of this Code. 
(5)  The industrial PUD is strongly encouraged to utilize permanent amenities that require minimal maintenance, except that which is deemed prudent and necessary in the lifetime of the material. Suggested industrial PUD amenities are as follows: 
a.  Signage limited by height and size. 
b.  Limited or shared curb cuts. 
c.  Traffic calming devices, including stamped concrete or pavers, curb extensions, landscaping islands, and others as approved by the community development director. 
d.  Architecturally distinctive facades. 
e.  In the case of a building with two street frontages, the sides of buildings facing public streets shall incorporate architecturally consistent windows, doorways, and other design elements. 
f.  Increased bricking/masonry requirement. 
g.  Masonry screening for all loading docks that face a public street. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-106; LDC 1991, § 12-411; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 630(08), 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 12-413. - Administration of a planned unit development. 
(a)  Administrative sequence. A PUD is treated as an overlay to the zoning ordinance due to their unique character and complexity, and is required to adhere to the rezoning process. Because the PUD is intended to work with infrastructure, topography, and land use, the PUD submittal requirements are much more intensive and detailed than what is typically required of a traditional zoning application. 
(1)  Preapplication conference. In step one, preapplication conference, the applicant should discuss with the community development director the procedure for adopting a PUD and the requirements for the general lay-out of major roadways and utilities, access to arterials, general design and narrative, the availability of existing services, and potential amenities. The applicant shall provide the community development director with conceptual plans, plats, and drawings to adequately describe the project. The community development director shall also advise the applicant, where appropriate, to discuss the proposed PUD development with those officials who must eventually approve the various aspects of the proposal. 
(2)  Application of rezoning request. In step two, application of rezoning request, the application must be filed in accordance with regular procedures and on application forms supplied by the city. The PUD application must include a site development plan, PUD design statement, landscaping plans and any other drawings or renderings that the applicant feels is pertinent to the request. 
(3)  Submission of preliminary plat. In step three, submission of preliminary plat, the preliminary plat must be submitted with the rezoning application. The preliminary plat submittal shall conform with all requirements of the city. 
(4)  Submission of the final plat. The final plat will generally not be considered by the planning commission until the zoning and preliminary plat have been approved by the city council. The community development director may waive this requirement due to the size and complexity of the project. The final plat submittal shall conform with all requirements of the city. 
(b)  Departure from standards. The planning commission and city council shall have the authority, in connection with the granting of any PUD approval pursuant to this section, to change, alter, vary, modify, or waive any provision of this Code as they deem appropriate to apply to an approved PUD; provided, however, that the modified standards shall: 
(1)  Achieve the purposes for which the PUD may be approved pursuant to this section; 
(2)  Maintain harmony with the general purposes, goals, and objectives of this Code and the comprehensive plan; and 
(3)  Result in a development providing amenities sufficient to address, offset, and mitigate development impacts. 
(c)  Conditions for approval. The planning commission or city council may attach to the site development plans whatever conditions they deem necessary to ensure that proper amenities are provided and compatibility with surrounding, existing and proposed land uses is maintained. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-106; LDC 1991, § 12-412; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 630(08), 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 12-414. - Time limit. 
    The construction of a planned unit development shall be started within two years of the effective date of approval of the plan by the city council. Failure to begin the development within the two years shall automatically void the development plan and the land shall revert to the same zoning classification which existed immediately preceding the approval of the planned unit development. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-106; LDC 1991, § 12-413; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-415. - Plan changes. 
    Any and all approved site plans, landscaping plans, and renderings shall become a part of the PUD approval, and any significant change proposed to the plans shall require the approval of an amended PUD with planning commission and city council consideration, with the following exceptions: The community development director may approve minor amendments to the PUD if it is concluded that those amendments will not affect the overall character of the development and does not modify a compelling component of the PUD application. Items that may be considered a minor amendment include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Changes to house elevations and floorplans when architecturally consistent and compatible with the approved plans. 
(2)  Changes to the tree and shrub species when the new species provides the same aesthetic and/or utilitarian effect as the approved species. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-106; LDC 1991, § 12-414; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 630(08), 9-15-2008) 
ARTICLE E. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 12-421. - Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
    A nonconforming building or structure existing at the time of initial adoption of these regulations may be continued, maintained and repaired, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; 
(2)  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations; 
(3)  Should each structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-118; LDC 1991, § 12-420; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-422. - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
    If a lawful use of structure, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of these regulations, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by these regulations in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of these regulations, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
(3)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
(4)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located; and 
(5)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-119; LDC 1991, § 12-421; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-423. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived, lawful uses of land exist that are no longer permissible under the terms of these regulations as enacted or amended, such uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived; 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived; and 
(3)  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by these regulations for the district in which such land is located. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-120; LDC 1991, § 12-422; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-424. - Nonconforming lots on record. 
    In any district in which a lot exists on record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived which does not conform in size or area to the provisions of these regulations, buildings for the uses permitted in such district may be erected on such lot, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of these regulations. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-121; LDC 1991, § 12-423; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-425. - Changes in nonconformity. 
    A nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination, shall not be changed unless changed to a use permitted in the district in which located; except that the board of adjustment may permit a change to a more restricted nonconforming use and such change shall be construed as an abandonment of the former permitted nonconforming use. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-122; LDC 1991, § 12-424; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
ARTICLE F. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 12-431. - Building permit and occupancy permit required. 
    These zoning regulations shall be enforced by the building official, the code enforcement officer or the zoning administrator, acting at the direction of the city manager. It shall be a violation of these regulations for any person to change or permit the change in the use of land or buildings or structures or to erect, alter, move or improve any building or structure until a building permit has been obtained and an occupancy permit applied for under the following conditions; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the erection of farm buildings not used for human habitation. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-123; LDC 1991, § 12-430; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-432. - Building permits. 
    Every application for a building permit shall have a zoning clearance and shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A site plan drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of existing buildings and structures and the lines within which the proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered; 
(2)  A declaration of the existing and intended use of each building or part of a building, the number of families and housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate; and 
(3)  Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots and their use as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of these regulations. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-124; LDC 1991, § 12-431; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-433. - Fees. 
(a)  The cost of building permits is set forth in the city's fee schedule. 
(b)  In the event of a declared federal natural disaster such as a tornado, the City of Moore has determined that the vacant lots caused by the natural disaster pose a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Moore and it is in the best interest of the City of Moore and its citizens to encourage the redevelopment of those vacant lots. To encourage redevelopment of those vacant lots, building permit fees shall be waived within the federal disaster area as defined by the community development department through a federal disaster damage assessment inventory: 
(1)  All residential building permit fees shall be waived on redevelopment lots, excluding any state fees. For residential redevelopment that increases the living unit density from the pre-disaster density, the net increase of living units shall not be eligible for fee waivers. 
(2)  All commercial and industrial building permit fees shall be waived on redevelopment lots, excluding any state fees. For commercial or industrial redevelopment that increases the square footage of the building, impervious surface of the site, or a land use change that increases the traffic impacts as defined by the adopted by the transportation impact fee schedule from the pre-disaster commercial or industrial development, the net increase of the square footage shall not be eligible for fee waivers. 
(3)  The period of fee waivers shall be in effect for two years from the date of the natural disaster declaration. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-125; LDC 1991, § 12-432; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 872(17) , 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 12-434. - Occupancy permits required. 
(a)  All businesses, and certain multifamily residential buildings within the city shall be required to apply for and hold in their possession an occupancy permit as outlined in this section, and applying to all assembly use groups, institutional use groups, educational use groups, mercantile use groups, business use groups, factory industrial use groups, high hazard use groups, and storage S-1 use groups as defined by the adopted building code, and referencing other applicable codes adopted by the city. An occupancy permit is required for any business moving into any building or portion of a building, or any multifamily residential building if any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The building or portion of building to be occupied is previously vacant or has never been occupied. 
(2)  The building or portion of building to be occupied has not yet received an occupancy permit. 
(3)  In any case where a building permit was required to construct, finish, alter, expand or split a building or portion of a building. 
(4)  Whenever a change of use or occupancy type, as defined under the adopted building codes, occurs. 
(b)  No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever and no change in use of such building shall be allowed until an occupancy permit has been issued stating that the building and use comply with the provisions and requirements of these regulations and all applicable building, electrical, plumbing, housing, health, fire protection and zoning regulations; provided, however, that no such certificate shall be issued until a building permit has been first obtained and issued and all water lines, installations and facilities; sewer lines, installations and facilities; streets, and drainage accepted for maintenance by the city, including all required inspections and the prior payment of any inspection fees, water connection and meter fees, water tap fees and sewage connection or tap fees. 
(c)  Any person, firm, corporation, owner, or person in charge of any building or part thereof that may allow or permit the building or structure to be occupied or used, in whole or part, prior to securing an occupancy permit when required by this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-108 for each and every day that the unauthorized occupancy is allowed to exist. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-126; LDC 1991, § 12-433; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 327(01), 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 647(09), 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 12-435. - Application. 
(a)  Certificates for occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the lawful erection or alteration of the building is completed. The certificate of occupancy and compliance shall state that the building or proposed use of land comply with these regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file at the office of the city clerk and copies shall be furnished at the request of any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. 
(b)  All other occupancy permits shall be applied for at city hall, in the community development department. All permits shall be issued through the community development department. Occupancy permits require approval from the fire marshal, building official and community development director. 
(c)  Upon approval of zoning from the community development director or designee, the applicant shall contact the building official and fire marshal, or their designee, for inspections to ensure code compliance. The applicant shall also contact the health department, when applicable, for an inspection to ensure code compliance. 
(d)  Upon approval of zoning requirements and inspections, the community development department shall issue the required occupancy permit. The permit will identify the approved business, occupancy type and occupancy limit. The occupancy permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location within the approved business. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-127; LDC 1991, § 12-434; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 327(01), 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 12-436. - Fees. 
    All fees for occupancy permits shall be collected at city hall. All fees shall be paid prior to assignment to the inspections department of the city and to the fire marshal's division of the city. The fees shall be set according to the adopted fee schedule of the city. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-128; LDC 1991, § 12-435; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 327(01), 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 12-437. - Violation of permit requirements; penalty. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change, improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land which does not comply with all of the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  No permit for the excavation, erection or alteration of any building shall be issued before the application has been made for certificates of occupancy and compliance, and no building or premises shall be occupied until that occupancy permit is issued. 
(c)  Any person, firm, corporation, or owner of any building or premises or part thereof who violates or refuses to comply with the provisions contained in these regulations, and any architect, builder, contractor, developer, individual, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction, shall be penalized as provided in section 1-108. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-130; LDC 1991, § 12-436; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-438. - Amendments. 
    The council may from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, amend the regulations and districts herein established. Any person desiring to have his own property rezoned or seeking a use on review or special use permit shall submit an application or petition for amendment to the city planning commission and shall file the petition or applications with the planning commission along with a filing fee as set by the council by motion or resolution. There shall also be paid a filing fee as set by the council at the time of filing an application or petition to request a hearing on a use permitted on review. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-131; LDC 1991, § 12-437; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-439. - Rezoning/use on review/special use permit application, contents. 
    The application or petition for rezoning, use on review, and special use permit shall show the legal description and street address of the property, name of the owner, present zoning classification or district, classifications or districts to which zoning is desired, the purpose to which the property is to be used if zoning is changed, and the application or petition shall list the names and the current mailing addresses of all owners of property with a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the property sought to be rezoned and described in the petition or application. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-132; LDC 1991, § 12-438; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-440. - City council agenda, notice. 
(a)  Within two days after receipt of the application or petition, the city clerk shall place the petition upon the agenda of the planning commission and shall also place the petition upon the agenda of the city council, provided that the hearing before the city council shall not be held prior to a consideration of the petition or application by the planning commission. 
(b)  The applicant shall, at his expense, cause notice of the filing of the petition requesting rezoning in a newspaper of general circulation or any official newspaper circulated in the city, which notice shall contain the legal description and street address of the property requested to be rezoned, map of the area to be affected, names of the owner, present zoning classification or district and classification or district requested and intended use of the property and the dates and places and hour of the hearing to be held to hear the application before the planning commission and the city council, and which notice shall be published not less than 20 days prior to the hearing of the application or petition by the city council. 
(c)  The applicant shall also, at his own expense, cause to be placed on the property described in the petition or application requesting rezoning, at least seven days before the hearing of the application of petition by the planning commission, a sign not less than 40 inches long and 20 inches wide with lettering thereon of not less than one inch in height stating the present and applied for zoning hearing dates before the planning commission and city council; the sign to be in such colors and posted or placed as near as possible to all public streets or roads toward which the affected property faces in such manner as to be visible and clearly legible from the public streets or roads and there shall also be attached to the sign in letters not less than elite typewrite type, the legal description, street address and the proposed use of the property if rezoning is approved. 
(d)  In addition to the notice provided in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section, the secretary of the planning commission of the city shall, not less than 20 days before the hearing before the planning commission, mail written notice to all owners of property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property sought to be rezoned, which notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  Legal description of the property and the street address of approximate location in the city; 
(2)  Present zoning and classification of the property and the classification sought by the applicant; and 
(3)  The date, time, and place of the public meetings in which the zoning change request will be heard before the planning commission and the city council. 
(e)  Upon consideration of the petition, the planning commission shall, within three days thereafter, recommend to the city council that the application be denied, granted or granted subject to conditions, which conditions shall be stated. 
(f)  In case a protest against such change in zoning is filed by owners of lots as set by state law, such amendment of change in zoning shall require three-fifths of all the members of the city council to approve the amendment or change in zoning classification. 
(g)  In addition to the other required notice, if the zoning change requested permits the use of treatment facilities, multiple-family facilities, transitional living facilities, halfway houses and any housing or facility that may be used for medical or nonmedical detoxification as these terms are defined pursuant to 43A O.S. § 3-403, the entity proposing the change in district regulation, restriction, or boundary shall mail a written notice within 30 days of the hearing to all real property owners within one-quarter of a mile where the area to be affected is located and shall be responsible for all costs incurred in mailing this notice. For purposes of this subsection, the term "entity" means any individual, corporation, company, firm, partnership, association, trust, state agency, government instrumentality or agency, institution, county, incorporated municipality or municipal authority or trust in which any governmental entity is a beneficiary, venture, or other legal entity however organized. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-132; LDC 1991, § 12-439; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-441. - Vacation of public easements. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated, the portion vacated shall have the same district classification as the land to which the vacated portion accrues. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-133; LDC 1991, § 12-440; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
ARTICLE G. - LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 12-451. - Purpose and intent of landscaping requirements. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish standards for installation of landscaping in all new development and redevelopment areas in order to enhance the aesthetic appearance of properties within the city, ensure the quality, quantity, and appropriateness of landscape materials, effect a functional and attractive design, improve compatibility between land uses, conserve water, control soil erosion, and preserve the character of existing neighborhoods. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-450; Ord. No. 10(92), 1-6-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-452. - Landscaping required. 
    Landscaping, as required herein, shall be provided for all new multifamily, civic, office, commercial, and industrial construction in the city. Landscaping shall also be provided for any addition to an existing multifamily, civic, office, commercial, or industrial use if the proposed addition increases the size of the existing structure by at least 50 percent. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-451; Ord. No. 10(92), 1-6-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-453. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Caliper means the diameter of a tree measured six inches above the ground. 
    Shrub means a woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems from the ground or small branches near the ground; may be deciduous or evergreen. 
    Tree means a large, woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or trunks and numerous branches, which normally grows to a minimum height of 15 feet in the county; may be classified as deciduous or evergreen. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-452; Ord. No. 10(92), 1-6-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-454. - Landscaping standards. 
    The requirements of this section shall apply to all land uses other than a single-family or two-family residence on a single lot. 
(1)  No less than five percent of the total land area of the site (excluding the street right-of-way) shall be landscaped. At least 75 percent of the landscaped area shall be in the front or side yards; 
(2)  There shall be one live tree having a minimum height of five feet, and two shrubs provided for every 400 square feet of area to be landscaped, including the street right-of-way; 
(3)  Trees shall have a minimum caliper of at least two inches; 
(4)  Credit for existing or newly planted larger trees (outside of the street right-of-way) that are larger than the minimum required size shall be given as follows: 
a.  A healthy tree of at least three-inch caliper and less than eight-inch caliper shall count for two trees; 
b.  A healthy tree of at least eight-inch caliper shall count for three trees; 
(5)  Artificial grass or any form of synthetic plant shall not be permitted as part of the minimum requirements for landscaped areas; 
(6)  The use of gravel as ground cover shall not be considered as meeting the minimum requirements of this section; 
(7)  The property owner shall be responsible for landscaping the unpaved street right-of-way. This area shall not be hard surfaced other than a permitted drive way or sidewalk; 
(8)  The area within the boundaries of a given lot which is devoted to and consists of plant material, vines and other groundcovers, planters, brick, stone, natural forms, water forms, aggregate or other inorganic features, but not including the use of smooth concrete or asphalt; provided, however, that the use of brick, stone, aggregate or other inorganic materials shall not predominate over the use of the organic plant materials; 
(9)  Trees shall not be planted in the street right-of-way except by special approval from the community development director; 
(10)  Trees and shrubs planted within the city should be selected due to their ability to respond to the environmental conditions within the city. The factors to be considered in tree selection are soil conditions in relation to growth, the tree's ability to cope with the climate, and its survival rate as an urban tree. Low maintenance, a moderate growth rate, and aesthetic quality should also be considered. Contact the community development department for a list of suitable trees. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-453; Ord. No. 10(92), 1-6-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-455. - Landscaping plans. 
    The requirements of this section shall apply to all land uses other than a single-family or two-family residence on a single lot. 
(1)  A landscaping plan is required and submitted as part of the site plan as submitted for a building permit. This plan shall show detailed landscaped treatment of any area to be landscaped, including the street right-of-way. If landscaping is to be used as sight-proof screening, the entire plan may be contained in one submission. The plan shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The type of plant shall be designated with plant lists or schedules showing the required and proposed landscaping; 
b.  Existing vegetation to be saved shall be identified; 
c.  The plan shall especially respect sight triangles and sight distances at all intersections; 
d.  Landscaping should be evenly spaced throughout the site so as to balance the effect of the landscaping; 
(2)  No building permit shall be issued until the landscaping plan is approved; 
(3)  A certificate of occupancy for any use shall not be issued until the landscaping has been installed in accordance with the plan; and it shall be illegal for any person, firm, or corporation to occupy or operate a business in any new structure for which landscaping, as shown by the plans, is not provided; except that if a structure and all site improvements are complete except for these landscaping requirements and the season of the year will not permit the planting and growing of plants, temporary occupancy permit may be permitted by the director until a date certain in the growing season. If the landscaping has not been completed by said date, the property owner shall be in violation of this Code or a temporary extension may be obtained as approved by the director for a period not to exceed one 30-day period. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-454; Ord. No. 10(92), 1-6-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-456. - Other requirements for landscaped areas. 
    The following requirements shall apply to all landscaped areas: 
(1)  The property owner in all zoning districts shall be responsible for landscaping the area within the street right-of-way line and the curbline. This area shall not be hard surfaced other than a permitted driveway or sidewalk; 
(2)  Plants shall be grouped according to similar water needs; 
(3)  Plants shall not interfere with safe sight distances or otherwise block vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic, or conflict with the installation, maintenance, or repair on any public utility; 
(4)  A planting area a minimum of 18 inches in width shall separate a building from a driveway or parking area as feasible; 
(5)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided between any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate seven cars or more and any lot frontage of the property on which the parking lot is located, unless the parking area is otherwise screened from the street by a building or other means; 
(6)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided between any vehicular loading area and any lot frontage of the property on which the loading area is located, unless the parking area is otherwise screened from the street by a building or other means. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-455; Ord. No. 10(92), 1-6-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-457. - Parking lot landscaping. 
    Landscaping in all commercial and residential parking lots shall be as follows: 
(1)  Parking lots shall be separated from street frontages and from abutting uses by planting areas; 
(2)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided between any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate seven cars or more and any lot frontage of the property on which the parking lot is located, unless the parking area is otherwise screened from the street by a building or other means; 
(3)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided between any vehicular loading area and any lot frontage of the property on which the loading area is located, unless the vehicular loading area is otherwise screened from the street by a building or other means; 
(4)  One deciduous shade tree shall be provided within the parking lot for every seven parking spaces, or portion thereof. Each tree shall be located within the parking lot in reasonable proximity to the spaces for which the tree was required. Trees provided to meet the minimum requirements of any landscape strip or buffer may not be counted toward this requirement; 
(5)  Tree planting areas shall be no less than eight feet in width and shall provide at least 100 square feet of planting area per tree. No tree shall be less than 21/2 feet from the edge of pavement or back of curb; if curbing is not provided around the tree planting area, curb stops shall be placed such that vehicles will not overhang the tree planting area; 
(6)  A landscaping island shall be located at the end of every parking bay between the last parking space and an adjacent travel aisle or driveway. The island shall be no less than eight feet wide for at least one-half the length of the adjacent parking space. The island shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover except for those areas that are mulched; 
(7)  Landscaping islands and tree planting areas shall be well drained and contain suitable soil and natural irrigation characteristics for the planting materials they contain. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-456; Ord. No. 10(92), 1-6-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-458. - Maintenance of landscape. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain in good condition all the improvements required by this section. Any required fence or screening that are damaged shall be repaired, and any vegetation that dies shall be replaced no later than the following planting season (spring or fall). 
(b)  When it is determined by the community development director, or his designee, that improvements required by this section are not being maintained, it shall be his duty to give notice in writing to the property owner. Such notice shall specify in what manner the improvements are in need of maintenance and a date for compliance. The property owner shall have not less than 30 days to comply with the notice; provided, however, that any person aggrieved by any such order or disagreeing with any of the requirements of the notice, may file an appeal within the 30-day period to the board of adjustment. 
(c)  Failure to provide the improvements required by this Code or failure to maintain required improvements in the manner prescribed by this Code shall constitute an offense and violation of this Code. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-457; Ord. No. 10(92), 1-6-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-459. - Completion requirements. 
    A certificate of occupancy for any use wherein landscaping is required by this article, shall not be used until the landscaping has been installed in accordance with the landscaping plan; except that if a structure and all site improvements are complete except for the landscaping, and the season of the year or some other constraint will not permit the planting or growing of plants, temporary occupancy may be permitted by the community development director until a date certain. If the landscaping has not been completed by said date, the property owner shall be in violation of the occupancy permit provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-108. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-458; Ord. No. 10, 1-6-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
ARTICLE H. - SPECIAL USE PERMITS 

Sec. 12-461. - Purpose and procedure. 
    The following special uses may be permitted in certain districts after approval of a special use permit. The approval process for the special use permit will be identical as that of uses permitted on review. The purpose of the special use permit is to allow certain uses in prescribed zoning districts where determined appropriate, without changing the zoning designation in some cases for the property and while providing specific requirements for such uses beyond what is normally listed within individual zoning district requirements. The special use permit expires upon change of use, occupancy or ownership of the property. Requirements and applicable zoning districts vary for each special use permit and include those set forth in this article. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-460; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-462. - Types of special use permits. 
(a)  Accessory commercial parking. This special use permit is intended to allow parking on a parcel of land which is adjacent to the parcel upon which the primary use is located and where the required parking does not exist and is needed to meet the needs of that use. This section applies to uses occurring in existing structures where tenants and parking requirements may change over time. The zoning for the primary use is not required on the parcel where the accessory parking is located, so long as it complies with the Moore Plan 21. The following requirements below must be met: 
(1)  Accessory commercial parking may be allowed in the following zoning districts: C-2, C-3, and C-5; 
(2)  Applicable parking, setback and landscape requirements shall apply. 
(b)  Bed and breakfast establishment. Bed and breakfast establishments may be allowed upon review in certain zoning districts. The bed and breakfast establishment must be occupied by the owner/operator as a full-time residence, shall serve as temporary lodging for transient customers and shall provide rooms for rent, which may include one meal in the morning. All other lodging facilities will be considered commercial establishments. All requirements below must be met: 
(1)  Bed and breakfast establishments may be allowed upon review in the A1, A2, R3, and R4 zoning districts; 
(2)  One guest room is allowed per 2,000 square feet of lot area, with a maximum of six, not including the owner/operator quarters; 
(3)  Owner shall reside on-premises; 
(4)  On-site parking must allow a minimum of one parking space per lease room and two spaces for the residence. Parking shall be an approved surface; 
(5)  Where feasible, parking shall be located to the side or rear of the structure. When front yard parking is used, no more than 50 percent of the front yard may be used; 
(6)  No individual cooking facilities are allowed in guest rooms; 
(7)  Services provided to persons other than overnight guests are strictly prohibited and are restricted to those specified in this section; 
(8)  A site plan, including parking, lighting, signage, landscaping and screening, must be submitted for review and should minimize visual intrusion to abutting properties. 
(c)  Communication towers. Commercial communication towers are prohibited within any public right-of-way or residential district. Such uses may be allowed upon review within the A-1, A-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, I-1, I-2, or I-3 zoning district subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Lease or ownership area should be large enough to accommodate the tower and support facilities, and include access to a public street or accessible parking area. Platting or approved lot split may be required prior to construction; 
(2)  No communication tower shall be located closer than 200 feet of the boundary line of any property zoned or used for residential purpose or within 200 feet of any residential structure. All towers shall observe a minimum setback from any street right-of-way and from any property zoned or occupied as residential use equal to the height of the tower; 
(3)  The area containing the tower and any other accessory structures or equipment shall be secured by a six-foot fence. Such fence shall be opaque when adjacent to any residential use or zoning district; 
(4)  Towers may be co-located on new or existing structures provided they do not extend beyond 20 feet above the highest point of the structure. 
(d)  Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes may be allowed upon review in the A-1 and A-2 zoning districts on tracts of land not less than five acres in size subject to the following: 
(1)  A manufactured home shall not be located, parked or stored on any such tract of land where dwellings or residences are not permitted under the zoning regulations; 
(2)  A manufactured home shall be subject to and required to comply with the building codes as the same applies to a dwelling. Such manufactured home shall be subject to all inspections and inspection fees applicable to a dwelling under the building code, electrical code, mechanical code and plumbing code and the health ordinances. It shall be subject to and comply with the provisions of all ordinances, including, but not limited to, ordinances pertaining to disposal of refuse, waste and sewage, safety, water supply, garage, drainage, fire prevention, health inspections and health department licenses and approvals where applicable and as may be determined and required by the health inspector; 
(3)  A manufactured home shall be of at least the length, width and size required or defined for manufactured homes under this Code; 
(4)  Manufactured homes may not be located on any tract of land where there is an existing residence; 
(5)  Manufactured homes must meet the length, width, and size requirements of this Code; 
(6)  All manufactured homes shall have wheels and axles removed; 
(7)  Skirting shall be installed around the entire perimeter; 
(8)  Foundation and tie-downs shall meet city requirements; 
(9)  Manufactured home installation shall meet all electrical, plumbing and mechanical requirements. 
(e)  Mixed use. Mixed uses are those uses which generally occur separately, but which may be allowed to occur within one structure. Mixed uses occurring in multiple structures should be approved through the planned unit development process. A mixed use special use permit may be allowed in the C-3 and C-6 zoning districts only. Any uses permitted by right in the following districts may be allowed upon review in the C-3 mixed use zoning district: C-3, C-2, C-1, and R-3. Any uses permitted by right in the following districts may be allowed upon review in the C-6 mixed use zoning district: C-6, C-3, C-2, C-1, and R-3. The following restrictions apply: 
(1)  The most intense of the uses must be an allowed use within the zoning district; 
(2)  On-site parking should be provided for all uses in accordance with this Code and shall meet all parking requirements, including landscaping requirements; 
(3)  A building permit with all required construction plans shall be submitted to and approved by city staff; 
(4)  Construction and tenant separation methods shall meet adopted code requirements and shall have building official and fire marshal approval. 
(f)  Specialty automotive. Specialty automotive businesses are intended to accommodate auto dealers who provide auto-finder, boutique, specialty, and custom vehicle sales, as well as the sale of mopeds, and motor-driven cycle defined in part by a gasoline, electric, or hybrid motor that displaces less than 50 cubic centimeters (cc). This type of business varies from traditional auto dealers in that vehicles are typically custom ordered and/or built to order, requiring substantially less floor, storage, and office space. These businesses generally have very low on-site inventory and are not dependent on a sales lot or showroom. These businesses are compatible with other businesses of a retail nature, both in form and function. This special use permit is not intended for a traditional car sales business where customary modifications are made to aid in the sale of the vehicle, also known as automotive sales and rental. Such uses may be allowed by permit in the following zoning districts: C-3, C-4, C-5, C-6, I-1, I-2, and I-3. The following restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  There shall be no outside storage of vehicles or parts. 
(2)  Any outside display shall be of a limited nature of completed vehicles ready for sale. The display area shall not encroach upon city right-of-way or create sight limitations. The display shall be of temporary nature, only during the normal hours of operation for the business. 
(3)  A site and building plan, including parking, lighting, signage, overhead doors, and outdoor display areas must be submitted for review and should reflect typical characteristics of a traditional retail establishment. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-461; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 627(08), 7-21-2008) 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 12-471. - Purpose. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this article. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-470; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-472. - Clarification and relationship of terms. 
(a)  For the purpose of these regulations, words used in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The term "shall" is mandatory and not directory. The term "should" is that which ought to occur, but is not mandatory. The term "should" allows for interpretation. 
(b)  The term "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated association of persons, such as a club; the term "building" includes any part thereof; the term "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
(c)  Words not herein defined shall conform to standard American-English usage. 
(d)  Examples and lists shall not be considered to be all-inclusive unless the content clearly states to the contrary. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-471; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
Sec. 12-473. - Words and terms defined. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in these regulations, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abuts/abutting means to be separated by common property lines, streets, alley, railroad, pipeline or other utilities' right-of-way. The term "abuts/abutting" implies a closer proximity than the term "adjacent." 
    Access means a way of approaching or entering a property. 
    Accessory building means a subordinate building or a portion of the main building located on the same lot as the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominate use of the building or premises. 
    Accessory use means a use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings and located upon the same lot therewith. 
    Adjacent means lying near or close to. See Abuts/abutting. 
    Adult entertainment uses means a business based upon materials or performances that depict, describe, or relate to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined hereunder. 
    Adult amusement or entertainment means amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or material depicting, describing, or relating to special conduct or specified anatomical areas as defined herein, including, but not limited to, topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment. 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a significant portion of its stock in trade books, film, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult mini motion picture theatre means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel means a motel wherein material is presented, as part of the motel services, via closed circuit television or otherwise, which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place at which slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled, still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theatre means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
    Massage parlor means any place where for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with sexual conduct or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes specified anatomical areas. 
    Sexual encounter center means any building or structure which contains, or is used for, commercial entertainment where the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with or to allow personal contact by employees, devices, or equipment or by personnel provided by the establishment which appeals to the prurient interest of the patron, to include, but not to be limited to, bath houses, massage parlors, and related or similar activities. 
For the purpose of this definition the terms "sexual conduct" and "specified anatomical areas" shall be defined as the following: 
    Sexual conduct means and includes the following: 
a.  The fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
b.  Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, and sodomy; 
c.  Masturbation; 
d.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in a and b of this definition. 
    Specified anatomical areas means and includes the following: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
No part of this paragraph will be deemed to disenfranchise any member of the healing arts licensed by the state to perform manipulation of body parts as part of their profession or counseling of said persons by licensed practitioners. 
    Advertising sign or structure means any cloth, card, paper, metal, glass, wooden, plastic, plaster, stone sign or other sign, device or structure of any character whatsoever, including a statuary, place for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building or structure. The term "placed" shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an advertising structure shall be determined as the area of the largest cross section of such structure. Neither directional, warning, not other signs posted by public officials in the course of their public duties nor merchandise being offered for sale shall be construed as advertising signs for the purpose of these regulations. 
    Alley means a minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
    Amortization means a term used in zoning to denote the process by which nonconforming uses and structures must be discontinued or made to conform to requirements of these regulations at the end of a specified period of time. 
    Apartment house. See Dwelling, multifamily. 
    Automobile means a self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Buses; 
(2)  Motor scooters; 
(3)  Motorcycles; 
(4)  Passenger cars; or 
(5)  Trucks; 
    Automobile fuel pump station means a gas station that may sell automobile motor fuels, oil and other automobile maintenance products but not perform any incidental services other than windshield washing, fluid level checking, and air pressure checking. 
    Automobile repair center means a type of service station that may be allowed to do major engine repair, welding for automobile repair, paint, and body work and other major and more obnoxious automotive services. It is only permitted on review. 
    Automobile service or gasoline station means any area of land, including structures thereon, that may be used for the retail sale of gasoline or fuel oils, or other automobile accessories, and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but not including storage or salvaging, painting, major repair, automatic automobile washing, or the sale of butane or propane fuels. This is not the same as a filling station. 
    Automobile wrecking yard means an area outside of a building where motor vehicles are disassembled, dismantled, junked, or wrecked, or where motor vehicles not in operable condition (other than a museum) are stored. 
    Bar means an establishment whose primary activity, measured by dollar volume of sales, involves the sale and the on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, low-point beer, mixed beverages, wine, or other liquor, and where food service, if any, is a secondary activity. 
    Basement means a story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises. 
    Billboard means a non-accessory sign or sign structure upon which advertising may be posted, painted, or affixed, and which is primarily designed for the rental or lease of the sign space for advertising not related to the use of the property upon which the sign is located. 
    Block means a parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public open spaces, rural land, drainage channels, or a combination thereof. 
    Board of adjustment means the board of adjustment of the city. 
    Boardinghouse means a dwelling other than a hotel, where for compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three or more, but not exceeding 20, persons on a weekly or monthly basis. 
    Building means a structure intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure for persons, animals, or property. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Building envelope means the net cubic space that remains for placing a structure on a site after building line, setback, side yard, height, and bulk regulations are observed. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of copping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or roof. 
    Building line means a specific distance from a lot line beyond which a structure cannot lawfully extend (same as setback line). 
    Building, main, means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
    Buffer zone means a strip of land that serves the purpose of separating, protecting, or screening one type of land use from another. 
    Capital improvements program means a governmental timetable of permanent improvements budgeted to fit the city's fiscal capacity of a future date, generally paid for by bond and tax programs. 
    Carport means a permanent roofed structure permanently open on at least two sides, designed for or occupied by private passenger vehicles. 
    City means the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
    City council means the governing or legislative authority of the city. 
    Clinic. See Medical facilities. 
    Compatibility means the characteristics of different uses or activities that permit them to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict. 
    Comprehensive plan means a legal document often in the form of a text with an accompanying map which is a compendium of a city's general policies regarding the long-term development of the city. It is adopted by the local legislative body and is also called a city plan, general plan, or master plan. 
    Conditional use means a use that may be located in certain zoning districts provided it will not be detrimental to the public health and welfare and will not impair the integrity and character of the zoned district. Same as uses permitted on review. 
    Convenience grocery store means a small grocery store, with or without automobile fuel pumps, located along a major thoroughfare which sells limited variety of goods when compared to supermarkets. 
    Coverage means the lot area covered by all buildings located thereon. 
    Day care center means any place, home, or institution which receives eight or more children under the age of 16 years, who are not of common parentage, for care apart from their parents, legal guardians or custodians, when such care is received for regular periods of time for compensation. 
    Density means the average number of housing units per unit of land generally expressed as dwelling unit per acre; may be specified as wither gross density, the number of dwelling units per acre based on total land area being considered, or net density, the number of dwelling units per acres excluding area in street right-of-way and other publicly owned property. 
    District means any sections of the city for which the regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height, and coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform for each class or kind of building therein. 
    Drive-in restaurant means a restaurant that provides carhop service and may provide walk-in service. 
    Drive-through restaurant means a restaurant that has facilities for a side window, or in-car ordering and a food pick-up portal located such that the customer never has to leave his car. Such a restaurant may also provide a carhop service or inside dining. 
    Drive-up restaurant means a restaurant that makes no provision for carhops or side-window, drive-through ordering. 
    Dwelling means any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one or more families. 
    Dwelling, modular, means a relocatable living unit manufactured off-site and transported on an independent carrier unit to a permanent site which has been constructed in accordance with an engineering bulletin issued by the Office of Technical Standards, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, D.C. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means a detached dwelling designed to be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other, exclusive of hotels or motels. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a detached dwelling (not including mobile homes) designed to be occupied by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a detached dwelling (not including mobile homes) designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other. 
    Easement means the legal right to use property owned by another for specific purposes, such as maintenance, utility lines, roads, etc. 
    Eminent domain means the right of a government to take private property for public use or benefit upon payment of just compensation to the owner. The term "condemnation," in one sense of the word, can mean the same. 
    Exception means a potential exemption from certain requirements in these zoning regulations, allowable because the exemption applied for is one that is provided by the laws. Though some uses are normally not viewed as acceptable they might be written into law as exceptions and, in certain cases, be viewed as acceptable. 
    Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not to exceed five persons not all related by blood or marriage. 
    Family day care home means any place, home or institution which receives seven or less children under the age of 16 years, who are not of common parentage, for care apart from their parents, legal guardians, or custodians, when such care is received for regular periods of time for compensation. 
    Floodplain (100-year flood) means the area in a drainage basin that is liable to be flooded (under water) by a rainfall having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded within any given year, resulting in the area being undesirable for many types of development. 
    Garage apartment means a dwelling unit for one family adjacent to or above a private garage. 
    Garage, parking, means any building, or portion thereof, used for the storage of four or more automobiles. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building or a part of a main building used for storage purposes only for automobiles used solely by the occupants and their guests of the building to which it is accessory. 
    Garage, repair, means a building in which services are provided for the care, servicing, repair or equipping of automobiles. Major engine repair, transmission repair, salvaged parts storage, and welding for automobile repair is permitted. 
    Gasoline, filling, or service station. See Automobile service or gasoline station. 
    Gross floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all of the floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, and including, but not limited to, the following spaces: 
(1)  Basements; 
(2)  Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor; 
(3)  Floor space or mechanical equipment with structural head room of seven feet or more; 
(4)  Penthouse; 
(5)  Attic space providing room of seven feet or more; 
(6)  Interior balconies, mezzanines and enclosed covered porches and enclosed steps; 
(7)  Accessory uses in enclosed covered space, but not including space used for off-street parking. 
    Group home means any establishment or institution other than a hotel or motel for not more than six residents, 18 years of age or older, who are developmentally disabled or physically handicapped and which offers or provides supervision, residential accommodations, food service and training and skilled development opportunities designed to increase independence of the residents and supportive assistance to any of its residents requiring supportive assistance. 
    Health club means an establishment of place of business engaged in providing exercising and recreation facilities. Typical uses include health spas, gymnasiums, martial arts centers, fitness centers, racquetball courts and dance exercise facilities. 
    Home occupation means any occupation carried on solely by the inhabitants of a dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings, provided that no trading in merchandise is carried on and in connection with which there is no display or merchandise or advertising sign other than two square feet in area attached to the main or accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used except such as is customary for purely domestic or household purposes. A beauty or barbershop, poodle parlor, tea room or restaurant, rest home or clinic, doctor's or dentist's office, child care center, tourist home, or cabinet, metal, or auto repair shop shall not be deemed a home occupation. 
    Homeowners association means an incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under recorded agreements through which each lot or homeowner in a planned unit development or other described land area is automatically a member. Such associations protect the land interests of the group (often called a neighborhood group) and, in the case of a planned unit development, each member is charged a proportionate share for the organization's activities (such as maintaining a common property). 
    Hotel means a building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six or more sleeping rooms occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation, but not including trailer court or camp, sanatorium, hospital, asylum, orphanage or building where persons are housed under restraint. 
    Improved land means a classification of land that may or may not be vacant, but definitely contains (or is very near to) such facilities and utilities as roads, sewer, water lines, and other types of basic infrastructure. 
    Individual sewage disposal system means a septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other approved on-lot sewage treatment device. 
    Intensity means the degree to which land is used, referring to levels of concentration or activity in uses. 
    Kennel means any lot or premises on which are kept three or more dogs, more than six months of age. More than one litter of puppies born from different female dogs may be kept only in a kennel. 
    Landscaping means the improvement of a lot, parcel, or tract of land with grass, shrubs, and/or trees. The term "landscaping" may include pedestrian walks, flowerbeds, ornamental objects, such as foundations, statuary, and other familiar natural or artificial objects. 
    Leapfrog development means the development that occurs well beyond the existing limits of urban development in a city, thus leaving intervening land behind; a form of urban sprawl. 
    Lot means any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one main buildings, or a group of main buildings, and accessory buildings and uses, including such open space as are required by these regulations and other laws or ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a street. 
    Lot area means the total area of a lot that is included within lot lines. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot frontage means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot. 
    Lot, reverse frontage, means a double frontage lot which is to be developed with the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress and egress provided on a minor street. This is a highly desirable design practice for double frontage lots. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight body feet or more in width and 32 body feet or more in length, but contains no less than 320 square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
    Medical facilities means and includes the following: 
    Convalescent, rest, or nursing home means a health facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for compensation. 
    Dental clinic or medical clinic means a facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients, provided that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions. 
    Dental office or doctor's office means same as dental clinic or medical clinic. 
    Hospital means an institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and includes related facilities, central services facilities and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. 
    Public health center means a facility primarily utilized by a health unit for providing public health services including related facilities such as laboratories, clinics and administrative offices operated in connection therewith. 
    Sanatorium means an institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical treatment or treatment and recuperation making use of natural therapeutic agents. 
    Mixed building means a building designed for or containing both residential and nonresidential uses, or multiple nonresidential uses. 
    Mobile home means a mobile living unit used or designed for human occupancy on a permanent basis. Mobile homes may be of the single-, double-, or triple-wide variety, the latter two being combinations of specially built single-wides. See Manufactured home. 
    Mobile home park means the land that is rented or used for occupancy by one or more mobile homes or travel trailers. 
    Mobile home subdivision means the land that has been subdivided with the intent that mobile homes will each occupy one lot and that the dweller is able to buy his lot. 
    Nonconformance means a lawful condition of a structure or land use which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. The term "nonconformance" may include, but is not limited to, any failure to conform to use, height, area, coverage, or off-street parking requirements. 
    Nursery (plant) means any land used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers, or other plants for sale or for transplanting. Also refers to a business which sells nursery stock and related garden supplies. 
    Occupancy permits means official certification which permits the use of a building in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and which certifies compliance with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building in its several parts together with any special stipulations or condition of the building permit. 
    Open space means area included in any side, rear, or front yard, or any other unoccupied space on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices and eaves of porches. 
    Parking space means a permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile together with a permanently surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress or egress of an automobile. 
    Planned unit development means a development that includes a mixture of housing types and densities whose regulations allow the developer more flexibility than regular regulations permit. Generally, a common open space, homeowners' association, and some neighborhood commercial activity is included. The overall density of the PUD must not exceed that which such an area of land could have legally been developed to under regular regulations. 
    Planning commission means the planning commission of the city. It is also called a zoning commission or planning and zoning commission. 
    Public improvement means any improvements consisting of drainage, water, sanitary sewer, paving, sidewalks, or other facilities for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
    Public use means any area, building or structure held, used, or controlled exclusively for public purposes by any department or branch of any government, without reference to the ownership of the building or structure. 
    Public use, quasi, means any use which is essentially public and not for profit which is under private ownership or control. 
    Public utility means a business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of public consequence and need, such as electricity, gas, water, transportation or communications. 
    Public way means any street, waterway, viaduct, sidewalk, bridge, waterfront, parkway, playground, square, park, aviation field, and other public ground and open space. 
    Recreation center means a place of entertainment that does not serve alcohol or beer and specializes in such entertainment as pool, billiards, pinball, video games, foosball, and the like. 
    Rezoning means an amendment to or change in the zoning status of a lot, tract, or parcel of land. 
    Right-of-way means the right of passage over the property of another either via public implied dedication (such as roads and railways) or accepted access (such as shoreline). "Easement" is a comparable term, but usually refers to utility lines and drainageways. 
    Roadway means the improved or unimproved portion of a street intended for the accommodation of vehicular traffic. 
    Roominghouse means a building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three or more, but not exceeding 20, persons. A building which has accommodations for more than 20 persons shall be defined as a hotel under the terms of these regulations. 
    Self-service laundry or dry cleaning establishment means any attended or unattended place, building or portion thereof, available to the general public for the purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing apparel, cloth, fabrics, and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical appliance which is operated primarily by the customers. 
    Service station. See Automobile service or gasoline station. 
    Setback line. See Building line. 
    Shopping center means one or more commercial buildings which are planned, developed, owned, or managed as a unit, which provides shared facilities, including parking. Although typically utilized for retail sales of goods and merchandise, offices, theatres, and food service tenants are authorized uses. Food service establishments are those which exclusively provide for on-premises consumption of prepared food. 
    Sidewalk means a paved surface area paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian way. 
    Sight-proof screening means decorative fencing, evergreen vegetation or landscaped earth berms maintained for the purpose of concealing from view the property or structure behind such a fence, evergreen vegetation or berm. 
    Special exemption. See Exception. 
    Special use permit means a use eligible to be permitted in a zoning district upon approval by the city council. 
    Spot zoning means the awarding of a use classification (zoning) to a single parcel of land when that classification is inappropriate or detrimental to the uses in the surrounding area. In spot zoning situations an individual property owner benefits greatly, at the cost of nearby property owners. 
    Stable, private, means a stable with a capacity for more than two horses or mules. 
    Stable, public, means a stable, other than a private stable, with a capacity for more than two horses or mules. 
    Standards means a term loosely defined as referring to all requirements in zoning regulations but more specifically including site design regulations such as lot area, height limits, floor area ratios, frontage requirements, etc. Under another sense of the term, a standard is a hypothetical estimate for what a city of given size and population "should" have in terms of city services and land use patterns, such as street widths, sewer line sizes, and treatment capacities, amount and type of park land, etc. 
    Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, half, means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for use. 
    Street means any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Street, cul-de-sac, means a street with an intersection at one end and a wide, circular turnaround on the other, thus discouraging use of the street by nonresidents of the street and facilitating privacy. 
    Street, intersecting, means any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
    Street, major (or major arterial), means a road that serves through-traffic movement across urban areas, often subject to controlled access from properties fronting on the right-of-way. Section line roads are generally a good example, since they facilitate the transportation of numerous vehicles across urban areas. 
    Street, minor, means a street that transports a much lower volume of daily traffic than a major street, classifiable into two varieties, local and collectors. Local roadways are those allowing access to abutting land, serving local (residents of a given street) traffic only. A collector street is one that channels traffic from local streets to major arterials. 
    Strip zoning means an assorted zoning, haphazard mixture of development, usually commercial, extending along both sides of a major street leading out from a city. 
    Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as load bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
    Subdivider (also referred to as "the developer") means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity, acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined. 
    Subdivision means the process of laying out a parcel of raw land into lots, blocks, streets, and public areas. The term "subdivision" also refers to the land that has been divided in this manner. 
    Tourist court means an area containing one or more buildings designed or intended to be used as temporary sleeping facilities of one or more transient families and intended primarily for automobile transients. 
    Tourist home means a dwelling occupied as a permanent residence by an owner or renter in which sleeping accommodations in not more than four rooms are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation. 
    Trailer or mobile home space means : a plot of ground within a trailer court designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
    Trailer court or mobile home park means a parcel of land under single ownership which has been designed or improved or is intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one or more trailer houses or mobile homes. 
    Trailer, hauling, means a vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods, or commodities, including boats. 
    Trailer home or mobile home means a detached single-family dwelling unit with all of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Designed for long-term occupancy and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems; 
(2)  Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels with the carriage frame for transportation being an integral part of the construction of the unit including axles, wheels and hitch; and 
(3)  Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete, including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports, connection to utilities and the like. 
    Trailer, traveling or camping, means a portable or mobile living unit used for temporary human occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants, and not constituting the principal place of residence of the occupants, and containing less than 175 square feet floor area. 
    Transition means a buffer between two or more dwelling districts or incompatible uses. 
    Underground home or subterranean home means a dwelling unit which is constructed at least halfway underground from floor to ceiling on at least two sides. The home must be intended and designed for yearround occupancy and have a roof that is covered by soil over 75 percent of its area. A part of the home may be constructed above grade (ground level) but not so much that the below grade area is more appropriately defined as a basement. 
    Utility means a service provided to the public by either a private or public agency. 
    Variance means an approved relaxation of city regulations as to land use when applied for by a property owner who would be caused undue hardship of the requirements were enforced to the criteria demanded. It can only be granted when this hardship is caused by the property's being a relatively useless size, shape, slope, location, or other liability, none of which being common to properties in the area. 
    Veterinary clinic/hospital means a facility for the medical or surgical treatment of diseases and injuries of domestic animals. 
    Yard means an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in these regulations that an accessory building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front, means a yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and outside wall of the main building. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
    Yard, side, means a yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of the main building. 
    Zero lot line means a lot where the outside wall of a structure is located on the side property line. 
    Zoning district means an area of the city designated in the zoning regulations text and delineated on the zoning map that is affected by specific land use requirements, as to use, building coverage, building height, setback lines, lot size, frontage requirements, parking and loading requirements and any other relevant regulations that are passed by the city. 
(Prior Code, app. B, § 16-27; LDC 1991, § 12-472; Ord. No. 35(92), 9-21-1992; Ord. No. 296(00), 11-20-2000) 
CHAPTER 5. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE A. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 12-501. - General. 
(a)  Title. This chapter may be known and cited as the "City of Moore Subdivision Regulations" and will be referred to herein as "this chapter". 
(b)  Referenced documents. The "Design Criteria and Construction Standards" are hereby adopted as a part of this chapter and shall be in full force and effect from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. This document, herein referred to as "design standards," shall be maintained by and kept current by the city engineer and/or community development director and is available for viewing in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Authority. These regulations and minimum standards for land development are adopted by resolution of the planning commission and ratified by ordinance of the city in accordance with the provisions in 11 O.S. §§ 45-101-45-105. 
(d)  Application to types of subdividing. These regulations and development standards shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision, whether presently within the corporate limits of the city or platted as an addition thereto for future, contemplated annexation: 
(1)  The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites, or parcels not covered by the lot-split procedure contained herein, any part of which, when subdivided, shall contain less than five acres in area; 
(2)  The division of land, previously subdivided or platted, into tracts, lots, sites or parcels of less than five acres in area; 
(3)  The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, including those for use by public and private utility companies; or 
(4)  The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract of land regardless of the area involved. 
(e)  Code compliance. All building and construction codes of the city, inspection provisions and fees shall be fully applicable to additions without the corporate limits by platted and contemplated for future annexation. Failure or refusal of the developers or builders to adhere to any city ordinance prior to annexation shall be a valid basis to deny city services. 
(f)  Purpose. The city subdivision regulations as adopted shall serve the following purposes: 
(1)  The regulation of land subdivision for residential and other uses is widely accepted as a function of municipal government in the United States. It has become widely recognized as a method of ensuring sound community growth and the safeguarding of the interests of the homeowner, the subdivider and the local government. The business of building a city requires the safeguarding of these interests and the assurances that land subdivision will provide permanent assets to the community. 
(2)  These regulations of land subdivision seek to prevent excessive governmental operating costs. At the same time they seek to ensure to the maximum degree possible the means whereby land can be developed for the highest possible use as determined by consideration of social, economic and environmental factors with all of the necessary protections for the prevention of deterioration, obsolescence, slums, and blight. 
(3)  Further, these regulations and standards for the subdivision and improvement of land for urban use are to make provisions for adequate light, air, open spaces, drainage, transportation, public utilities and other needs, to ensure the development and maintenance of a healthy attractive and efficient community that provides for the conservation and protection of its human and natural resources; they are designed, intended and should be administered in a manner to: 
a.  Implement the city's comprehensive plan in relation to: 
1.  The use of land and land use relationships; 
2.  The transportation system, including, but not limited to, highways, streets, alleys, and sidewalks; 
3.  Community facilities, including recreational and educational facilities, fire stations, etc.; 
4.  The extension or expansion of the sanitary sewer system, including adequate easements to accommodate lines and facilities; 
5.  The appropriate disposition of surface runoff water; and 
6.  The accommodation of all other utilities within adequate easements; 
b.  Protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the city; 
c.  Provide for adequate light, air and privacy to secure safety from fire, flood and other physical dangers and to prevent overcrowding of the land; 
d.  Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of slums and blight; 
e.  Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining tracts; 
f.  Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the tract of land being developed be borne by the developers of the tract, and that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole community be borne by the whole community; 
g.  Provide the best possible design for the tract; 
h.  Reconcile any differences of interests; and 
i.  Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision. 
(g)  Policy. It is the policy of the planning commission of the city that these regulations are adopted for the purpose of establishing standards for reviewing of plans, plats, and replats as provided for in 11 O.S. § 45-105. 
(h)  Violation and penalty. 
(1)  No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change, improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land which does not comply with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  A violation of this chapter shall be deemed an offense and punishable by fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations shall be fined as provided in section 1-108 for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-501; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-502. - Subdividing general procedure. 
(a)  Plat approval. For all cases of subdividing within the scope of these regulations, a plat of the land in question, or an easement with a description in writing where appropriate, shall be drawn and submitted to the planning commission and city council for their approval or disapproval, as provided hereafter in these regulations. The subdividing process shall consist of the following procedures: 
(1)  Preliminary and subsequent final platting is required for the following types of land subdivision: 
a.  The division of unplatted land within any residential, commercial, or industrial zoning district resulting in two or more tracts, lots or parcels. 
b.  The subdivision of unplatted land within the A-1 or A-2 zoning district resulting in five or more tracts, lot or parcels, any part of which, when subdivided contains less than ten acres in area. 
(2)  A simplified plat is required for the division of unplatted land for the conveyance of a single tract, lot or parcel. The simplified plat requirements are the same as described in section 12-533. 
(3)  A lot split plat is required for the division of unplatted land in the A-1 or A-2 zoning district into four or fewer parcels, as described in section 12-543. 
(b)  Filing fee. To defray partially the costs of notification and administration procedures there shall be paid to the clerk at the time of submission of the preliminary and final plats a fee in the amount as set by the city council by motion or resolution. 
(c)  Agenda. Each plat submitted for preliminary or final approval shall be placed on the agenda of the planning commission only after fulfilling the appropriate requirements of these regulations. However, a plat not meeting all of the requirements may be submitted providing the subdivider presents with the plat a written request for specific exceptions and explains the reasons therefor. 
(d)  Official recording. No plat or other land subdivision instrument shall be filed in the office of the county clerk until it shall have been approved by the planning commission and by the city council as hereinafter set forth. Before recording the final plat, digital as-built drawings shall be submitted to the community development and GIS departments in AutoCAD or GIS shapefile format. All final plats shall be filed within two years of date of approval by the planning commission and city council, and no lots shall be sold from any plat until recorded. Time extensions of the two-year filing requirement may be granted by the planning commission upon review of the final plat and a finding that circumstances prevail substantially as of the time of original approval. 
(e)  Exemption. Plats containing four lots or fewer may be exempted from the provisions of all or part of procedural provisions contained in articles C, D and F of this chapter upon written approval of the community development director; provided, however, that all other provisions of these regulations, including those relating to design and improvements, shall be complied with. 
(f)  Data required. To assist in incorporating plats into the city's GIS mapping system plats must be provided in AutoCAD or GIS shapefile format. Templates of these file types are available in the community development department. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-502; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 823(16), 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 12-503. - City council may amend. 
    The city council may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public rules and regulations for the administration of these regulations to the end that the public be informed and the approval of plats be expedited. These regulations may be enlarged or amended by the city council after public hearing, due notice of which shall be given as required by law. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-503; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-504. - Requirements. 
(a)  Compliance to this Code. No subdivider shall subdivide any tract of land that is located within the city or within its exclusive extraterritorial jurisdiction and neither within another city nor within the exclusive extraterritorial jurisdiction of another city, as defined by the Oklahoma Statutes, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Compliance to other codes. All subdivisions and development shall comply with other adopted codes whether specified herein or not, including, but not limited to, the city zoning ordinance" and Moore Plan 21. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any provision hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as allowable by state law, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly. Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violations of this chapter. 
(d)  Improvements required. 
(1)  The subdivider shall furnish, extend, install and/or construct all infrastructure, including, but not limited to, the water and sanitary sewer systems and the street and drainage facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. All such facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the design standards referenced as part of this chapter, and other standards, specifications and drawings as may be hereafter adopted, approved by the city council and placed on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(2)  Where considered necessary by the city engineer and/or community development director the facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by the design standards to provide for future growth and expansion, and will conform to the water and sewer extension policy. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-504; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-505. - Variances. 
    Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations would result in substantial hardship or inequity, the planning commission may vary or modify, except as otherwise indicated, such requirements of design, but not of procedure or improvements, so that the subdivider may develop his property in a reasonable manner, but so, at the same time, that the public welfare and interests of the city are protected and general intent and spirit of these regulations be preserved. Such modification may be granted upon written request of the subdivider stating the reasons for each modification and may be waived by three-fourths affirmative vote of the regular membership of the planning commission and confirmed by a simple majority vote of the city council. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-505; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-506. - Vacation of public way or easement. 
    A formal application may be initiated by the planning commission or city council or by property owners owning more than one-half the total frontage of the public way or easement sought to be closed. Said application is filed with the community development department. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-506; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
ARTICLE B. - GENERAL SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 12-511. - General. 
    Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any part of the land, before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the owner of the land or his agent shall apply for and secure the approval of the planning commission of such proposed subdivision. The proposed subdivision shall conform to the general procedure described as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary plat. 
(2)  Final plat and construction plans. 
(3)  Posting of inspection fees and maintenance bonds. 
(4)  Construction improvements. 
(5)  City acceptance of improvements. 
(6)  Filing of the final plat. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-511; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
ARTICLE C. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 12-521. - General requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plat is to provide early illustration of the nature of a proposed subdivision. This step in the process occurs prior to the preparation of detailed drawings of construction details in order that conflicts with surrounding lands, community plans or other factors might be avoided at an early time. Discussion of intentions or anticipated development approaches with the staff is welcomed and encouraged at any time, including prior to the actual preparation of a preliminary plat. 
(b)  Submittal. The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat for submission to the planning commission. Twenty-three copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the office of the secretary of the planning commission not less than 21 days or such shorter review time as might be determined by the planning staff prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. Additionally, one 11-inch by 17-inch copy of the preliminary plat shall be submitted with the application. 
(c)  Code compliance. The preliminary plat must comply with all city codes and ordinances. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-521; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-522. - Application conference. 
(a)  Purpose. A preliminary plat application conference may be requested by the developer or the community development director. The purpose of the application conference is to give the developer an opportunity to: 
(1)  Discuss the proposed development with the director of public works, the planning director and the city engineer; 
(2)  Obtain copies of all forms, publications, design criteria, and standards available from the city; and 
(3)  Determine whether the current zoning is appropriate for the proposed development or if rezoning may be required. 
(b)  Conference to streamline process. The plan submittal and the conference provide an opportunity for the developer and the city to communicate and streamline the platting process. 
(c)  Submittal. The submittal for the application conference shall be the same as the preliminary plat application. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-522; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-523. - Application. 
    The subdivider shall submit with the preliminary plat an executed copy of the application and certificate of design which is provided as appendix A to these regulations. The application is provided to assist with the preparation of preliminary plats and to expedite the review of such plats. The certification of design is provided to ensure that the land planner preparing the plat has taken full cognizance of the general plan, the land use plan, and the ordinances and regulations governing the subdivision of land, and that he has, to the best of his ability, designed the subdivision in accordance therewith. Exceptions to the certification of design in accordance with stated plans and regulations may be requested in writing, stating clearly the reasons for the request, attached to the application and certificate of design and submitted therewith. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-523; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Editor's note- Appendix A is, as attached to the initial subdivision ordinance, on file with the city clerk. 
Sec. 12-524. - Contents of preliminary plat. 
(a)  General. The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch and shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  The scale, north point, and date; 
(2)  The proposed name of the subdivision; 
(3)  The name and address of owner of record, the subdivider and of the registered engineer or registered land surveyor; 
(4)  A key map showing the location of the proposed subdivision referenced to existing or proposed major streets and to government section lines, and including the direction and number of acres of the drainage area of which the proposed subdivision is a part; (See also subsection (a)(10) of this section) 
(5)  The names, with location of intersecting boundary lines, of adjoining subdivisions and the location of city limits, if falling within or immediately adjoining the tract; 
(6)  The land contours with vertical intervals not greater than two feet referenced to a United States geological survey or coast and geodetic survey benchmark or monument; 
(7)  The location of existing buildings, water, watercourses, and the location of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin or are immediately adjacent to the subdivision; provided, however, that actual measured distances shall not be required; 
(8)  The length of the boundaries of the tract, measured to the nearest foot, and the proposed location and width of streets, alleys, easements and setback lines and the approximate lot dimensions; 
(9)  The location, approximate size and type of sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, power and natural gas lines and other surface and subsurface structures and pipelines existing within or immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision; and the location, layout, type and proposed size of the following structures and utilities: 
a.  Water mains; 
b.  Sanitary sewer mains, submains and laterals; 
c.  Storm sewers, culverts and drainage structures; and 
d.  Street improvements; 
(10)  The location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage structures, and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the proposed subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements relating thereto, whether they are located within or outside of the proposed plat; 
(11)  The classification of every street easement within or adjacent to the subdivision in accordance with the intended use of the street based on the proposed design. This shall be done by placing the appropriate term: 
a.  Arterial; 
b.  Collector; 
c.  Residential collector; 
d.  Residential local; and 
(12)  A title block appearing at the lower left-hand corner which shall include: 
a.  Name of the subdivision. 
b.  Name and seal of the engineer of record or registered surveyor. 
c.  Scale. 
(b)  Restrictive covenants. In such cases where a property owners association (POA) will be established, the subdivider shall submit with the submission of the preliminary plat, ten copies of all restrictive and protective covenants that will be proposed for filing with the final plat. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-524; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-525. - Planning commission action, preliminary plat method of approval. 
(a)  Planning commission. The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, disapprove, or table the plat within 45 days of the date of its submission by the applicant. Approval is subject to action of the city council. If the preliminary plat is disapproved or approved conditionally, the reason for such action shall be recorded in the minutes of the commission meeting. (A copy of the minutes of the meeting shall be transmitted to the subdivider.) The reasons for disapproval or conditional approval shall refer specifically to those parts of the general plan, land use plan, or specific regulations with which the plat does not conform. On conditionally approving the plat, the community development director may require submission of a revised plat. Unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the subdivider, if no action be taken by the planning commission at the end of 45 days after submission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved subject to action by the city council. 
(b)  City council. The city council will either concur in the action of the planning commission or take such exceptions as it may elect. If the plat conforms to all of the standards, or after agreement with the applicant is reached upon any revision which shall be filed with the planning commission or a revised copy, the subdivider may proceed with the laying out of streets and roads, the preparation of utility plans and with the preparation of a final plat. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-525; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
ARTICLE D. - FINAL PLAT AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 12-531. - General requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the final plat is to create a recorded document which accurately describes the subdivision land, both as to accurate dimensions, and as to legal provisions which are pertinent to the subdivision. Much of the reason for this step is to make the transfer of the land more simple and certain. Land sales by reference to a legally filed plat are generally less complicated and more likely to provide the precise legal situation sought. The certainty of such sales derives from the assurance of an accurate survey and processes designed to ensure the provision of facilities necessary to service the land. 
(b)  Submittal. Fifteen dark line prints, one 11-inch by 17-inch copy of the final plat shall be submitted to the office of the planning commission secretary not less than 21 days or such shorter review time as might be determined by the planning staff before the planning commission meeting at which it is to be considered for final approval. At the same time, there shall be submitted three sets of the proposed plans and specifications for all improvements and the proposed restrictions in final form; provided, however, that the final plat may be approved subject to later submission of final improvement plans and specifications. 
(c)  Impact fees. All required impact fees, including the transportation impact fee, shall be collected as set forth in the city codes and ordinances. 
(d)  Code compliance. The final plat shall comply with all city codes and ordinances. 
(e)  Control network. All plans shall be submitted in NAD 1983 HARN Oklahoma State Plane South, US feet coordinates using city survey monuments. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-531; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 823(16), 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 12-532. - Application. 
(a)  Application required. The subdivider shall submit with the final plat an executed copy of the application and certificate of design which is provided as appendix B to these regulations. The application is provided to assist with the preparation of final plats and to expedite the review of such plans. The application includes certifications to the compliance of the plat with pertinent regulations and with the requirements of good engineering practices. The application and certification are to be executed by a registered professional engineer or licensed land surveyor holding a license to practice in the state. 
Editor's note- Appendix B is, as attached to the initial subdivision ordinance, on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  Time of submission. The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the planning commission and city council for final approval within two years of the date on which the preliminary plat was approved. If not submitted for final approval within such time, the preliminary plat shall be considered as having been disapproved unless the planning commission agrees to an extension of time. The final plat shall be filed in the office of the county clerk within two years after approval by the city council and planning commission, or if not filed within such time, an extension may be granted by the planning commission upon review of the plat. If there are substantial changes in the layout of a plat, or if there are changes to public dedications shown, it will be necessary to submit a final plat for re-approval. 
(c)  The final plat shall be submitted digitally in AutoCAD or GIS shapefile format. Templates of these file types are available in the community development department. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-532; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 823(16), 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 12-533. - Contents. 
(a)  Plat preparation. The final plat shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor holding a license to practice in the state. The plat must bear the seal and signature of a registered land surveyor. 
(b)  Drafting. The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to the inch from an accurate survey and on sheets whose dimensions are 24 inches by 36 inches. On the first sheet of every plat, there shall be a key map showing the location of the subdivision referenced to government survey section lines and major streets. If more than two sheets are required for the plat, the key map shall show the number of the sheet for each area. The borders of the sheets shall be 11/2 inches at top and bottom, two inches at left, and one inch at right. 
(c)  Contents. The final plat shall show: 
(1)  The location and description of all section corners and permanent survey monuments in or near the tract, to at least one of which the subdivision shall be referenced; 
(2)  The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals thereof, and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in degrees and minutes, as hereafter specified; 
(3)  The boundary lines of the land being subdivided fully dimensioned by length and bearings, and the location of boundary lines of adjoining land, with adjacent subdivisions identified by official names. Material which is not a part of the subdivision shall be shown in dashed or dotted lines; 
(4)  The lines of all proposed streets fully dimensioned by the lengths and bearings or angles; 
(5)  The lines of all proposed alleys. Where the length or direction of an alley is not readily discernable from data given for lot and block lines, the length and bearing shall be given; 
(6)  The widths, and names where appropriate, of all proposed streets and alleys, and of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements which shall be properly located; 
(7)  The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings or angles, except that where a lot line meets a street line at right angles, the angle may be shown as a symbol; 
(8)  The outline of any property which is offered for dedication to public use fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, with the areas other than streets to be marked "public"; 
(9)  The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with areas to be excluded from platting marked "reserved" or "not a part"; 
(10)  The location of all building lines, setback lines, and easements for public services or utilities with dimensions showing their locations; 
(11)  The radii, arcs, points of tangency, points of intersection, and central angles and curve data for curvilinear streets and radii for all property returns; 
(12)  The proper acknowledgements of owners and the consent by the mortgagee to plat dedications; 
(13)  The following which shall be made and shown on a reproducible tracing: 
a.  Owner's certificate and dedication, signed; 
b.  Surveyor's certificate of survey; 
c.  Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to the public; 
d.  Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive covenants, filed in the office of the county clerk which directly affect the land being subdivided; 
e.  Certificate of planning commission approval; 
f.  Certification of city council's acceptance of streets, easements and public land dedications; and 
g.  County treasurer's certificate; 
(14)  A title which shall include: 
a.  Name of the subdivision; 
b.  Name of the city, county and state; and 
c.  Location and description of the subdivision referenced to section, range and township; 
(15)  A title block appearing at the lower left-hand corner which shall include: 
a.  Name of the subdivision; 
b.  Name and seal of the registered land surveyor; 
c.  Scale. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-533; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-534. - Construction plans. 
(a)  General. Construction plans shall include the following: 
(1)  All improvements shall be designed in accordance with the design standards referenced as part of this article. 
(2)  Three copies of complete construction plans, specifications, engineering calculations and detailed cost projections for streets, drainage, sanitary sewers, water distribution, and any other improvements to be constructed, are required to be submitted with the final plat. Construction plans must be 100 percent complete at the time of submittal. Any incomplete sets of construction plans shall be returned and unreviewed. 
(3)  The construction plans shall be submitted on standard 24-inch by 36-inch sheets. 
(4)  Each sheet of the construction plans shall contain a title block, including space for the notation of revisions. This space is to be completed with each revision to the plan sheet and shall clearly note the nature of the revision and the date that the revision was made. This title block shall be located at the lower left hand corner of each sheet submitted. 
(5)  Each sheet of the construction plans shall include north arrow, scale, date, and benchmark description to sea level datum. 
(6)  The specifications and each construction plan sheet shall bear the seal and signature of the licensed professional engineer who prepared the plans. 
(b)  Paving plans. The construction plans, at a minimum, shall include a plan and profile of each street with stationing, top of curb grades, if applicable, or street centerline, borrow ditch flowline and existing and proposed ground lines. The typical cross section of proposed streets shall show the width of roadway, pavement type and location and width of sidewalk. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer and water plans. The construction plans, at a minimum, shall include a plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers with stationing, grades, pipe sizes, and materials indicated and showing locations of manholes, cleanouts, etc., and a plan of the proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves, fire hydrants and fittings, etc. Application construction details shall be included with the construction plans. 
(d)  Storm drainage plan. The construction plans shall include stormwater detention plans and erosion plans, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The construction plans shall include a general location map of the subdivision showing the entire watershed (a U.S.G.S. quadrangle is satisfactory) and the limits of all on-site and off-site stormwater draining to the project. 
(2)  The construction plans shall include calculations showing the anticipated stormwater flow, including watershed area, percent runoff, runoff factors, storm intensity and time of concentrations showing basis for design. 
(3)  The construction plans shall include a plan and profile of proposed storm sewers or channels, showing stationing, hydraulic data, pipe grades, sizes and materials, manholes, inlets, pipe connections, outlet structures, etc. 
(4)  The construction plans shall include a detailed plan for any bridges, culverts, catchbasins, any other drainage structures or any other improvements to be made and shall include all of the following: 
a.  The open channel or storm drain grades, design flow, design velocity, capacity and hydraulic grade line; 
b.  A plan and profile of all culverts under any street with the design flow of water, headwater, and tailwater depth and tail water capacity; 
c.  The size of all driveway culverts to carry the design flow of water at each point of installation; 
d.  Typical ditch sections and the width of any right-of-way or easement needed; 
e.  A summary sheet of all drainage facilities; 
f.  The seal and signature, prominently displayed on each sheet, of the licensed professional engineer responsible for the design. 
(5)  The plat shall notify that the filling or obstruction within the floodplain and drainage easements shall be prohibited. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-534; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 824(16), 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 12-535. - Design summary. 
    A separate document or report entitled "Engineering Design Summary" may be required as directed by the city engineer and/or community development director and included with the submittal of the construction plans and specifications. It shall summarize calculations and other such engineering information pertaining to the major items of design. It shall be used during the review to determine whether the facilities proposed for construction have been designed in accordance with the intent of the design standards. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-535; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-536. - Planning commission action, final plat method of approval. 
(a)  Planning commission. The planning commission shall act upon the final plat within 45 day after it has been submitted for final approval. This approval and the date thereof shall be shown on the plat over the signature of the planning commission chairman or vice-chairman. Unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the subdivider and if no action is taken by the planning commission at the end of 45 days after submission, the plat shall be deemed approved. A certification by the secretary of the planning commission as to the date of submission of plat for final approval and failure of planning commission to act thereon within such time shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement of approval. If the final plat is disapproved, grounds for this refusal shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be transmitted to the applicant. The reasons for disapproval shall refer specifically to those parts of the general plan or ordinance or regulation with which the plat does not comply. 
(b)  City council. Before recording the final plat, it shall be submitted to the city council for approval and for acceptance of public ways and service and utility easements and land dedicated to public use. This approval of the plat shall be shown over the signature of the mayor and attested to by the city clerk or his deputy. The disapproval of any plat or plan by the city council shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon. 
(c)  Final approval. Before recording the final plat, digital as-built drawings shall be submitted to the community development and GIS departments in AutoCAD or GIS shapefile format. Templates of these file types are available in the community development department. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-536; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 823(16), 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 12-537. - Recording of plat. 
    After final approval of the plat and the affixing of all required signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider shall provide the planning commission secretary with one reproducible transparency, and a digital file in either AutoCAD or GIS shapefile format. The final plat shall be filed with the county clerk, meeting all requirements for such filing after final criteria are met. 
(1)  Final plat is approved by the city council and all revision required by the city council are complete; 
(2)  The developer has submitted final copies of the final plat and construction plans and all required signatures have been obtained; 
(3)  All required fees have been paid in full; 
(4)  All public improvements have been constructed, inspected, approved and dedicated to the city, or surety bonds or letter of credit have been posted and all as-built plans have been submitted in either AutoCAD or GIS shapefile format; 
(5)  The developer has provided proof that private restrictions have been filed of record; and 
(6)  The developer has provided all required maintenance bonds. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-537; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 823(16), 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 12-538. - Sale of lots. 
    The sale of lots by a developer of an addition prior to the final approval and recording of the final plat of the addition is hereby prohibited and no deed of conveyance shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk prior to that time. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-538; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
ARTICLE E. - REPLATS AND AMENDING PLATS 

Sec. 12-541. - General. 
(a)  Replats required. A replat is required for property in which there has been a change in lot allocation, dedicated infrastructure or easements. 
(b)  Requirement waived. The community development director may waive this requirement if the replat involves minor changes. 
(c)  Certified copies required. Certified copies of the entire subdivision and deed restrictions shall accompany replats. 
(d)  Subject to final plat requirements. Replats are subject to the same requirements as final plats, and shall contain the information required by this article. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-541; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-542. - Application. 
    Application procedure shall be that of the final plat and shall contain information required by this article. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-542; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-543. - Lot-splits. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of providing for the processing of lot-split plats is to facilitate the conveyance of simple property divisions. Those matters which shall be considered as lot-splits shall be those with involve the dividing or redividing of a single parcel of land into not more than four resulting parcels, and which dividing shall not involve the extension, opening, vacating, narrowing, or change of alignment of any thoroughfare, street, right-of-way, or easement. The determination of eligibility for processing as a lot-split plat shall be made from the records of the ownership of the property as of the date that these regulations are officially adopted. The division of properties may be processed as lot-split plats only to the extent of the creation of three divisions, resulting in four parcels, additional to those properties on file with the county clerk as of the above stated date. 
(b)  Community development director approval. The city council may empower the community development director, or his designee, to approve such lot-split applications as meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Where the resulting parcels are all larger than five acres; 
(2)  Where the proposal is for the purposes of shifting property lines with the result that there are no more land parcels created than before the action; or 
(3)  Where the proposal does not involve the dedication or vacation of any public rights-of-way or easements. 
(c)  City council approval. In cases where the proposed lot-split cannot be approved by the community development director acting as the designated representative of the city council, the proposal shall be set for consideration by the city council. In the event of a denial of a lot-split proposal by the city council, the reasons therefor shall be set down in writing, and at the option of the applicant an appeal may be taken to district court. 
(d)  Deed required. As a minimum, the processing of a lot-split shall require the presentation of the instruments by which the interests in the land shall be conveyed (deed). 
(e)  Survey required. A before and after surveyor drawing shall be required for a lot-split to be considered. 
(f)  Other submissions. The community development director shall inform the applicant of additional items which are necessary for full consideration of the request. These additional items may include: 
(1)  A simplified lot-split plat; 
(2)  Restrictive covenants; 
(3)  State health department approvals of water or sewer provisions; 
(4)  A property legal description; 
(5)  A survey certificate of the property; 
(6)  Other information important to consideration of the application; 
(7)  A site plan which shall include the following: 
a.  Public improvements and utilities; 
b.  Existing and proposed improvements. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-543; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
ARTICLE F. - DESIGN 

Sec. 12-551. - Urban design principles. 
    The design of each subdivision is important to the overall nature of the community, and it is important how the individual subdivisions fit together to make up the community. That is much of the reason for community-wide planning for physical features such as land use, circulation systems, community facilities and public utilities. Quality design of subdivisions is also important to the private economic sector because good design helps to sell developments in a competitive market, saves development costs and increases profits. Because these areas have been considered in the processes that led to the general plan and the land use plan it shall be necessary for each subdivision to be designed in accordance with the principles of design established in the general plan and the land use plan and in accordance with the following general principles: 
(1)  It is intended that the city urban area should be designed as a group of integrated residential neighborhoods and appropriate commercial and industrial and public facilities. The neighborhood, a planning unit, is intended as an area principally for residential use, and of a size shopping facilities to serve the residents of the neighborhood should be provided and designed as an integral part of each neighborhood. 
a.  Each subdivision shall provide for the continuation of all arterial streets and highways as shown on the major street plan. Arterial streets should be located on the perimeter of the residential neighborhood; 
b.  Minor streets shall be designed to provide access to each parcel of land within the residential neighborhood and within industrial areas, and in a manner that will discourage use by through traffic. They should be planned so that future urban expansion will not require the conversion of minor streets to arterial routes; 
c.  Collector streets should be designed to provide a direct route from other minor streets to the major street system; 
d.  Ingress and egress to residential properties should be provided only on minor streets; 
e.  Pedestrian ways should be separated from roadways used by vehicular traffic. Sidewalks should be designed to provide all residential building sites with direct access to all neighborhood facilities, including the elementary schools, parks and playgrounds, churches and shopping centers; and 
f.  Minimum standards for development are contained in the zoning regulations. However, the general plan expresses policies which are intended to achieve optimum quality of development in the urban area. If only the minimum standards are followed, as expressed by the various ordinances regulating land development, a standardization of development will occur. This will produce a monotonous urban setting. Subdivision design should seek a quality to carry out the purpose and spirit of the policies expressed in the general plan and in these regulations rather than be limited to the minimum standards required herein. 
(2)  The size of lots and blocks and other areas for residential, commercial, industrial and public uses should be designed to provide adequate light, air, open space, landscaping and off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(3)  The arrangement of lots and blocks and the street system should be designed to make the most advantageous use of topography and natural physical features. Tree masses and large individual trees should be preserved. The system of sidewalks and roadways and the lot layout should be designed to take advantage of the visual of the area. 
(4)  Access to residential lots should be arranged from local streets. If a development is platted with no lots having frontage orientation onto a collector street, and with restrictive covenants prohibiting driveway access onto a collector street, then the surface width of the collector street may be reduced to 32 feet. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-551; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-552. - Street design standards. 
(a)  Conformity to comprehensive plan. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to all of the elements of the comprehensive plan and shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Major streets shall be planned to conform with the major street plan; 
(2)  Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require service streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of arterial and local traffic; 
(3)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of intervening land. Such distances also shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separation structures; 
(4)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is placed in the city under conditions approved by the planning commission and acceptable to the subdivider; 
(5)  Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed future street system for the unsubdivided portion may be required by the planning commission; 
(6)  Where a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall be arranged to permit the logical locations and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility easements; 
(7)  No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission; 
(8)  Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by arterial traffic will be discouraged; 
(9)  Streets shall intersect at approximately right angles. 
(b)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 200 feet shall be avoided. 
(c)  Street right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall be in accordance with the land use plan and the general plan and, where not designated therein, shall conform with the following requirements. The paved width of all streets shall be adequate to serve the existing and future estimated traffic load for the facility and shall comply with the design standards. 
Major Streets ROW Width Paving Width Arterials 100 ft. 50 ft. Major collector 100 ft. 50 ft. Minor Streets Collector 60 ft. 36 ft. Commercial 60 ft. 36 ft. Industrial 60 ft. 36 ft. Residential estates 50 ft. 24 ft. Minor residential 50 ft. 26 ft. Cul-de-sac 50 ft. 26 ft.  
(d)  Cul-de-sac length. A cul-de-sac shall not be utilized for more than 35 lots and shall be provided with a turnaround having a radius of not less than 50 feet at the property line and not less than 38 feet at the curbline. If there is provided in the center of the turnaround an unpaved island, it shall be improved with landscaping that will not interfere with sight distance, and the design shall be approved by the city engineer or the community development director. 
(e)  Street stubs. The arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no hardship in the subdividing of adjacent properties. The planning commission may require the dedication of street rights-of-way to facilitate the development of adjoining properties. At the time of development adjoining existing street stubs, all street stubs shall be utilized to connect to surrounding neighborhoods, or the street stub shall be developed as a bulb or pedestrian walkway, or the street stub shall be removed at the expense of the developer. 
(f)  Private roads. Private roads shall be constructed to city standards and shall be inspected by the construction inspector of the community development department. Private roads shall conform to the requirements as set forth in article A of this chapter. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-552; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Editor's note- Detail sheets are on file with the city clerk. 
Sec. 12-553. - Easement design standards. 
(a)  Rear utility easements required. Where alleys are not provided, easements not less than ten feet wide shall be provided along each rear lot line. A five-foot easement along side lot lines of individual lots may be required where necessary for use by public and private utilities. The planning commission may require easements of greater width for the extension of main storm and sanitary sewers and other utilities where it is deemed necessary. 
(b)  Utility easements adjacent to unplatted land required. When a subdivision is adjacent to unplatted land, the easements for public and private utilities shall be: 
(1)  Provided as 20 feet wide on the land being subdivided; or 
(2)  Provided as ten feet wide on the land being subdivided with an easement ten feet wide being presented adjacent and simultaneous to the presentation to the final plat. 
(c)  Sight triangle required. In order to provide for traffic safety, there shall be platted on each corner of each intersection of two streets a sight triangle which shall be described as a triangle having 25-foot sides on each of the street rights-of-way, or a radius of 25 feet. The plat or the covenants of the addition shall clearly prohibit any construction or planting of landscaping materials that reach greater than two feet in height in this right-of-way. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-553; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-12-2002) 
Sec. 12-554. - Public areas and open space. 
    Public parks, playgrounds, school sites and other public areas and open spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and standards set forth in the city's comprehensive plan, parks and recreation master plan, and in the ordinances relating thereto. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-554; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-555. - Block design standards. 
(a)  Determination of design. The lengths, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard for the following: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  Block length. Blocks for residential use shall not be longer than 1,800 feet, measured along the centerline of the block. When a block exceeds 600 feet in length, the planning commission may require a dedicated easement not less than five feet in width and a paved crosswalk not less than five feet in width to provide pedestrian access across the block. 
(c)  Block width. Blocks used for residential purposes should be of sufficient width to allow for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth, but should be not less than 200 feet in width. Blocks intended for business and industrial use should be of a width suitable for the intended use, with due allowance for off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-555; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-556. - Lot design standards. 
    Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where they are needed to provide for the separation of development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least 20 feet shall be provided along the portion of the lots abutting such a traffic artery or other use where screening is required. There shall be no right-of-access across a planting screen easement. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-556; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-557. - Fire protection standards. 
    In areas of the city where city water service is available, all buildings shall be serviced by fire hydrants installed in accordance with standards and specifications of this Code. In residential subdivisions, fire hydrants shall not be located more than 500 feet from any building. In commercial subdivisions, fire hydrants shall not be located more than 300 feet from any building. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-557; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-558. - Subdivision access standards. 
(a)  30 lots or less. Subdivisions with 30 lots or less may be developed with only one means of access to an existing public street. The design of the entrance street shall, at a minimum, comply with the design standards for local residential streets, or the design standards of an approved planned unit development. 
(b)  31 to 100 lots. Subdivisions with 31 to 100 lots that do not provide two separate means of access directly to an arterial street, or indirectly through an existing subdivision, may be developed with only one means of access designed as follows: 
(1)  The access or entrance street may be designed as a collector street with no residential driveway taking access from the collector street up to the first intersection. This design requires an emergency access road constructed to city fire department standards; or 
(2)  The single entrance into an addition may be constructed with a divided median with the driving lanes on both sides maintaining a minimum paving width of 20 feet. The access or entrance street may extend no more than 300 feet before two alternate routes must loop through the addition so that access to the entrance street is feasible from both directions. An emergency access road is not required for this design. 
(c)  101 to 200 lots. Subdivisions with 101 to 200 lots may be constructed with a single entrance but must have an emergency access road constructed to city fire department standards. The single entrance must be designed with a divided median with the driving lanes on both sides maintaining a minimum paving width of 20 feet. The access or entrance street may extend no more than 300 feet before two alternative routes through the addition are provided. The alternate routes must loop through the addition so that access to the entrance street is feasible from both directions. An emergency access road constructed to city fire department standards is required. 
(d)  More than 200 lots. Subdivisions with more than 200 lots must be constructed with two separate means of access by either directly to an arterial street, or indirectly through an existing subdivision, one point of access being exclusively an arterial street. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-558; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-559. - Residential landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Landscaping required. In all platted residential subdivisions, landscaping shall be required along the perimeter of subdivision abutting an arterial street or major collector road. The minimum requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  One tree shall be required for every 50 feet of arterial or major collector road frontage. The trees may be grouped or spaced. Each tree shall have a minimum of two-inch caliper. 
(2)  Trees and shrubs planted within the city should be selected due to their ability to respond to the environmental conditions within the city. The factors to be considered in tree selection are soil conditions in relation to growth, the tree's ability to cope with the climate, and its survival rate as an urban tree. Low maintenance, a moderate growth rate, and aesthetic quality should also be considered. 
(b)  Landscaping plan. A landscaping plan detailing the location, species, and caliper of all trees and shrubs to be planted must be submitted with the preliminary plat. The plantings shall be clearly identified with a summary detailing the species, size, and number of plantings. In the event that a perimeter fence is erected around a subdivision, the fence shall also be shown on such landscaping plan with the building materials to be utilized. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-559; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
ARTICLE G. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 12-561. - General provisions. 
(a)  Improvement compliance. All improvements shall be designed and installed in accordance with all of the elements of the general plan and shall meet the minimum standards established by the ordinances and regulations relating thereto. 
(b)  Improvement inspection fees. The city shall charge and collect inspection fees in all unplatted and platted developments for all water, sanitary or storm sewer and paving improvements based on the cost of the improvements as set by the council by motion or resolution. 
(c)  Plan preparation. Plans for the improvements herein required shall be prepared by a qualified engineer, registered to practice in the state. Two sets of prints of the proposed plans and specifications for all improvements shall be filed with the community development department at the time of the submission of the final plat. One set of as built plans and specifications, certified and signed by an engineer registered to practice in the state, shall be filed with the community development department prior to the acceptance by the city council of any improvement installed by the subdivider. 
(d)  Permanent markers. Each lot and block corner shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not less than three-eighths-inch in diameter and not less than 18 inches long driven to the surface. 
(e)  Work order required. A work order issued by the community development director shall be required prior to any installation of public improvements. This work order shall be issued only after approval of construction plans by the city's engineer, or his designee. 
(f)  Survey control network preservation. Any improvement work for development shall be designed and performed to preserve the existing City of Moore survey monuments. In the event that a survey monument is removed, destroyed, or relocated for development, the city shall charge and collect a re-setting fee as established in the adopted fee schedule. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-561; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 889(18) , 8-20-2018) 
Sec. 12-562. - Improvement alternatives. 
(a)  Surety bonds. In lieu of completion of the improvements herein required, the city council may require the subdivider to file the following instruments: 
(1)  An executed surety bond; and 
(2)  An executed agreement guaranteeing installation of improvements. 
(b)  Surety bond procedures. These instruments shall be conveyed to the community development director and he shall deposit them with the city clerk; after acceptance by the city council they shall be on file as the subdivider's good and faithful assurance of the installation of the improvements. The amount of the bond shall be 100 percent surety, and sufficient to cover 11/2 times the entire cost, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the city engineer, of the installation of all specified improvements. The term of the bond shall be until the completion of the installation of the improvements according to the plans and specifications as approved by the planning commission, but not to exceed two years. 
(c)  Restrictions. In any case, where the city council does not require instruments for surety of improvements required herein, no building shall be permitted on any lot or in any area in a subdivision where the proposed construction will produce run-off or require utility services that affect other areas or lots located within or outside the subdivision until all improvements are installed as needed for the protection of the affected area, unless a bond in the amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost of such improvements is posted for the portion of the drainage or utility improvements that will protect the affected area. 
(d)  Letter-of-credit. In lieu of filing the surety bond and agreement as outlined above, the subdivider may secure and place on deposit with the city an irrevocable letter-of-credit written by a bank certified to do business in the state. Such letter-of-credit shall be drawn in favor of the city, shall be irrevocable for the surety term of two years, and shall be for 11/2 times the entire cost of improvements as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the city engineer. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-562; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-563. - Street improvements. 
    The subdivider of any subdivision designed to be used for residential, commercial, industrial or other purposes shall lay out, grade and otherwise improve all streets that are designated on the approved plat or that directly serve the subdivision in accordance with the specifications of the city and in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  State or federal highway standards. The design of an improvement of an intersection of any new street with an existing state or federal highway shall be in accordance with the specifications of the state department of transportation, but in no case shall the standard be less than the applicable specifications of the city. All applicable state and federal permits are required prior to construction. 
(2)  Driveways. All driveways which connect with public streets shall be constructed in accordance with the design standards and shall include the following: 
a.  Maximum width for a residential driveway shall be 30 feet; 
b.  Maximum width for a commercial driveway shall be 30 feet; however, this does not include width of any median; 
c.  Maximum width for a commercial driveway with a median greater than ten feet will be considered as two separate drives, and must meet drive separation, or curb cut, requirements. 
(3)  Joint application. These regulations shall apply jointly with the adopted standard development details to the construction of streets of arterial, major collector, collector, commercial, industrial, residential estates, minor residential, and culs-de-sac. These regulations provide for both concrete construction and asphalt as an alternate. 
(4)  Curb cuts. No curb cut onto an arterial or major collector road shall be permitted for any purpose within 125 feet from the centerline of an intersecting arterial or major collector roadway. Curb cuts shall be measured from the center of the street to the center of the curb cuts. Curb cuts on arterial and major collector roadways shall be minimized and will be approved at the building permit stage. Curb cuts shall be inspected by the community development department prior to the pouring of the concrete. 
(5)  Street offsets. Streets shall not have an offset, or jog, of less than 200 feet measured from the centerlines. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-563; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-564. - Water lines. 
(a)  Code compliance. The subdivider shall install water lines and fire hydrants, and installation shall be in accordance with the city specifications governing water line construction. The standards for water line and fire hydrant construction are shown on the city's adopted standard detail sheets. 
(b)  Public water extension. Public water shall be extended to serve all zoning districts, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Residential developments in the A-1 Rural Agricultural Zoning District. 
(2)  Residential subdivisions in the A-2 Suburban Agricultural District or the RE Residential Estates Zoning District located 2,640 feet (one-half mile) or further from existing public water pending planning commission and city council approval. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-564; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Editor's note- Detail sheets are on file with the city clerk. 
Sec. 12-565. - Sanitary sewers. 
(a)  Installation required. The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers whenever a sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible as determined by the planning commission. Sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with the specifications governing sanitary sewer construction. The standards for sewer construction are shown on the city's adopted standard detail sheets. 
(b)  Public sanitary sewer extension. Public sanitary sewer shall be extended to serve all zoning districts, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Residential developments in the A-1 Rural Agricultural Zoning District. 
(2)  Residential subdivisions in the A-2 Suburban Agricultural District or the RE Residential Estates Zoning District located 2640 feet (one-half mile) or further from existing public sanitary sewer pending planning commission and city council approval. 
(3)  If existing topography does not permit gravity flow to the existing city sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  Septic system regulations. Whenever a sanitary sewer is not reasonably accessible, septic tanks or other unit disposal systems may be used in accordance with all applicable state and county regulations. 
(d)  Sanitary disposal system may be required. When subdivisions contain ten acres or more, the planning commission may require the subdivider to install sanitary sewers and a disposal system that is adequate to serve all of the lots within the subdivision. 
(e)  Minimum service standards for a sanitary sewer lift station. Subdividers shall be allowed to construct sanitary sewer lift stations that meet all city, state, and federal requirements to service subdivisions with no less than 50 household units. The city shall charge a sanitary sewer lift station impact fee per household unit at the time of development in an amount established in adopted fee schedule. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-565; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 693(11), 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-566. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Pedestrian access. The planning commission may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from roads to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements at least six feet in width. Easements shall be indicated on the plat and paving must be installed as required by the planning commission. 
(b)  Sidewalks required. All subdivisions shall provide for the installation of sidewalks on all arterial roads, collector roads, and on the local road network, including easements and common areas, except no sidewalks shall be required for residential acreage subdivisions (A-1, A-2, and RE zoning districts) on the local road network. 
(c)  Pedestrian access installation fee. 
(1)  In lieu of constructing sidewalks on arterial or collector roads, the developer may, pay to the city an amount necessary to construct all sidewalks on arterial or collector roads when the roadway is: 
a.  An unimproved roadway with bar ditches; 
b.  A federal, state, or city-funded roadway project scheduled for construction; or 
c.  As approved by the city council. 
(2)  The amount shall be determined by the community development director based upon quantity of materials and work required using current prices. The collected pedestrian access installation fees shall be used for capital improvements to the pedestrian transportation infrastructure, including sidewalks, transportation trails, and drainage projects as necessary to complete the pedestrian projects. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-566; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 413(03), 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 12-567. - Maintenance and supervision. 
(a)  Purpose. Where the subdivision contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of the area, or that are of common use or benefit which are not or cannot be satisfactorily maintained by an existing public agency, provisions shall be made which are acceptable to the agency having jurisdiction over the location and maintenance of such facilities for the proper and continuous operation, maintenance and supervision of such facilities. 
(b)  Maintenance bond required. At the time of the acceptance of subdivision improvements, the developer or contractor shall be required to post a maintenance bond for ten percent of the construction cost of the subject improvements. This bond shall be for the assurance of the serviceability of facilities installed and shall be given as an irrevocable guarantee. The term of maintenance bonds shall be two years on water and sewer improvements and two years on street and drainage improvements. These maintenance bonds shall be irrevocable. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-567; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
ARTICLE H. - PARKLAND DEDICATION 

Sec. 12-571. - General. 
(a)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all residential subdivision plats having a dwelling unit density or greater than one unit per 0.75 net acres, and/or the owners or applicants for approval thereof, pursuant to the authority of the City Charter. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding all final plats submitted to the city from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall meet the requirements of this article, regardless of whether the preliminary plat had been approved before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Dedication of land. Land accepted for dedication under the requirements of this article shall be conveyed by dedication within the plat to be filed for record in the office of the county clerk, and by warranty deed transferring property in the fee simple to the city. 
(c)  Open space credit. In the alternative of dedication of parkland as described in subsection (b) of this section, land will not be required to be dedicated or conveyed to the city, where a private park and/or open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision; such areas shall be credited against the requirements of dedication for park and/or open space and recreation purposes, as set forth in section 12-1202, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as set forth in section 12-1204, provided the park board finds it is in the public interest to do so, and that the following standards are met: 
(1)  That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private park and/or open space; 
(2)  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written agreement; 
(3)  That the use of the private park and/or open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property within the tract and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city council; 
(4)  That the proposed private park and/or open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location of the private open space land; and 
(5)  That facilities proposed for the park and/or open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the city's comprehensive plan and parks and recreation master plan and are approved by the city council. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-571; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-572. - Reservation of future park and/or open space or the contribution of money. 
(a)  Park board determination. The determination as to whether the subdivider will contribute land or money will be made by the park board. This decision may be appealed to the city council. In the case of any appeal, the matter shall be presented first to the park board and then to the planning commission. Upon review, the park board and the planning commission shall make recommendations to the city council. 
(b)  Park board recommendation. In those cases where a dedication of land is required and no appeal is involved, the park board shall review the plans and make recommendation to the planning commission. Consistent with the recommendations of the park board, the subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat to the planning commission. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-572; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-573. - Standards for determining amount of land and/or fee. 
(a)  Required formula. The acreage to be contributed concurrent with the final approval by the city council of any residential subdivision plat shall be determined by the following formula: 
    2.5 acres × each 1,000 persons projected to occupy the fully developed subdivision = amount of land to be contributed, which is: 
    0.002 acres × number of persons per dwelling unit × number of dwelling units projected for subdivision = amount of land to be contributed. 
In determining the number of persons projected to occupy a subdivision, the park board will use the most recent federal decennial census statistics on number of persons per dwelling unit for the city. 
(b)  Park board review. In those instances where the formula used above shows that less than 2,500 persons will ultimately occupy any given subdivision as reflected by the preapplication submitted for review, the park board shall review said plans and promptly recommend whether land or money should be required of the subdivider. 
(1)  If the park and/or open space is to be required, then the amount of land determined by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be reserved and delineated on the preapplication plans submitted to the park board and the preliminary plat submitted to the planning commission. The appropriate portion thereof (as determined by the above formula) shall be dedicated or conveyed to the city at the time of recording the final plat. 
(2)  If a fee in lieu of a land contribution is required, the amount of fee shall be determined at the time of final platting, according to the following formula: Fair market value of land per acre times the amount of land required to be dedicated according to subsections (a) and (b) of this section equals the fee in lieu of land dedication. 
a.  The subdivider shall tender and pay said fee immediately prior to recording the final plat. 
b.  Time of determining value of land. The fair market value of the land shall be determined no more than six months before submission of the final plat to the city council. 
c.  Basis for determining the value of land. The representative cash value of the land that would otherwise be required to be dedicated shall be the full and fair market value of the raw land plus a proportionate share of those incidental costs as defined in section 12-1205(3) which would be attached to a subdivider in those cases where land itself was given. Such value shall be determined by averaging the value of all residentially zoned acreage in the preliminary plat. 
d.  Method of determining value of land. The fair market value shall be determined by negotiations between the subdivider and the city. If negotiations have failed to reach agreement by the time the final plat is submitted, then within five days an appraisal board shall be appointed to determine the fair market value, whose appraisal shall be final and binding on both parties. The appraisal board shall consist of three qualified real estate appraisers, one selected by the city, one selected by the subdivider, and one selected by the chosen appraisers. The appraiser's fee shall be paid jointly by the subdivider and the city, with the city's share coming from the park fee fund. Within ten days, the appraisal board shall tender a report of the fair market value of the land as of the date the appraisal board was appointed. 
e.  In such case as the council, upon the recommendation of the park board, shall determine, a subdivider may dedicate more land than would be required by the formulas herein set out and receive a written credit against future mandatory park land dedications. Where a subdivider dedicates land against future requirements, the development which is thereby relieved of all or part of its mandatory park land dedication requirement must be in the same general area, to be at the city's sole determination. The credit shall attach to the relieved land and remain with the relieved land, regardless of change in ownership thereof. 
f.  In the event a subdivider deviates from the approved preliminary plat in final platting or rezones land within the preliminary plat which has the effect of increasing the density of population over the earlier population density estimates made under this article, or where the use of property is changed from a nonresidential use to a residential use, the owner or subdivider shall be obligated to provide additional land or fee based on the value of the previously platted land to compensate for the increase in population. Such contribution shall be made prior to the city issuing a building permit or occupancy permit. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-573; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-574. - Suitability of land. 
    Any land dedicated to meet the requirements of this article shall be reasonably located and adaptable for use as an active neighborhood park and recreation facility. Such determination shall be made by the park board, whose recommendation will be forwarded to the planning commission for recommendation to the city council. Factors to be used in evaluating the adequacy of the proposed park and recreation areas include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Unity. The dedicated land should form a single parcel or tract of land at least three acres in size unless the park board determines that a smaller tract would be in the public interest, or that additional contiguous land will be reasonably available for dedication to or purchase by the city. 
(2)  Shape. The shape of the parcel or tract of land to be dedicated should be appropriate for parks and recreation purposes (i.e., softball, tennis and usable open space). 
(3)  Access. Public access to park land delineated on a preliminary plat shall be ensured by a provision of at least 30 feet of street frontage in a manner satisfactory to the park board. At the time the land abutting the delineated area is developed, the subdivider of such abutting land shall furnish and pay for paving all abutting street frontage. In those cases where the park board deems it appropriate, it may recommend to the city council that the subdivider provide water and sewer services to one side of the lineated area, meeting the requirements as determined by the community development director. 
(4)  Topography. The land to be dedicated to meet the requirements of this article shall be suitable for parks, open spaces, and recreational activities. The city's comprehensive plan and parks and recreation master plan shall be considered when evaluating land proposals for dedication. 
(5)  Location. The land to be dedicated shall be located so as to serve the recreation and open space needs of the subdivision for which the dedication was made. However, an evaluation of possible locations would also include factors such as freedom from possible safety hazards (i.e., major thoroughfares). 
(6)  Cost. Land to be dedicated shall be viewed in terms of the costs of development and maintenance once it becomes park land. 
(7)  Useable open space. The term "useable open space" is defined to mean any parcel of land that meets the requirements as to suitability as detailed in section 12-1205, and does not necessarily require that the land be appropriate for such recreation purposes as softball, tennis and organized sports. Useable open space will be determined by the parks board; uses would include, but not be limited to, the following: hiking trails, arboretum, bird walks, picnic areas, existing or planned greenbelt areas to be left in their natural state, and similar uses that would benefit the public either from natural beauty or open space type of recreation use. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-574; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-575. - Use of money paid in lieu of dedication of land and fees charged for development of neighborhood parks. 
(a)  Fee in lieu of. The money paid in by owners, subdividers, and applicants at final approval of subdivision plats in lieu of the dedication of land and the interest accrued thereon shall be deposited in the hotel/motel occupancy tax account, shall be held in said fund to be used only for fees associated with the appraisal board and the purchasing of park and recreation land or capital improvements. 
(b)  Park fee required. There shall be a fee charged per dwelling unit in an amount established in adopted fee schedule for all residential and multifamily building permits, said moneys shall be used exclusively in the development of neighborhood parks. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-575; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-576. - Form of dedication. 
    Land accepted for dedication under the requirements of this article shall be conveyed by either of the following methods: 
(1)  By dedication within the plat to be filed for record in the office of the county clerk, and by warranty deed transferring the property in fee simple to the city; or 
(2)  By credit for private park and/or open space. Where a private park and/or open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, such areas shall be credited against the requirement of dedication for park and/or open space and recreation purposes, as set forth in section 12-1202, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as set forth in section 12-1204, provided the park board review committee finds it is in the public interest to do so, and that the following standards are met: 
a.  That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private park and/or open space; 
b.  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written agreement; 
c.  That the use of the private park and/or open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property within the tract and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city council; 
d.  That the proposed private park and/or open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location of the private open space land; and 
e.  That facilities proposed for the park and/or open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the city's comprehensive plan and parks and recreation master plan and are approved by the city council. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-576; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
ARTICLE I. - GATED SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 12-581. - General requirements. 
(a)  Required standards. All gated subdivisions shall comply with the following site standards: 
(1)  No public street shall be obstructed. Gated access will only be considered for private streets, approved planned unit developments, apartment projects, or other subdivision plats approved by the city council for private streets; 
(2)  The gate shall be located a sufficient distance from a public street to allow three cars to line up at the gate without interfering with vehicles utilizing the public street; however, in no case shall the gate be located closer than 70 feet from the curb or edge of pavement of a public street; 
(3)  A turnaround lane shall be provided for vehicles unable to enter the gated development; 
(4)  Road spikes, barbs or other tire damaging devices shall not be allowed; 
(5)  The city council shall approve all circulation plans for this type of development and may require multiple entrances; 
(6)  Adopted city standards for streets, sidewalks, fire lanes, fire hydrants, and other engineering and development requirements shall apply to controlled access developments; 
(7)  The minimum gate opening width, including clearance for all improvements related to the gate, shall not be less than 20 feet if accommodating two directions of traffic and no less than 14 feet for each gate accommodating each direction of traffic; 
(8)  An entry key pad shall be located on a pedestal near the normal access route. The entry code shall be used for non-emergency access. The access code shall be given to the fire department, police department and all other emergency and city services; 
(9)  An emergency release hitch pin shall be installed on the control arm. This hitch pin, when removed, will detach the control arm from the gate and allow the gate to swing open freely with manual intervention; 
(10)  A battery backup system shall be provided for each gate. The batteries shall be trickled charged to maintain electrical energy, and in the event of loss of normal electrical current, cause the gate to open and stay open until reset by a responsible member of the homeowners' association; 
(11)  The location of all entrance pedestals, emergency pull boxes, key pads, hitch pins, related equipment, operation of gate, signage, opening design, swinging or sliding operation of the gate, or any other design specifications shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the plans approved by the community development director and the fire chief; 
(12)  Should any problem occur in the operation of the gate, or any violation of this section occur, the gate shall remain open and accessible until the problem is resolved and/or the gate is repaired and tested; and 
(13)  When a covered entry is requested, the minimum height shall be no less than 16 feet. 
(b)  Requirement of emergency rapid access devices for gated communities. 
(1)  Gated communities shall include all controlled access gates that serve housing developments, apartment complexes, townhouse complexes, and any other controlled access gates where a gated access affect's the health, safety, and welfare of the public served. 
(2)  Emergency rapid access devices. For the purpose of this section, emergency rapid access devices shall include rapid access key boxes, keyed switches, and keyed padlocks. The keys and devices shall be UL certified and approved by the fire chief or his designee. 
(3)  Requirement. All new gated communities as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall install and maintain rapid entry devices as described in subsection (b)(2) of this section. All existing gated communities as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall install and maintain rapid entry devises as described in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(c)  Homeowners' association required. A homeowners' association shall be established for all controlled access developments. The homeowners' association will be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Providing the names, addresses, and emergency contact numbers of all officers to the fire department and the police department. 
(2)  Maintenance and repairs of the private streets and/or fire lanes, and to provide the funds therefor through the use of assessments. 
(3)  Maintenance, testing and repairs of all functions of the gate. 
(4)  Establishing the access code to the gate and ensuring that the fire department, police department and other emergency services have the proper code number. Changing the code shall not be permitted without proper notification. 
(5)  Accompanying the fire department during annual inspection and testing of the operating systems. 
(6)  Maintaining a service agreement with a qualified contractor to ensure yearround maintenance. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-578; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-582. - Administration. 
(a)  The city manager, upon recommendation of the community development director, fire chief and police chief, shall approve an access agreement with the developer, homeowners' association, or other responsible property owners, providing for an annual inspection of each gate to ensure that each gate is tested to meet all of the requirements of this article prior to it being approved for operation or continued operation. The access agreement shall include a hold harmless clause, wherein the developer, homeowners' association, or other responsible property owners agree to hold the city harmless in the event that the emergency devices on the gates fail, and the fire department or police department are compelled to crash the gates in order to respond to an emergency call or situation. In the event that damage to any city-owned vehicle is caused by the failure of the developer, homeowners' association, or other responsible property owners to notify in a timely fashion the fire department and the police department of a new access code, or failure to submit a key to a new lock on the emergency pull box, the developer, homeowners' association, or other responsible property owners shall be liable for the cost of repairs to city owned equipment as a result of a crash of the gate. 
(b)  Verification of the access agreement and a copy thereof shall be kept on file at the fire department and the police department, along with the contractor's name, address, 24-hour telephone numbers, and the developer, homeowners' representative, or responsible property owners name, address, and emergency access telephone numbers shall be minimum requirements for approval of the annual inspection of the gate. The fire department shall conduct the annual inspection on the anniversary date each year of the date of approval of the access agreement. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-579; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
ARTICLE J. - DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL 

Sec. 12-591. - General. 
(a)  It is the goal of this article to limit stormwater runoff rates after development to their historic rates or less, as an aid in erosion control and to decrease the probability of downstream flooding. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to establish standard principles and practices for the design and construction of drainage systems within the city. The design factors, formulae, graphs and procedures are intended for use as an engineering guide in the solution of drainage problems involving determination of the quantity, rate of flow, method of collection, storage, conveyance and discharge of stormwater. 
(c)  Methods of design other than those indicated herein may be considered where experience clearly indicates they are preferable and they exceed the minimum requirements as listed herein. However, there should be no extensive variations from the practices established herein without the express approval of the city engineer and/or the community development director. Post development runoff calculations must meet or be less than the maximum flow rates using the methods and procedures presented in this article. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-581; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-592. - Minimum drainage requirements for the city. 
(a)  General design criteria. Drainage facilities shall be designed to convey runoff for the following frequency storms: 
(1)  Inlets on grade: Ten-year storm event. 
(2)  Inlets in a sump and all storm sewer downstream from that point: 50-year storm event with provisions for 100-year storm event overflow. 
(3)  Curbed streets in a residential district: 25-year storm event. 
(4)  Bridges and bridge boxes: 50-year storm event with provisions for 100-year storm event overflow. 
(5)  Open channels: 50-year storm event and concrete lined to contain the 25-year storm event for channels with a drainage area greater than ten acres. 
(6)  Detention facilities: Multiple storm events, including the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50- and 100-year storm events. 
(7)  Culverts under any street: 50-year storm event. 
(8)  Driveway culverts: 25-year storm event. 
(9)  Side ditches in rural estates type subdivisions: 25-year storm event. 
(10)  Any other facilities in commercial, institutional and other high value districts: Ten-year storm event. 
(b)  Dedicated easement. Dedicated drainage easements shall encompass all land lying below the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood. 
(c)  Access. Private streets shall include a drainage easement which includes the street and any side ditches so that access can be maintained to the drainageways. 
(d)  Detention facilities. Stormwater detention shall be required for all developments at the time of their construction. This shall include all subdivisions of land and any new construction of a commercial or industrial nature. Exclusions shall be considered for individual residential construction on a lot of two acres or more; however, in basins where the community development director determines that there has been historical flooding, detention will be required. Residential construction in an approved addition prior to this article shall not require detention. New developments shall employ the use of a regional detention pond and shall not use multiple individual ponds unless approved by the city engineer or the community development director. All detention facilities shall remain in the care of the private sector and shall be the responsibility of the property owners' association. All maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owners' association. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-582; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-593. - Drainage and detention fee in lieu of. 
(a)  All development except for the following specific exclusions shall be subject to the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Single-family residential homes being constructed on unplatted properties; 
(2)  Agricultural facilities being constructed in A-1 or A-2 zoning; 
(3)  Additions or alterations to single-family residential homes. 
(b)  In drainage areas with known downstream flooding of structures, or if it is determined that development of subject property will cause or contribute to flooding or sedimentation of existing structures downstream, the developer shall install detention facilities meeting all requirements of this article. 
(1)  Detention shall be required for any multifamily development within zoning districts R-3 and R-4. 
(2)  Detention shall be required for any development exceeding 20 acres, or as determined by the community development director. If on-site detention is not required, a fee in lieu of detention shall be required. 
(c)  Detention shall not be required in drainage areas where the city has no record of downstream flooding of structures and drainage calculations provided by the developer or the city indicate projected flooding of existing downstream structures would not occur assuming the drainage basin were totally developed utilizing maximum projected land use as indicted in the long range city plan. 
(d)  When it has been determined on-site detention is required, engineering plans and drainage calculations shall be provided to the community development director or his designee for review and approval when filing a final plat or applying for a building permit. 
(e)  When it has been determined by the community development director that alternative methods of protecting downstream properties can be accomplished without causing substantial detriment to the public good, safety or welfare or without being contrary to the spirit, purpose and intent of this article, the community development director may accept a fee in lieu of requiring on-site detention facilities. The fees shall be determined by the average impervious surface per lot of each zoning district. 
(1)  Fees to be accepted shall be tendered prior to the filing of the plat for residential subdivisions or the issuance of the building permit for commercial projects according to the amount of impervious surface to be constructed. 
(2)  The term "impervious surface" shall mean any hard-surfaced areas which prevent or retard the entry of water into the soil in the manner and to the extent that such water entered the soil under natural conditions, or where water is caused to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow than was present under natural conditions. Impervious surfaces shall include, but are not limited to, rooftops; sidewalks; paving; driveways; parking lots; walkways; patio areas; storage areas; and asphalt, concrete, gravel, oiled macadam or other surfaces which similarly affect the natural infiltration or runoff patterns or real property in its natural state. 
(3)  Impervious surface installed or constructed as a part or portion of a public street or a private or public sidewalk in a street right-of-way shall not be calculated as a part of the fee collected in lieu of on-site detention. 
(4)  Fees accepted shall be deposited in a separate account. Fees shall be utilized for the costs and expenses incurred or to be incurred in evaluating, preventing, reducing, eliminating, or attempting to eliminate, prevent, or reduce the known or projected flooding problems in the city; and shall be utilized to maintain such facilities and stormwater control system. 
(5)  The fees in lieu of on-site detention shall be in the amounts established in adopted fee schedule. 
(6)  As used in this section, the fees tendered hereunder shall be deemed accepted when the funds required are received by the city treasurer. 
(7)  It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, install, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve make, put together, or convert any building, structure, improvement, facility, or impervious surface within the city, or cause the same to be done, without first paying any fee in lieu of detention as required by this section. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-582.1; Ord. No. 483(04), 10-18-2004) 
Sec. 12-594. - Floodplain designations. 
(a)  Any reference to official floodplain maps shall mean the highest order of floodplain designation recognized by the city. The city's community development director will maintain a file of such designations. Unless otherwise declared in writing by the city engineer, the descending order of floodplain studies shall be as follows: 
(1)  An officially ordered study such as those watershed studies completed as a part of a master drainage study. 
(2)  Individual basin studies approved and accepted by the city engineer. 
(3)  Maps of the flood insurance administration of the Federal Emergency Maintenance Agency on which floodprone areas are delineated. 
(b)  The highest available order of study shall be the basis of design unless it can be clearly shown that the subject study is in error. Contested studies shall be brought to the attention of the city engineer who will submit the claim of error along with supporting data to the study author for consideration. Final decision as to the credibility of the study will be rendered in writing by the city engineer or the community development director. 
(c)  Drainage plan preparation. Drainage plans shall be submitted as follows: 
(1)  Plan and profile shall be drawn on sheets 24-inch by 36-inch to a horizontal scale of one inch equals 20 feet or one inch equals 40 feet and vertical scale of one inch equals two feet or one inch equals four feet (except that scales may vary on special projects, such as culverts and channel cross sections). All plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state and shall bear the engineer's seal. 
(2)  Plans for the proposed drainage system shall include, as a minimum: property lines, lot and block numbers, dimensions, right-of-way and easement lines, floodplains, street names, paved surfaces (existing or proposed), contract limits, location, size and type of inlets, manholes, culverts, pipes, channels and related structures, outfall details, miscellaneous riprap placement, two-foot contour lines (minimum) and title block. Stationing shall be provided along the construction centerline. The north arrow shall remain pointing to the top of the sheet, or to the left. 
(3)  Profiles shall indicate the proposed system (size and material) with elevations, flow lines, gradients, left and right bank channel profiles, station numbers, maximum water elevations of any standing body of water, inlets, manholes, ground line and curbline elevations, typical sections, riprap construction, filling details, minimum permissible slab elevations adjacent to 100-year floodplains, open drainage features, pipe crossings, design flow capacities, title block and any other necessary information. 
(4)  When official floodplain designations and delineations of floodways denoting limits of permissible flood flow restricting developments exist, they shall be shown on all preliminary plats and final plans submitted for approval wherever such plans and plats contain floodplains and/or floodway segments. In any case in which official floodplains are not delineated they shall be determined on the basis of standard Corp of Engineers HEC I and HEC II or other methods approved by the city engineer, and shall be shown on all preliminary plats and final plans submitted for approval. 
(d)  Submittals. 
(1)  Computations and plans to support all drainage designs shall be submitted to the city engineer for review. The computations and plans shall be in such form as to provide the basis for timely and consistent review and will be made a part of the permanent record for future evaluation. The computations and plans shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. Before final approval, the submitting engineer shall provide an as built plan accompanied with a letter of certification stating that the submitted plan complies with all governing ordinances and adopted drainage standards of the city. In addition to the required paper copy, as-built plans for drainage improvements shall be submitted electronically in either AutoCAD or GIS shapefile formats, and shall be submitted in NAD 1983 HARN Oklahoma State Plane South, US feet coordinates using city survey monuments. 
(2)  Specified minimum drainage parameters for historic, developed or proposed conditions that must be shown prior to approval are as follows: 
a.  Drainage area. 
b.  Length and slope of drainage basin. 
c.  Time of concentration (in minutes). 
d.  Intensity (in inches/hour) (for specified storm). 
e.  Runoff coefficients (C values for rational method if used). 
f.  Q (flow rate in cfs). 
g.  Design slope and length for all culverts. 
h.  Roughness coefficient for all channels and culverts. 
i.  Q flow rate (in cfs) for all channels and culverts. 
j.  Velocity (in ft/s) corresponding with each calculated Q. 
k.  Designation of material types for all channel and culverts. 
l.  Specific materials and/or methods for erosion and sedimentation control. 
m.  Detention pond volume calculations. 
n.  Detention pond depth vs. storage curve. 
o.  Detention pond depth vs. discharge curve. 
p.  Detention pond location, elevations and dimensions. 
q.  Detention storage calculations with inflow and outflow hydrographs. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-583; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 823(16), 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 12-595. - Determination of stormwater runoff. 
(a)  General. The rational method will be accepted as adequate for drainage areas up to 640 acres. For larger areas, other methods may be used. The methodology developed by the U.S. Geological Survey titled "Techniques for estimating flood discharges for Oklahoma streams" will be acceptable as adequate for drainage basins in excess of 640 acres. Other hydrographic models or methods may be approved by the city engineer. The rational method is based on the following assumptions: 
(1)  The peak rate of runoff at any point is a direct function of the average rainfall intensity during the time of concentration to that point. 
(2)  The frequency of the peak discharge is the same as the frequency of the average rainfall intensity. 
(3)  The time of concentration is the time required for the runoff to become established and flow from the most remote part of the drainage area to the point under design. 
The latter assumption applies to the part most remote in time, not necessarily in distance. In the rational method, average intensities have no time sequence relation to the actual rainfall pattern during the storm. The intensity duration curve is not a time sequence. 
(b)  Rational method of runoff computation. The rational formula is defined as follows: 
    Q = CIA 
    Where: 
    Q = Runoff volume in cubic feet per-second (cfs). 
    A = Area to be drained in acres (AC). 
    C = Runoff coefficient. 
    I = Rate of rainfall over the entire drainage area in inches per hour, based on the time of concentration. 
(1)  Runoff coefficient (C). It should be noted that the runoff coefficient (C) is the variable of the rational method which is least susceptible to precise determination. Its use in the formula implies a fixed relation for any given drainage area, which in reality is not the case. A reasonable coefficient must be chosen to represent the integrated effects of infiltration, detention storage, evaporation, retention, flow routing, and interception. All of these affect the time distribution and peak rate of runoff. 
Ranges for (C) values are as follows: Single-family residence 0.70 Multifamily 0.75 Apartments 0.80 Commercial/industrial 0.90 Parks-golf courses 0.40 Undeveloped, pasture and cultivated 0.40 Acreage development less than two acres per lot 0.60 Two acres per lot or more development 0.50  
(2)  Rainfall intensity (I). Rainfall intensity (I) is the average rainfall rate in inches per hour which is considered for a particular drainage basin or sub-basin and is selected on the basis of design rainfall duration and design frequency of occurrence. The design duration is equal to the time of concentration for the drainage area under consideration. Intensity duration curves for this region are included herein. 
a.  The time of concentration used in the rational equation is the critical time of concentration for the point of interest. The critical time of concentration is the time associated with the peak runoff from the watershed to the point of interest. The time of concentration to any point in a storm drainage system is a combination of the inlet time and the time of flow in the conduit. Street flow shall be considered as being in an open paved channel. Manning's equation is acceptable for determining open channel and free water surface flows. 
b.  An acceptable formula for use in determining overland time of concentration is: 
    Tc = k (L.375/S.2) 
    Where: 
    L = Length of flow in feet. 
    S = Average slope in feet/foot. 
    k = Constant for character of surface. Values of k: 
    Pavement 0.372. 
    Bare soil 0.604. 
    Poor grass 0.942. 
    Average grass 1.04. 
    Dense grass 1.13. 
c.  An acceptable formula for determining channel flow time is: 
    Tc = k (L2/S.385) 
    Values of k: 
    Curbed street 0.0035. 
    Concrete lined channel 0.006. 
    Sodded swale 0.008. 
    Bar ditch 0.012. 
d.  The time of flow in a closed conduit is the quotient of the length of the conduit and velocity of flow as computed using the hydraulic characteristics of the conduit. The time required to fill the conduit shall be neglected even though it may represent an appreciable percentage of total time of concentration. 
(3)  Drainage area (A). The size, shape and characteristics of the watershed must be determined. Drainage areas shall be determined through the use of planimetric topographic maps, supplemented by field surveys where topographic data has changed or where the map relief makes it difficult to distinguish the direction of flows. A drainage area map shall be provided for each project. The drainage area contributing to the system being designed and drainage sub-area contributing to each inlet point shall be identified. The outlines of the drainage divides must follow actual lines rather than artificial land divisions. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-584; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-596. - Flow in streets. 
(a)  General. The location of inlets and permissible flow of water in the streets shall be related to the extent and frequency of interference to traffic and the probability of flood damage to surrounding property. Interference to traffic is regulated by design limits of the spread of water into traffic lanes, especially in regard to collector streets and arterials. 
(b)  Design criteria. 
(1)  Flow in gutters on straight or parabolic crown paved streets or roads may be determined by using Manning's formula for channel flow. 
(2)  Minimum gutter slope on residential streets shall not be less than 0.004 ft./ft. (0.4 percent). 
(3)  Maximum gutter slope shall not be more than 0.08 ft./ft. (eight percent). 
(4)  Lowering of the standard height of street crown or splitting of curb heights shall not be allowed for the purpose of hydraulic design unless approved by the city engineer. In no case will it be allowed on collector or arterial streets. 
(5)  All street sections shall have a positive crown. 
(6)  Street capacity. The flow depth at the gutters shall not exceed six inches for a 50-year storm. A concrete overflow flume shall be provided at all sump locations to provide for the 100-year overflow. 
(7)  The use of a cul-de-sac or dead end street as the terminal point of residential street flow shall not be allowed for drainage areas exceeding five acres. A minimum of 70 percent of the flow in a residential street shall be removed to a storm sewer or drainage system prior to reaching the point of curvature of a cul-de-sac or the end of the street for drainage areas exceeding five acres in size, but in no case shall the sum of the bypassed flow equivalent drainage area and the drainage area to the end of the cul-de-sac exceed five acres. 
(8)  The maximum drainage area that may be conveyed on a curbed street is 20 acres. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-585; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-597. - Enclosed storm sewers. 
(a)  General. All storm sewers shall be designed by the application of the Manning's or Kutter's equations either directly or through appropriate charts or nomographs. In the preparation of hydraulic designs, investigations shall be made of all existing structures and their performance on the waterway in question. Sewer sizing based on storm frequency shall be as set forth in section 12-582. In addition, runoff from storms exceeding the design storm up to the 100-year storm should be anticipated and disposed of with minimum damage to surrounding property and the sewer must be accessible for maintenance. Drainage between lots will be conveyed in an enclosed storm sewer with a concrete flume for overflow conditions. 
(b)  Materials of construction. 
(1)  Reinforced concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C76. Unless otherwise specified, all pipe shall be Class III for 24-inch and smaller and Class II for 27-inch and larger in accordance with ASTM C76, wall b. If a closed box design is used in lieu of pipe, the design shall conform to state department of transportation RCB standards or structural design calculations shall be provided. 
(2)  Corrugated metal pipe wall thickness shall meet ODOT fill height table for metal pipe (FHTMP-4-00E). 
(3)  Corrugated metal pipe shall not be place under paved public streets unless approved by the city engineer. 
(c)  Design criteria. 
(1)  Pipes which are a part of the storm sewer system shall have a minimum diameter of 18 inches. 
(2)  Enclosed storm sewers shall be designed for open-channel flow to satisfy, as well as possible, the requirements for unsteady and non-uniform flow. Sealed joints are required for any pipe that can operate under head. Any pipe under any paving shall be "O" ring type pipe and wrapped to prevent infiltration of the fill material into the pipe. 
(3)  Grades. The minimum slope shall be such to maintain a minimum velocity of 2.5 fps flowing full. The maximum slope shall be such that the velocity does not exceed 20 feet per second. 
(4)  Flows may be computed by either the Kutter or Manning equation. The Kutter and the Manning equations are used for pipes and conduits of all shapes flowing either full or partially full. 
(5)  Roughness coefficient "n" for storm sewers: 
Materials of construction Design coefficient Manning's Box culverts 0.013 Concrete pipe 0.013 Annular plain corrugated metal pipe 0.024, 0.027 Smooth flow helical plain corrugated metal pipe 0.018, 0.024 Special cases: "n" as approved by city engineer  
(6)  General rules to be observed. 
a.  Pipe size and slope selected so that flow will not decrease at inlet, manholes or other changes in geometry. 
b.  Do not discharge a larger pipe into a smaller one. 
c.  At change in pipe size, match top of pipes. 
d.  Design capacity of the conduit shall not exceed the conduit capacity at critical slope. 
e.  A one-foot freeboard shall be maintained below the proposed finish grade through the storm sewer system. The submittal of energy calculations shall be required on any reach of a system which exceeds 500 lineal feet; on the total system that exceeds 1,500 lineal feet; on a reach of a system which has an elevation change exceeding ten feet. 
    An acceptable critical slope formula is: 
    Sc = 111 N 2/D 1/3 
    Where: 
    Sc = Critical slope. 
    N = Manning's "n". 
    D = Circular pipe diameter feet. 
(7)  Manhole locations. Manholes shall be located at intervals not to exceed 350 feet for pipe sizes 42 inches or less. For pipe sizes larger than 42 inches, manholes shall be located as determined by the city engineer. Manholes shall be located at conduit junctions, changes of grade, and changes of alignment for all pipe sizes. 
(8)  Pipe connections. Manholes, junction boxes or inlets shall be used at all pipe connections and/or changes in pipe size. 
(9)  Head losses at structures. Minor energy head losses at structures shall be disregarded. Major losses shall be taken into account if they significantly affect the sewer performance. 
(10)  Pipe extensions. The use of one material to extend a sewer constructed of a different material shall not be allowed except at manholes, junction boxes or inlets. 
(11)  Pipe laid on curves. Degree of curvature shall be as per manufacturer's recommendations. 
(12)  Outlet erosion protection. All storm sewer outlets shall have erosion protection provided by headwalls, flared end sections, curtain walls, energy dissipators, rip rap, etc., as required by accepted engineering practices and approved by the city engineer. 
(d)  Inlet system. 
(1)  Inlet design and location in street sections must be compatible with the allowable spread of water on the street section as established in section 12-596. 
(2)  Inlet location shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  Whenever possible, inlets will intercept water before it reaches a pedestrian crosswalk. 
(4)  Inlets shall not be located in a curb radius. Where existing conditions exist that require an inlet in the radius, the radius shall not be less than 38 feet. 
(5)  Inlets shall be sized to prevent water from minor streets spilling over and flooding major streets. 
(6)  Where a curbed street crosses a bridge, gutter flow shall be intercepted and not allowed to flow onto the bridge. 
(7)  Inlets shall be installed at a low point or on the minimum slope of 0.4 percent and shall have the following accepted capacities: 
Standard Inlet 
Designation Grate (cfs) Hood (cfs) Total (cfs) 1 - 0 1.6 2.5 4.1 2 - 0 3.2 5.0 8.2 2 - 1 3.2 10.1 13.2 2 - 2 3.2 15.0 18.2 2 - 3 3.2 20.0 23.2 2 - 4 3.2 25.0 28.2 2 - 5 3.2 30.0 33.2  
The above inlet designation is as follows: The first number represents the number of grates with matching hoods. The second number represents the number of additional pairs of hoods. 
(8)  The storm sewer system at a low point (sump) must provide a concrete overflow channel capable of carrying the 100-year frequency storm in a designated drainage easement. 
(9)  Any inlet grates over which a bicyclist can ride shall be of a design considered bicycle safe. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-586; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-598. - Open drainage channels. 
(a)  Natural drainage flow. Increases in runoff which change the equilibrium of natural areas in the system mandate specific engineering solutions to conserve these natural systems and the pre-development characteristics of the area. 
(b)  Open storm drainage requirements. 
(1)  All land adjoining open natural or improved storm drainage channels having an elevation below the 100-year flood elevation of the channel shall be dedicated for the purpose of providing drainage, public park and/or utility easement. 
(2)  All channel improvements shall be approved by the city engineer prior to the commencement of any work thereon. 
(3)  Whenever channel improvements are carried out, sodding, back-sloping, cribbing and other bank protection shall be designed and constructed to control siltation and erosion for the anticipated conditions and flow resulting from a 100-year frequency rainfall. 
(4)  Any channel grading shall be such that water will not gather in pools. 
(5)  Drainage easements of satisfactory width to provide working room for construction and access for channel maintenance shall be provided. An open drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement except where a paved street surface is at least two lanes wide and is provided on both sides of a channel so as to provide access. 
(c)  Design considerations. 
(1)  Channel profile. Channels should be as wide and shallow, and on as flat a grade as hydraulics and topography will allow. 
(2)  Channel hydraulics. Hydraulic characteristics of channels shall be determined by Manning's equation. The "n" value used for channels shall be based on the design engineer's experience and judgement in regard to the individual channel characteristics and approved by the city engineer. When submitting calculations, include the source. 
(3)  Constructed channel geometry. Whenever a trapezoidal channel is constructed, the minimum bottom width shall be four feet with side slopes of not steeper than four to one for sodded sections and a minimum bottom width of three feet with side slopes of not steeper than one to one for paved or rock lined sections. If the radius of the centerline of the channel is less than three times b, additional outside bank height is required and may be determined by the following: 
    = v2(t + b) 
   2gr 
    Where: 
    H = Additional height on outside edge of channel (ft.). 
    v = Velocity of flow in channel (fps). 
    t = Width of flow at water surface (ft.). 
    b = Bottom width of channel (ft.). 
    r = Centerline radius of turn (ft.). 
    g = Acceleration of gravity (32.3 ft./sec 2 ). 
(4)  Flow velocities in channels. Velocities shall not exceed six fps for sections sodded in Bermuda grass. Velocities in concrete lined or paved sections shall not exceed 15 fps. Whenever improved conduits carrying water discharge into channels either natural or manmade scour protection shall be installed. 
(5)  Trickle channels. All channels altered or improved from the natural state will require a minimum three-foot-wide paved trickle channel. The paved trickle channel shall be designed in a manner that will minimize erosion or undermining of the improvement. Sodding, soil stabilization, or other methods of erosion control shall be required adjacent to the paved channel. 
(6)  Concrete flumes. Concrete flumes in lieu of enclosed pipe shall not be allowed except under the following conditions: 
a.  Drainage area shall not exceed five acres. 
b.  The structure shall extend to the rear of the adjacent lots and shall lie within an easement, or common area and discharge into a drainage easement, park or common area maintained by the city or property owners association. 
c.  A curtain wall shall be provided at the discharge end. 
d.  The entrance to the flume shall be sized based on the following weir equation: 
    Q = C L h 3 / 2 
    Where: 
    Q = Runoff volume in cubic feet per section. 
    L = Weir opening. 
    h = Height of weir opening. 
    C = 3.0. 
Where h does not exceed the height of the curb at the entrance. 
e.  The water surface in the flume shall never be higher than the top of the curb at the entrance during any flow condition. 
(7)  Exit provisions. Any paved channel more than three feet deep with slopes steeper than 2:1 shall have recessed hand/toe pockets in the channel wall spaced vertically on 15-inch centers alternating on a 12-inch width. The pockets (steps) shall be located a maximum of 200 feet apart along the channel and alternate from side to side. 
(8)  Outlet stabilization. Rip rap outlet stabilization shall be constructed at the discharge end of the open drainage channel when the new channel discharges into a undeveloped channel or when the discharge velocities are erosive. 
(9)  Limitation on fences. Fences shall not be erected below the shoulder of the sodded section or below limits of the 100-year flood line, and in no case shall fences be closer than six feet measured horizontally to the edge of the paved section, unless paved section is sized for the 100-year flood then the fence may be set next to the paved channel. In all other situations, fences shall be a minimum of six feet away from channel. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-587; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-599. - Bridges and culverts. 
(a)  Materials and size. 
(1)  Culverts under private drive approaches may be reinforced concrete pipe or corrugated metal pipe. Size shall be not less than 18 inches or 21 inches in length times 15 inches in width corrugated metal pipe arch. 
(2)  Culverts under public streets shall be reinforced concrete conforming to state department of transportation standards. 
(b)  General design requirements. 
(1)  Bridges and culverts shall be designed to pass the 50-year storm unless used as an outlet for a detention pond. Structures under residential streets shall be designed so that water overtopping the structure from a 100-year frequency storm shall not flood the street to a depth greater than six inches above the street crown. Structures crossing under arterial or collector streets shall be designed so that waters overtopping the structure from a 100-year frequency storm shall not flood the street to a depth greater than six inches above the street crown. Allowable spread of waters shall not exceed the adjacent floodway. 
(2)  Scour protection shall be provided to control erosion. 
(3)  Flared end sections with curtain walls may be used in lieu of headwalls on culverts of 48 inches or less. Concrete flared end sections discharging water shall be tied back a minimum of three pipe lengths. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-588; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-600. - Stormwater storage. 
(a)  General. Stormwater detention shall be required for all developments at the time of their construction. This shall include all subdivisions of land and any new construction of a commercial or industrial nature. Exclusions may be considered for individual residential construction not associated with a multi-lot development. Exclusions may also be considered for residential construction on a lot of five acres or more. Residential construction in an approved addition prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not require detention. New developments shall employ the use of a regional detention pond and shall not use multiple individual ponds unless approved by the city. All detention facilities shall remain in the care of the private sector and shall be the responsibility of the property owners' association. All maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owners' association. 
(b)  Rainfall storage. 
(1)  Rooftop storage or underground storage shall not be permitted. 
(2)  Parking lot storage, if used, may employ ponding areas with a controlled outlet structure to control the discharge. Special attention shall be given to the potential flooding of parked cars. 
(3)  Property line swale ponding and small on-site ponds, if used, shall be examined for possible adverse effects on building foundations due to saturation of the subsoil. 
(c)  Design considerations for rainfall and runoff storage. 
(1)  Sizing of detention facilities shall be by approved methods such as APWA unit hydrograph, SCS method, etc. 
(2)  The storage facility shall be designed to pass, as a maximum, the historic runoff rate and shall control the increased runoff due to the development under consideration. 
(3)  Release rates shall be based on head over the outlet and shall not exceed the historic flow for the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50- and 100-year design frequency storm discharges. 
(4)  When a combination of storage facilities are used to control runoff, the system as a whole shall be designed with the capacity to detain the design storms with discharge rates in accordance with subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(5)  All facilities shall be provided with an emergency spillway with scour protection. Earth embankments shall have side slopes not steeper than 3:1. Proper materials shall be used to provide stability and minimum seepage. 
(6)  The storage volume of a detention facility shall be oversized by ten percent to allow for sedimentation. Exception: concrete with sedimentation control or written maintenance program to allow for sediment control. 
(7)  All detention ponds shall be provided with a paved trickle channel from the main inlet point to the outlet structure to transmit low flows; except where it is not required by the design as approved by the city engineer. 
(8)  Erosion control for storage and/or detention facilities shall be in accordance with EPA requirements. 
(9)  A paved access road shall be provided to all-detention areas for maintenance purposes. The paved access road shall be dedicated as part of the detention area. 
(10)  Earth dams and other earth embankments shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer in accordance with accepted engineering practices to ensure that dam failures will not occur. Design criteria used by the soil conservation service in the selection of materials and construction procedures will be accepted. 
(11)  Energy dissipators shall be installed downstream of the outlet structure to return flow to channel design velocity. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-589; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 12-601. - Erosion and sedimentation. 
(a)  General. The purpose of this section is to provide effective management for the control of erosion and sedimentation and to protect water quality and the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. The items detailed herein are to be considered as a minimum. EPA and ODEQ guidelines shall be followed where more restrictive. 
(1)  Appropriate erosion and sedimentation facilities shall be installed and maintained throughout the construction period for any construction activity on individual tracts or lots. 
(2)  All erosion and sediment control methods necessary for land treatment measures which will effectively minimize and control erosion and sedimentation during and following any proposed construction activity shall be indicated on the final construction and/or building permit plans. 
(3)  All earth slopes and earth areas new or existing subject to erosion, such as adjacent to trickle channels, inlet structures, and outlet structures, within any area designated for detention or drainage shall be slab sodded with Bermuda sod or have permanent established growth of vegetation. All vegetation areas shall be fertilized, watered, and in an established growing condition prior to completion or acceptance of any drainage facility. Drainage channels shall be slab sodded to the limits of the 100-year design storm. 
(4)  Erosion and sediment control on urban areas established by the county conservation district shall be used to determine best practices, define terms and provide basic methodology. 
(b)  Design considerations; general design principles. Practical combinations of the following principles shall be utilized, as a minimum, in planning measures to be installed for any land disturbing activity: 
(1)  The land disturbing activity shall conform to existing topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential. 
(2)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum through construction scheduling and management. 
(3)  Cut and fill operations should be kept to a minimum. 
(4)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(5)  Natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented whenever feasible. 
(6)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(7)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(c)  General practice. Soil and water conservation measures include, but are not necessarily restricted to, vegetation, sediment basins, dikes, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, diversions, waterways or outlets, and rip rap. Vegetative practices shall be applied to control erosion. The practice can be either temporary and/or permanent depending on the site specific needs. 
(d)  Erosion and sediment control criteria. 
(1)  Long-term permanent seeding, sprigging, or planting producing vegetative cover. Bermuda grass, Kentucky 31 tall fescue and weeping lovegrass are some of the types of permanent vegetation that shall be used to control erosion. 
(2)  Short-term seeding, producing temporary vegetative cover. Small grains like oats, rye and wheat, and sudans and sorghums are the most feasible temporary vegetation and shall be used to control erosion. This practice is effective for areas where soil is left exposed for a period of six to 12 months. The time may be shorter during periods of erosive rainfall. 
(3)  Sodding. Areas should be covered with a turf of perennial sod forming grass. 
(4)  Dikes and swales. The design drainage areas for dikes and swales shall not exceed five acres. The minimum dimensions shall be in accordance with EPA guidelines. 
a.  Diversion dike. 
b.  Interceptor dike or swale. 
c.  Perimeter dike or swale. 
d.  Straw bale dike. Where no other practice is feasible, a temporary barrier with a life expectancy of three months or less can be installed across or at the toe of a slope for the contributing drainage areas, in accordance with the EPA standards. 
(5)  Stabilized entrance. A stabilized construction entrance shall be built in accordance with the EPA standards to reduce or eliminate the tracking or flowing of sediment onto public right-of-way. 
(6)  Outlet. A concrete or stone outlet structure shall be constructed in areas where the entire drainage area to the structure is not stabilized or where there is a need to dispose runoff at a protected outlet or where concentrated flow for the duration of the period of construction needs to be diffused. 
(7)  Chute stabilization. A grade stabilization structure in the form of a paved chute or flume shall be constructed to prevent erosion, where concentrated flow of surface runoff is to be conveyed down a slope, in accordance with EPA standards. The maximum allowable drainage area upstream of such a structure shall not exceed 36 acres. 
(8)  Pipe stabilization. A grade stabilization structure in the form of a pipe slope drain shall be constructed to prevent erosion, where concentrated flow of surface runoff is to be conveyed down a slope, in accordance with EPA standards. The maximum allowable drainage area upstream of such a structure shall not exceed five acres. 
(9)  Stormwater detention facilities may be used temporarily as sediment basins. A temporary outlet structure for the stormwater detention facility to work as a sediment pond shall be constructed. At the end of the construction activity, the developer shall make sure that the outlet structure shall meet the design requirements of a stormwater detention facility. The EPA general permit requires that, where it is attainable, a temporary or permanent sediment basin be installed in any drainage location where more than ten acres in the upstream drainage area are disturbed at one time. The sediment basin must provide at least 3,600 cubic feet of storage for every acre of land which it drains (flows from upland areas that are undisturbed may be diverted around the basin). For drainage locations with ten or fewer disturbed acres, sediment traps, filter fences, or equivalent measures must be installed along the downhill boundary of the construction site. 
(10)  Mulch stabilization. Hay and sod mulching, as a temporary measure, may be used for embankment stabilization in areas where surface runoff is to be directed down a slope. 
(11)  Mat stabilization. Erosion matting may be used for embankment and slope stabilization where appropriate. The specified use must be recommended by the manufacturer for the proposed material. 
(12)  Fence stabilization. Silt fencing may be used for slope stabilization where appropriate. The specified use must be recommended by the manufacturer for the proposed material. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-590; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002) 
ARTICLE K. - TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE 

Sec. 12-611. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Capital improvement means and includes transportation system planning, preliminary facility engineering, engineering or design study, land surveys, land acquisition, permitting and construction, erection or placement of facilities, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Acquisition of land for right-of-way or facility purposes; 
(2)  Construction of access, paving and parking facilities; 
(3)  Provision for relocation of water, sewer, or other utility lines and mains to facilities; 
(4)  Site development activities involving grading, shaping, berming and landscaping and vegetation; and 
(5)  Provision, construction or erection of bridges, placement, and lighting. 
    Expansion of the capacity of a system facility applies to all land acquisition or to the addition, extension, or expansion of transportation facilities. 
    Fee payer means a person commencing a land development activity which generates construction or placement of a residential or nonresidential dwelling unit and which requires the issuance of a building permit, or the approval and recordation of a final subdivision plat or map. 
    Traffic impact study means a study which quantifies the changes in traffic levels and translates these changes into transportation impacts in the vicinity of the project. The traffic impact study will identify on-site and off-site transportation system improvements needed to accommodate the additional traffic associated with new development. 
    Senior housing is a housing development intended for senior citizens as defined by the current AARP standards. For the intent and purposes of this code, a senior housing development shall be one in which, at a minimum, 60 percent of the living units are built to current ADA standards. 
    Restaurant, fast food/fast casual is an eating establishment that has a drive-thru window for service and/or convenience. These establishments are generally characterized by long hours of service, a high dining-in customer turnover rate of less than one hour, and do not provide full table service. 
    Restaurant, other is an eating establishment with no drive-thru window. These establishments are generally characterized by low customer turnover rate of more than one hour, and provides full table service. 
    Personal storage facility, also known as mini-storage, is defined as buildings containing individual rental storage facilities not exceeding 800 square feet per unit. These facilities are not used to house businesses of any kind. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-591; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 900(19) , 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 12-612. - Imposition of transportation impact fees. 
    Except as provided in section 12-613 of this Code, any person after the effective date of this chapter seeking the issuance of a building permit for any structure subject to the provisions of the city's building code, or any person seeking to record a final plat pursuant to the subdivision regulations of the city, shall be required to pay a transportation impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-592; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 900(19) , 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 12-613. - Computation of transportation fees. 
    The amount of the impact fee shall be determined by the schedule set forth below. In the event of a single building with more than one land use category, the fees shall be computed proportionately by gross square footage within the building. 
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE 
LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS 
Type of Land Use Type of 
Assessment Impact Fees RESIDENTIAL Single Family R-1 Per Lot $647.00 Multi Family R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 Per Unit $453.00 Senior Housing Per Unit $236.00 RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL * Gas or Convenience Stores Gross Square Feet $3.44 Restaurant, Fast Food/Fast Casual Gross Square Feet $3.00 Restaurant, Other Gross Square Feet $0.35 All other retail or commercial Gross Square Feet $0.35 Office ** Gross Square Feet $0.25 Industrial *** Gross Square Feet $0.36 Industrial, Personal Storage Facility Gross Square Feet $0.10 Institutional Gross Square Feet $0.25  
* Commercial or retail developments that either generate 200 trips or greater per peak hour (a.m. or p.m.) or 2,000 or greater trips per day, or are 50,000 gross square feet or larger shall require the performance of a traffic impact study (TIS). The TIS shall be conducted by a qualified traffic engineer. Transportation impact fees or improvements shall be assessed based on the results of the study in lieu of the above impact fee. 
** Office developments that are 50,000 square feet or larger shall require the performance of a TIS. The TIS shall be conducted by a qualified traffic engineer. Transportation impact fees or improvements shall be assessed based on the results of the study in lieu of the above impact fee. 
*** Industrial developments that are 50,000 square feet or larger shall require the performance of a TIS. The TIS shall be conducted by a qualified traffic engineer. Transportation impact fees or improvements shall be assessed based on the results of the study in lieu of the above impact fee. 
    Adjustments: On January 1, 2000, and on the first day of each year thereafter, the community development director shall review the fees. The director shall adjust the fees based on the most recent consumer price index published by the bureau of labor statistics. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-593; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 900(19) , 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 12-614. - Payment of fees. 
    The fee payer shall pay the transportation impact fee required by this chapter to the city manager or his designee prior to the issuance of a building permit for any structure subject to the provisions of the city's building code, or prior to the recordation of a final plat for any subdivision. No such permit may be issued or plat recorded for any such activity until the required fee is paid. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-594; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 900(19) , 3-4-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. ; Ord. No. 900(19) , 3-4-2019, adopted March 4, 2019, amended the title of § 12-614 to read as herein set out. The former § 2-614 title pertained to payment required prior to issuing building permit. 
Sec. 12-615. - Transportation impact fee trust fund established. 
    There is hereby established a single transportation impact fee district, which includes the entire corporate limits of the city, for the collection and expenditure of all fees provided for herein. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-595; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 900(19) , 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 12-616. - Use of funds. 
    Funds collected from transportation impact fees shall be used only to pay for capital improvements to the transportation system within the corporate limits of the city, as recommended in the transportation system plan or the most current capital improvements plan. The funds may also be used as matching funds to obtain state or federal surface transportation program funds. No funds shall be used to pay for transportation operating or maintenance costs. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-596; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 900(19) , 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 12-617. - Credits. 
    A fee payer shall be given dollar for dollar credits for the actual development costs, if any, he may be required to make or may voluntarily make; or an equivalent offset of dollar for dollar for such improvements previously made in the course of land development activities, where such costs are or were for land, facilities, or improvements to the transportation system, adjacent to the fee payer's development. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-597; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 900(19) , 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 12-618. - Appeals. 
(a)  If the fee payer disagrees with the land use classification assigned for the computation of the transportation impact fee, or the fee payer disputes the result of such calculation as being not in proportion to the estimated traffic generation by the development, the fee payer shall have the option of appealing such fees to the community development director. All appeals shall be made in writing to the director. 
(1)  Land use classification. If the fee payer disagrees with how the development is classified in the computation of fees, the fee payer may appeal to the community development director for a reclassification. The appeal shall be accompanied by supporting evidence and materials for city consideration and analysis. 
(2)  Fee adjustment. If the fee payer seeks to pay less fees than is established by the fee schedule for the particular land use classification, the fee payer may perform an independent fee calculation for the land use or business activity for which the permit is sought. Such independent calculation shall determine the proportionately different costs incurred by the city in the provision of transportation capital improvements to serve the development in question. Any such independent calculation shall be prepared and presented by qualified professionals and follow best practices and methodologies. Such calculations and evidence shall be provided by a licensed traffic engineer in the State of Oklahoma. 
(b)  A fee shall be charged for the processing and analysis of all appeals, as established in the city's schedule of fees. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-598; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 900(19) , 3-4-2019) 
ARTICLE L. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 12-621. - Definitions as used in chapter 5. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a minor right-of-way dedicated to public use, which gives a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
    As-built plan means a revised set of drawings reflecting all changes made in the specification and construction drawings during the construction process. The drawing shows the exact dimension, geometry and location of all elements of the improvements completed. 
    Block means a parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks, parks or green strips, rural land or drainage channels or a combination thereof. 
    Building line or setback line means a line designating the area outside of which buildings may not be erected. 
    City means the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
    City council means the city council of the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
    Construction plan or drawing means a technical drawing showing what is to be built; also called plans, blueprints, or working drawings. 
    Development means the erection, construction, or change of use of buildings; or the erection or construction of any additions to existing buildings where outer walls are added or altered as to location, but not including alterations or remodeling of buildings where said outer walls are not added or altered as to location. 
    Easement means a grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or persons, of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes. 
    General plan means the comprehensive development plan for the city which has been officially adopted to provide long range development policies for the area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and which includes, among other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision, circulation and community facilities; also known as the comprehensive plan, or the Moore Plan 21. 
    Lot means a subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the transfer of ownership or for development. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two or more streets. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot which runs through a block from street to street and which has two nonintersecting sides abutting on two or more streets. 
    Lot line adjustment means a relocation of the lot lines of two or more lots included in a plat which is filed of record, for the purpose of making necessary adjustments to building sites. 
    Lot, reverse frontage, means a double frontage lot which is to be developed with the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress and egress provided on a minor street. 
    Planning commission means the planning commission of the city. 
    Plat, final, means a map of land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions and curve data of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land. 
    Plat, preliminary, means a map of a proposed land subdivision showing the character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the suitability of the proposed subdivision of land. 
    Public improvements means any utility, structure, or modification of topography which is, or will be, located within, under, or over a right-of-way or easement of record and which is, or will be, owned and/or maintained by other than the individual owner of record. 
    Street means a public or private right-of-way which affords the primary means of access to abutting property. 
    Street, collector, means a street which collects traffic from other minor streets and serves as the most direct route to a major or a community facility. 
    Street, cul-de-sac, means a minor street having one end open to vehicular traffic and having one closed end. 
    Street, frontage or service, means a street auxiliary to and located on the side of a major street for service to abutting properties and adjacent areas and for control of access. 
    Street, major, means a freeway, principal arterial, or minor arterial designated on the adopted Moore Plan 21. 
    Street, minor, means a street whose primary purpose is to provide access to adjacent properties and which is designed so that its use by arterial traffic will be discouraged. 
    Street, public, means any preexisting county road heretofore annexed by the city and which forms a part of said city be reason of such annexation, or any street or road granted or dedicated to and accepted by the city. 
    Street, residential estate type, means a local street in a residential estate (RE) or agricultural (A-1, A-2) zone or district. 
    Subdivider means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting as a unit subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined; also known as the developer. 
    Subdivision means the division or redivision of land into two or more lots, tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for development, or the dedication or vacation of a public or private right-of-way or easement. 
(LDC 1991, pt. 12, ch. 5, art. L; Ord. No. 393(02), 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 823(16), 7-5-2016) 
ARTICLE M. - APPENDICES 

Sec. 12-631. - Appendices on file. 
    The following appendices are on file in the office of the city clerk: 
Appendix 1 Design Criteria and Construction Standards Appendix A Preliminary Plat Application Appendix B Final Plat Application  
(LDC 1991, pt. 12, ch. 5, art. M) 
CHAPTER 6. - SIGN REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 12-641. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Sign means and includes every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof sign, illuminated sign, projecting sign, and temporary sign, and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display illustration or insignia used to advertise or to promote the interests of any person when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public. 
(Prior Code, § 5-356) 
Sec. 12-642. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions and regulations of sections 12-641 through 12-645 shall not apply to the following signs: 
(1)  Real estate signs not exceeding eight square feet in area which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which such signs are located only; 
(2)  Professional name plates not exceeding one square foot in area; 
(3)  Bulletin boards not over eight square feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions when the same are located on the premises of the institution; 
(4)  Signs denoting the architect, engineer or contractor when placed upon work under construction, and not exceeding 16 square feet in area; or 
(5)  Signs denoting a place of business, occupation, or profession when such sign is located on such premises. 
(Prior Code, § 5-357; LDC 1991, § 12-602) 
Sec. 12-643. - Placement. 
    No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this chapter shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. 
(Prior Code, § 5-358; LDC 1991, § 12-603) 
Sec. 12-644. - Obstructing view at intersection. 
    No wall, fence, sign, structure or plant growth, having a height in excess of three feet above the elevation of the curb or crown of the adjacent roadway, whichever is the lower, shall be maintained upon any corner lot adjacent to a street intersection within the city, within a triangular area measured from the point of intersection of the front and roadside lot lines of such corner lot along such front and roadside lot lines a distance of 25 feet and interconnected to form a right triangle of the area of such corner lot adjacent to the street intersection. 
(Prior Code, § 5-359; LDC 1991, § 12-604) 
Sec. 12-645. - Nuisance. 
    Structures and plant growth maintained in violation of section 12-644 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated, as such, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and laws of the state prescribing the manner and procedure for abatement thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 5-360; LDC 1991, § 12-605) 
ARTICLE B. - PERMITS 

Sec. 12-661. - Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to erect, alter or relocate within the city any sign or other advertising structure, as defined in these regulations, without first obtaining an erection permit from the city and making payment of the fee required herein. 
(Prior Code, § 5-386; LDC 1991, § 12-611) 
Sec. 12-662. - Form. 
    Application for erection permits shall be made upon blanks provided by the city and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected; 
(3)  Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings or structures; 
(4)  A drawing of the plans and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground; 
(5)  Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting the structure; and 
(6)  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which the structure is to be erected. 
(Prior Code, § 5-387; LDC 1991, § 12-612) 
Sec. 12-663. - Issuance. 
    Upon the filing of the application, the city shall examine such plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure. If it shall appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this article and all other laws and ordinances, the erection permit may be issued. 
(Prior Code, § 5-388; LDC 1991, § 12-613) 
Sec. 12-664. - Fees. 
    Every applicant for a permit required by this article, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall pay to the city the permit fee for each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 5-389; LDC 1991, § 12-614) 
Sec. 12-665. - Revocation. 
    The city may revoke any permit issued by the city upon failure of the holder hereof to comply with any provision of any city ordinance relating to signs. 
(Prior Code, § 5-390; LDC 1991, § 12-615) 
ARTICLE C. - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING 

Sec. 12-671. - Purpose. 
    For the purpose of extending regulations or the use of land to the erection, placement, display, location, and maintenance of signs and outdoor advertising media; for the purpose of protection of places of historical and cultural importance; to increase safety and lessen congestion in the streets; to conserve the value of buildings; to preserve residential values; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, standards are provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6-186; LDC 1991, § 12-621) 
Sec. 12-672. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building facade means the exterior wall of a building that is exposed to public view. 
    Building facade, front, means the wall that has the main entrance to the structure. 
    Building facade side, means any side that does not contain a main entrance to the structure. 
    Decoration means illustrations, symbols, streamers, bunting, wreaths, figures, insignia, and other devices employed to express and illustrate a message of seasonal character. 
    Directional and informational signs means signs which direct the reader to the location of a facility or group of facilities, public or semipublic uses, such as parks and recreational areas, communities, historical or cultural points of interest, service areas providing food, lodging, and gasoline, fire stations, colleges, churches and similar facilities. 
    Electronic message center means a sign which provides public service information, any similar public interest information and/or related advertising for a general business located on the same premises through electronically controlled intermittent light impulses. A message center shall consist of letters, words or numerals, pictures or graphics, which can either change sequentially or travel across the display area. A message center as herein defined is deemed to be a sign subject to the requirements of this article. 
    Expressway means a divided roadway consisting of four lanes of traffic or more with a center median or barrier and which may or may not provide grade separation structures above or below intersecting cross traffic, which may incorporate controlled access and may provide access to abutting properties by means of frontage roads or specific on-off ramps. 
    Freestanding sign means any signage installed on posts or other supports that are not attached to any building or structure. 
    Grand opening sign refers to a sign that publicizes a new establishment opening to the public for the first time. 
    I-35 corridor means the area in which the current comprehensive plan has indicated as the I-35 corridor. 
    Multi-tenant sign means an on-premises sign identifying individual businesses within a commercial building. 
    Nonaccessory sign means a sign or advertising device which directs attention to an activity, service, or products sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Portable sign means a sign designed to be movable from one location to another and not permanently attached to the ground or to any immobile structure and shall include signs commonly referred to as A-frame, sandwich signs, stake signs, wind signs, banners, feather signs, or any other advertising device not permanently attached to the ground or building. 
    Roof sign means a sign erected on a vertical frame work supported by and located immediately and entirely over the roof of a building; 
    Sign means any structure or part thereof or any device, permanent or temporary, attached to, painted on, supported by, or represented on a building, fence, post or other structure which is used or intended to be used to attract attention; provided, however, the term "sign" does not include a flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, association of nations, state, city, or other political unit, and does not include any advertising device attached to any motor vehicle, or on a public coin-operated telephone facility, including its customary identification emblems, legends, and structural accessories. 
    Temporary sign means any sign or advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, wood, or other light materials, with or without frames, which is intended to be displayed for a limited time only. 
    Wall sign means an attached accessory sign painted on or attached to the wall or surface of a building or display surface, which is parallel to the supporting surface. 
(Prior Code, § 6-187; LDC 1991, § 12-622; Ord. No. 825(16), 7-18-2016) 
Sec. 12-673. - To be located in accordance with article. 
    No sign or similar outdoor advertising device shall be erected, placed, displayed, located or maintained except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6-188; LDC 1991, § 12-623) 
Sec. 12-674. - General regulation for accessory and nonaccessory signs. 
    Sections 12-682 through 12-695 set out general rules for accessory and nonaccessory signs. 
(Prior Code, § 6-189, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-624) 
Sec. 12-675. - Use of public right-of-way. 
    Use of public right-of-way is restricted as follows: 
(1)  Erection, construction, location, retention or placement of any sign in or over the public right-of-way shall be prohibited, except as provided elsewhere in this article; and 
(2)  Merchandise such as tires, produce, and any other articles for sale shall not be located in any manner in the public right-of-way. 
(Prior Code, § 6-189, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-625) 
Sec. 12-676. - Use of public property. 
    Use of public property is restricted as follows: 
(1)  The use of any boulevard, street, parkway, park road, or park under the control of the city for any political, social, civic or charitable nonaccessory advertising purpose within full view of those traveling on a public road is prohibited. The city's use of these areas to display public information or the placement of decorations as herein defined are excluded from this regulation; 
(2)  The scattering or any application of paint, pots, paste, glue, or any materials or substance used in painting or fixing advertising matter upon any public street or sidewalk is prohibited; or 
(3)  The scattering or spreading in any manner along any public property of any bills, wastepaper, paper, cloth, or other materials used in advertising is prohibited. 
(Prior Code, § 6-189, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-626) 
Sec. 12-677. - Prohibition of obscene advertising. 
    It is unlawful for any person to permit the manufacturing, installing, erecting, or displaying of any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
(Prior Code, § 6-189, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-627) 
Sec. 12-678. - Permission of property owner. 
    The erection, construction, or maintenance of any sign upon any property or building without the consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent, or trustee thereof is hereby prohibited. 
(Prior Code, § 6-189, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-628) 
Sec. 12-679. - Identification of sign contractor or sign owner. 
    The name of the sign contractor or sign owner responsible for erection and maintenance of any sign shall be painted on or attached by use of a name plate in a conspicuous location on the supporting structure or display surface of the sign. 
(Prior Code, § 6-189, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-629) 
Sec. 12-680. - Ground maintenance around signs. 
    The owner of any property on which a sign is located and those responsible for maintenance of the sign shall be equally responsible for the conditions of the area in the vicinity of the sign and shall be required to keep the area clean, sanitary, and free from noxious or offensive substances, rubbish, and flammable waste materials. 
(Prior Code, § 6-189, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-630) 
Sec. 12-681. - Emergency and required entrances and exits. 
    The erection, construction, or maintenance of any sign which will obstruct any fire escape, stairway, or standpipe, or which will be attached to or supported by a fire escape or stairway, or which will interfere with human exit through any emergency opening, or which will obstruct the exterior door or required exit of any building, or which will obstruct any legally required light or ventilation is prohibited. 
(Prior Code, § 6-189, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-631) 
Sec. 12-682. - Non-accessory billboard sign regulations. 
    The purpose of this section is to promote the reasonable, orderly and effective display of nonaccessory signage along Interstate 35 while remaining consistent with national policies, to protect the public investment in the interstate and federal-aid primary highways, to promote and enhance the beauty, order and attractiveness of the city to residents, tourists and visitors and thus, positively influence the economic prosperity of the area. The uncontrolled use of nonaccessory signs and their location may be injurious to traffic safety and to the well-being of the public, in conflict with the objectives stated above, and may have a negative impact on adjacent property values. Recent substantial public and private investments within the city have resulted in a heightened real estate market for new development within the I-35 area, including new residential development. Due to this investment, it is deemed necessary to regulate and limit the number and placement of nonaccessory signs in this area, thereby resulting in the overall enhancement of the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(1)  All non-accessory or billboard signs existing or under permit on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be located only in the C-3, C-4, C-5, I-1, I-2 and I-3 zoning districts, and shall be located only on property abutting the I-35 right-of-way. 
(2)  Non-accessory sign locations shall comply with all established building lines and required setbacks as outlined in this article and any ordinances of the city, notwithstanding any other provision noted herein. Where a railroad right-of-way crosses a public right-of-way, required setbacks or established building lines on adjacent properties are extended through or across the railroad right-of-way. 
(3)  No non-accessory or billboard sign shall be erected, constructed, located or placed within 25 feet of the right-of-way line of I-35, nor shall any such non-accessory or billboard sign be erected within 100 feet of any existing single-family dwelling. 
(4)  The maximum height of the highest point of the structure or display surface of any non-accessory or billboard sign existing or under permit on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be 40 feet, measured from grade level of the ground surface in which the structure supports are placed. 
(5)  All non-accessory or billboard signs facing in the same direction shall be at least 1,000 feet apart laterally; provided, however, that temporary non-accessory signs may be permitted by the city council in case of a special event sponsored by the city, a civic organization or an organized business group of the city. Such signs shall not be permitted to stand more than 30 days and shall be removed immediately upon termination of the special event. 
(6)  Erection, construction, location or placement of a non-accessory or billboard sign on the roof or otherwise attached or affixed to any building or other structure is prohibited. 
(7)  No non-accessory or billboard sign shall have more than 672 square feet of sign face facing one direction of travel, nor shall such sign be more than 60 feet in horizontal distance. 
(8)  No non-accessory or billboard sign shall be placed in a vertical position with one structure atop another. 
(9)  All non-accessory or billboard signs shall comply with permit requirements of the state and federal governments. 
(10)  Except as specifically permitted by this article, no non-accessory signs shall be permitted within the boundaries of an area known as the I-35 corridor as defined in the city's comprehensive plan. 
(11)  Nonconforming nonaccessory signs. Within the previously described area, existing nonaccessory signs shall be considered nonconforming, and shall be allowed to continue unless such sign is altered in a manner that increases the degree of nonconformity or is abandoned for a period of more than two years. 
(12)  Exception. Whenever a condemnation proceeding or a civil action results in an order entered by a court of competent jurisdiction approving a settlement agreement, or any other court order which invests the lessee of a nonaccessory sign with the right to maintain such nonaccessory sign within the described area, that lessee shall have a vested property right in the nonaccessory sign, and the right to maintain it, for the term of the lease and any extensions or renewals thereof. 
(13)  No non-accessory sign with a display area of 100 feet or less shall utilize flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-632; Ord. No. 133(95), 2-2-1996; Ord. No. 542(06), 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 825(16), 7-18-2016) 
Sec. 12-683. - Accessory sign regulations. 
    For purposes of this Code, an accessory sign is defined as any advertising device which identifies or displays information concerning the proprietor of the business conducted on the premises, or directs attention to an activity, service or products sold or offered on the premises on which the sign is located. 
(1)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  The maximum display area for freestanding signs shall not exceed 200 square feet per side, except that any such sign located within the I-35 corridor defined in the city's comprehensive plan shall have a maximum display area of 300 square feet per side. Maximum allowable space for an electronic messaging center is 25 percent of total sign area, except that any such sign located within the I-35 corridor shall have a maximum display area of 50 percent of the total sign area. 
b.  One freestanding sign per street frontage shall be permitted, provided that an additional sign location shall be permitted for each additional 200 feet of frontage in excess of the first 300 feet of frontage on each street. 
c.  The maximum height shall be 40 feet above grade level, provided a maximum height of 65 feet shall be permitted for signs located in commercial zones which lie within the I-35 corridor. A minimum clearance of 14 feet above any driveway or service drive shall be maintained. 
d.  Multi-tenant signs are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  One multi-tenant sign shall be permitted per street frontage of the development in lieu of an allowable freestanding pole sign. One additional multi-tenant sign is permitted along a street for each additional 750 linear feet of street frontage. 
2.  The maximum display area shall not exceed 200 square feet per side, except that any such sign located within the I-35 corridor shall have a maximum display area of 300 square feet per side. Maximum allowable space for an electronic messaging center is 25 percent of total sign area, except that any such sign located within the I-35 corridor shall have a maximum display area of 50 percent of the total sign area. 
3.  Materials and design of multi-tenant signs shall be architecturally compatible with the main structure. 
e.  Freestanding signs shall not be placed in or overhang any street right-of-way or public easement, nor shall they be located so as to cause a sight distance problem at any street or driveway. 
(2)  Wall signs. Wall signs are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Wall signs shall not exceed a maximum display area of 21/2 square feet per one linear foot of the building facade front, and 11/2 square feet per one linear foot of the building facade side on which the sign is affixed, except that any such sign located on a side of a building that fronts the I-35 corridor shall not exceed a maximum display area of five square feet per one linear foot of the building frontage. The community development director may determine location of front facade based on the intent of these regulations and character of the area. 
b.  Banners may be used as a temporary wall sign to identify the name of the business, but they shall be regulated by the above specifications and may only be used for a maximum of 30 days from the opening date of the business. 
c.  A wall sign length shall not exceed 75 percent of the length of the building facade on which the sign is affixed. 
d.  No illuminated wall sign shall be permitted on the rear or side of the building that is adjacent to a residential use. 
e.  All wall signs shall have a surface or facing of noncombustible material; however, combustible structural trim may be used thereon. 
(3)  Portable signs. Portable signs shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Shall not be lighted; 
b.  Shall be limited to ground signs only; 
c.  Shall not exceed 32 square feet of total surface area per side, but may be double sided; 
d.  No more than one portable sign per occupant or business shall be permitted, but it may be double sided; 
e.  Shall be kept in good repair and shall be removed if they fall into disrepair; and 
f.  Shall not be placed in or overhang any street right-of-way or public easement, nor shall they be located so as to cause a sight distance problem at any street or driveway. 
All portable signs as defined in this subsection shall come into compliance with the requirements set forth herein within six months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-633; Ord. No. 133(95), 2-2-1996; Ord. No. 251(99), 4-15-1999; Ord. No. 825(16), 7-18-2016) 
Sec. 12-684. - Maintenance. 
    All nonaccessory and accessory signs shall be maintained in good and safe structural condition. The painted portions shall be periodically repainted and kept in good condition. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-634; Ord. No. 825(16), 7-18-2016) 
Sec. 12-685. - Structural requirements. 
    Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in this section. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such a manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-635) 
Sec. 12-686. - Wind loads. 
    Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in the building code or applicable engineering principles approved by the city engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-636) 
Sec. 12-687. - Allowable stresses. 
    The design of wood, concrete or steel members shall conform to the requirements of the building code. Loads, both vertical and horizontal, exerted on the soil shall not produce stresses exceeding those specified in the building code. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-637) 
Sec. 12-688. - Construction. 
    Signs and sign structures shall be securely built, constructed and erected in conformance with the requirements of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-638) 
Sec. 12-689. - Location. 
    Supports for signs or sign structures shall not be placed in or upon public rights-of-way or public easements. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-639) 
Sec. 12-690. - Materials. 
    Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for buildings in the building code. Plastic materials shall be those specified in the building code standards, which have a flame spread rating of 225 or less and a smoke density not greater than that obtained from burning of untreated wood under similar conditions when tested in the way intended for use. The products of combustion shall be no more toxic than the burning of untreated wood under similar conditions. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-640) 
Sec. 12-691. - Restrictions of combustible materials. 
    All sign structures which are erected in the fire limits shall have structural members of heavy timber or incombustible material. No combustible materials other than approved plastic shall be used in construction of electric signs. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-641) 
Sec. 12-692. - Nonstructural trim. 
    Nonstructural trim may be of wood, metal, approved plastic or any combination thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-642) 
Sec. 12-693. - Anchorage. 
    Members supporting unbraced signs shall be so proportioned that the bearing loads imposed on the soil in either direction, vertical or horizontal, shall not exceed safe values. Braced ground signs shall be anchored to resist specified wind loads acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil for effective resistance to a depth of not less than three feet. Anchors and supports shall be guarded and protected when near driveways, parking lots or similar locations where they could be damaged by moving vehicles. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-643) 
Sec. 12-694. - Display surfaces. 
    Display surfaces in all types of signs may be made of metal or other approved materials. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-644) 
Sec. 12-695. - Approved materials. 
    The building official shall require that sufficient technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any materials; and if it is determined that the evidence is satisfactory for the use intended, he shall approve its use. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-645) 
Sec. 12-696. - Nonaccessory directional and informational signs. 
(a)  The display surface of a nonaccessory directional or information sign shall contain no more than directions to or information relative to public and semipublic purposes. Advertising copy of any kind is prohibited. 
(b)  Erection, construction, or maintenance of nonaccessory directional and informational signs shall be in compliance with any setback requirements or established building line as required by other city ordinances. The use by any governmental agency of these sign types to display items of public information is not included in this regulation. 
(c)  The erection, construction, or maintenance of nonaccessory directional or informational signs on the roof of any building is prohibited. 
(d)  The location of nonaccessory directional and informational signs shall not be nearer than 300 feet from any other nonaccessory directional or informational sign with a similar message. 
(Prior Code, § 6-190, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-646) 
Sec. 12-697. - Temporary signage. 
(a)  Grand opening signs. 
(1)  For the purposes of this Code, a grand opening sign refers to a sign that publicizes a new establishment opening to the public for the first time. 
(2)  The sign shall not be displayed more than 30 days. 
(3)  There shall be only one grand opening allowed per business, and this grand opening must occur in conjunction with the time the business first opens to the public at a particular location. 
(4)  Grand opening signs shall not exceed a total surface area of 32 square feet per side, may be double sided, and shall not exceed a maximum of two grand opening signs per lot, except that any such grand opening event located in the I-35 corridor shall not have grand opening signs that exceed a total surface area of 64 square feet per side, may be double sided, and shall not exceed a maximum of two grand opening signs per lot. 
(5)  Grand opening signs shall not be placed in or overhang any street right-of-way or public easement, nor shall they be located so as to cause a sight distance problem at any street or driveway. 
(b)  Other temporary signs. Temporary signs not specifically regulated shall be displayed only in accordance with the following conditions: 
(1)  Shall be limited to ground signs only, shall not exceed nine square feet of total surface area per side, and may be double sided. 
(2)  Shall be comprised of no more than one temporary sign per business. 
(3)  Shall remain in place no longer than 30 days at a time. 
(4)  Each business shall be allowed three temporary signs per year. 
(5)  Temporary signs shall not be placed in or overhang any street right-of-way or public easement, nor shall they be located so as to cause a sight distance problem at any street or driveway. 
(c)  Date of compliance. All temporary signs as defined in this section shall come into compliance with the requirements set forth herein within six months from the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-647; Ord. No. 825(16), 7-18-2016) 
CHAPTER 7. - MOBILE HOMES 
ARTICLE A. - TRAILER CAMPS AND PARKS 

Sec. 12-701. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cabin plot means a section of ground not less than 30 feet by 40 feet in area upon which only one camp cottage or cabin shall be located. 
    Trailer, house trailer, trailer coach, or automobile trailer means any vehicle or structure so designed and constructed as to permit occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on streets and highways, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, except when designed to run exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Trailer camp means any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp, site, lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for any trailer coach or house trailers and upon which any trailer coach or house trailer is parked and shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof, whether a charge is made therefor or not. The term "trailer camp" shall not include automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of display, inspection and sale, nor include mobile home parks. 
    Tourist camp means any park, tourist park, tourist court, camp, court, site, lot, parcel or tract of land upon which one or more camp cottages or cabins are located and maintained for the accommodation of transients by the day, week, month or year, whether a charge is made therefor or not. 
    Unit means a section of ground in a trailer camp of not less than 1,000 square feet of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location for only one automobile and one trailer. 
(Prior Code, § 14-16; LDC 1991, § 12-701) 
Sec. 12-702. - Trailer or tourist camp license required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained, upon any property owned or controlled by him, a trailer camp or tourist camp or combination of the two (within the limits of the city), without having first secured a license therefor, and for each of them, from the city clerk in compliance with the terms of this article. Such license shall expire one year from date of issuance and may be renewed for additional periods of one year. 
(Prior Code, § 14-17; LDC 1991, § 12-702) 
Sec. 12-703. - Application; fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring a license for the operation of a trailer or tourist camp shall file application therefor with the city clerk and pay to city clerk the sum as set by the city for each occupied unit or plot in the existing or proposed camp. A corporate surety bond in the sum as set by the city conditioned to guarantee compliance with all of the terms of this article during the term of such permit shall be filed with the city clerk by the applicant at such time. The application shall state the name and the address of the owner of the land involved and a legal description of the premises upon which the trailer or tourist camp is or will be located. The application must be accompanied by at least four copies of a camp plan showing: 
(1)  The extent and area used for camping purposes; 
(2)  Roads and driveways within the camp; 
(3)  Location of sites for units for a house, trailers, or cabins; 
(4)  Location and number of sanitary facilities; 
(5)  Plan for water supply; and 
(6)  Plan for electrical lighting and current. 
(b)  No license issued under the terms of this article shall convey any right to erect any building or to do any plumbing or electrical work without compliance with other applicable ordinances with reference thereto of the city. 
(Prior Code, app. A, § 4-18; LDC 1991, § 12-703; Ord. No. 536, 7-1-1990) 
Sec. 12-704. - Parking regulations for house trailers. 
(a)  It is unlawful within the city to park, use or occupy any trailer on any street, alley or highway or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, except as provided in this article. 
(b)  Emergency or temporary stopping of house trailers is permitted in any street, alley or highway where other vehicular traffic may legally park, for no longer than one hour subject to any other or further prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for such street, alley or highway. 
(c)  House trailers may be parked and occupied as living quarters on the premises of an authorized and licensed trailer camp or tourist camp. 
(d)  In any district of the city, the owner or occupant of private premises shall be permitted to park or store not more than one unoccupied trailer on such premises, provided no living quarters shall be maintained, nor any business conducted in such trailer while so parked or stored. 
(Prior Code, § 14-19; LDC 1991, § 12-704) 
Sec. 12-705. - Location. 
(a)  No trailer or tourist camp shall be located in any zone of the city except as authorized and permitted under the provisions of the city zoning ordinances. 
(b)  No trailer or tourist camp shall be located within the limits of the city unless city water, sewer and fire protection facilities are available or in existence at such location. 
(c)  No occupied trailer or building of any nature shall be located within the city limits nearer to roads or streets than the applicable setback line for the zoning district in which such trailer or building is located and all buildings and vehicles within trailer camps or tourist camps shall be set back at least ten feet from other buildings and vehicles within the same and shall be set back at least ten feet from the boundary line of the tract upon which they are located. 
(Prior Code, § 14-20; LDC 1991, § 12-705) 
Sec. 12-706. - Site requirements. 
(a)  Every trailer or tourist camp shall be located on an area having good drainage of surface waters. 
(b)  All house trailer units and cabin plots shall be clearly designated and the camp so arranged that all units and plots face and abut on a driveway at least 16 feet in width giving access to all units from a public street. All driveways and roads within the camp shall have an all weather hard surface and shall be graded so as to have natural drainage therefrom into a city street and shall be well-lighted at night and unobstructed. 
(c)  All cabins or cottages within such tourist or trailer camps shall contain at least 280 square feet of living area and shall have a minimum width of 14 feet with eight-foot ceilings and 27 square feet of ventilating openings. All windows must be screened and wooden floors shall be raised at least 12 inches from ground level. 
(d)  Sanitary sewer facilities must be located within 240 feet of all cottages, cabins and house trailers and all weather walkways connecting the same must be well-lighted at all times. 
(e)  Every house trailer unit shall be furnished with an electric service outlet, equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse meeting the requirements of the currently adopted electrical code. 
(f)  House trailer spaces shall be provided with a minimum of 1,000 square feet for each space and must be at least 25 feet wide and clearly defined. Trailers shall be so located on each space that there shall be at least a 15-foot clearance between trailer coaches. No trailer coach shall be located nearer than ten feet to any property line bounding the campsite. 
(Prior Code, § 14-21; LDC 1991, § 12-706) 
Sec. 12-707. - Water requirements. 
(a)  An adequate supply of pure water from city mains with supply faucet located within 50 feet of all trailers or cabins shall be furnished for drinking and domestic purposes. 
(b)  Common drinking vessels shall not be permitted nor shall any drinking water faucets be located in any enclosure containing sanitary facilities. 
(c)  An abundant supply of hot water shall be provided at all times for bathing, washing and laundry facilities for occupants of the trailer court or tourist camp. 
(Prior Code, § 14-22; LDC 1991, § 12-707) 
Sec. 12-708. - Toilet and other facilities. 
    Each trailer park or tourist camp shall be provided with toilets, baths or showers, slop sinks and other sanitation facilities in conformance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Toilet facilities for men and women shall be either in separate buildings at least 20 feet apart, or separated, if in the same building, by soundproof walls; 
(2)  Toilet facilities for women shall consist of not less than one flush toilet for every five trailer coach spaces and one lavatory for every ten coach spaces. There shall be one shower or bathtub for every ten trailer coach spaces and each toilet, shower or bathtub shall be in a private compartment; 
(3)  Toilet facilities for men shall consist of not less than one flush toilet for every ten coach spaces, one shower or bathtub for every ten trailer coach spaces and one lavatory for every ten trailer coach spaces. One urinal shall be provided for every 15 trailer coach spaces. Each toilet, shower or bathtub shall be in a private compartment; 
(4)  Service buildings housing the toilet facilities above required shall be in permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating such buildings, electrical, plumbing and sanitation system and shall be located not closer than ten feet nor further than 240 feet from any cabin or trailer coach space; 
(5)  The service buildings shall be well-lighted at all times, well-ventilated with screened openings, constructed of moisture-proof material as will permit repeated cleaning and washing and maintained at a temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit at all times. The floors of such service building shall be constructed of material impervious to water and sloped to a floor drain connected with the sewage system; and 
(6)  All service buildings and the grounds of the trailer or tourist park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition, free of all conditions that might menace the health of the occupants or the public or constitute a nuisance. 
(Prior Code, § 14-23; LDC 1991, § 12-708) 
Sec. 12-709. - Connections to sewer. 
(a)  All waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets and lavatories shall be washed into a sewer system extended from and connected with the city sewer system. 
(b)  All sanitary facilities in any trailer which are not connected with the city sewer system by means of rigid pipe connections shall be sealed and their use is hereby declared unlawful. 
(c)  Each faucet site shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste and excess of water into the sewer system of the city. In no case shall any waste water be thrown or discharged on the surface of the ground or disposed of by means other than herein provided. 
(d)  Every house trailer or cabin site and unit shall be provided with a substantial metal garbage depository according to the provisions of city ordinances regulating the same and placed for removal by the city garbage collection service. 
(Prior Code, § 14-24; LDC 1991, § 12-709) 
Sec. 12-710. - Attendant's duties. 
(a)  In every trailer or tourist camp there shall be an office building in which shall be located the office of the person in charge of the same. A copy of the camp license issued by the city clerk, together with a copy of this article shall be posted therein and the camp register shall be kept at all times in such office. 
(b)  It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge and licensee of trailer or tourist camp to: 
(1)  Keep a register at all times of all guests showing: 
a.  Names and addresses; 
b.  Dates of entrance and departure; 
c.  License number of trailers and towing automobiles; 
d.  Name of state issuing such license; and 
e.  Place of last location and length of stay there. 
The register so required shall be open at all times to inspection by state, federal and city officers. 
(2)  Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. 
(3)  Ensure that the provisions of this article are complied with and enforced at all times by occupants of the camp and report promptly to city authorities violations hereof. 
(4)  Report to the city authorities all cases of persons or animals suspected of being infected with any communicable disease. 
(5)  Maintain in convenient places at least one hand fire extinguisher for each eight units or cabins within the camp approved by the city fire department. 
(6)  Restrain the lighting of open fires on the premises and prohibit the use of any trailer site or cabin site by a greater number of occupants than allowed by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 14-25; LDC 1991, § 12-710) 
Sec. 12-711. - Building code applied. 
    All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on any camp licensed under this article, shall be performed in accordance with the ordinances of the city regulating the same, unless such ordinances are specifically made inapplicable under the terms thereof or under the terms of this article. However, any employee of any trailer camp licensed under this article may, when designated and authorized by the building official of the city, connect and disconnect water, gas and sewage facilities to house trailers located in any trailer camp operated under the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 14-26; LDC 1991, § 12-711) 
ARTICLE B. - MOBILE HOMES 

Sec. 12-721. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Freestanding mobile home means a mobile home not located in an approved mobile home park. 
    MHMA means the Mobile Home Manufacturers Association. 
    Mobile home means any vehicle designated so as to permit occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons or the conduct of any business or profession, which may be mounted on wheels and propelled by its own power and not designed to run on stationary rails, and which has been factory assembled of a greater length than 25 feet and factory equipped with at least one water closet, one bathtub or shower, one lavatory and one kitchen sink, installed in compliance with MHMA minimum standards. 
    Mobile home park means any tract of ground consisting of not less than 15 acres of land upon which are situated at least 50 sites or lots for mobile homes, of the size, improved and equipped as specified in this article, and which rents or leases spaces therein for periods of time not less than 30 days. 
    Park means a mobile home park as defined in this section. 
    Site or lot means a well defined plot of land designated as the location for a single mobile home, not less than 2,500 square feet. 
(Prior Code, § 14-41; LDC 1991, § 12-721) 
Sec. 12-722. - Park license required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained, upon any property controlled or owned by him, a mobile home park, as defined in this article, without having first secured a license therefor and having paid the proper fee for inspection of the construction of such park. Such license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed annually upon written application to the city clerk. However, no license shall be renewed, except with the approval of the city council, if the owner or manager has been finally convicted in a court of proper jurisdiction of a violation of the liquor laws of the state or a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Prior Code, § 14-42; LDC 1991, § 12-722) 
Sec. 12-723. - Application; fee; bond. 
    Any person desiring a license for the operation of a mobile home park shall file application therefor with the city clerk, and pay to the city clerk the sum set by the city by motion or resolution, and file a corporate surety bond in the sum set by the city, conditioned to guarantee compliance with all of the requirements of this article during the term of the permit. The application shall state the name and address of the owner of the land involved and the legal description of the premises upon which the park is to be located. The licenses issued under the terms of this article shall not convey any right to erect any building, or do any plumbing, or electrical work, without compliance with other applicable ordinances with reference thereto of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 14-43; LDC 1991, § 12-723) 
Sec. 12-724. - Filing of plans prerequisite to issuance. 
    Any person desiring to construct or operate a mobile home park in the city shall file with the city clerk his application for license, together with one complete set of plans and specifications for all improvements to be placed upon the property. The plans for the area shall show the entire area to be used, together with improvements on adjoining property, if any, roads and driveways within the park, location of sites or lots, abutting streets and alleys, location of water lines, sewer lines, gas lines, electrical lines and any other utilities and plans for electrical street lighting, and any other necessary information that the city council may require. No construction may begin upon the park area until the license is issued. Prior to the issuance of any such license the applicant shall file with the city clerk a corporate surety bond conditioned to guarantee improvement of such area according to such plans and specifications, within a time specified by the city council, which may be one and the same bond as that required by section 12-723. 
(Prior Code, § 14-44; LDC 1991, § 12-724) 
Sec. 12-725. - Site requirements. 
(a)  No occupied mobile home or building of any nature shall be located within the city limits nearer to the roads or streets than the applicable setback line for the zoning district in which such mobile home or building is located. Side yards and back yards between mobile home sites shall be not less than required by ordinance for the zone in which the park is located. 
(b)  Every mobile home park shall be located on an area having good drainage of surface waters, and fire hydrants shall be installed every 500 feet or less along the streets therein. 
(c)  All sites or lots shall be clearly designated and the park so arranged that all sites abut on a driveway or street at least 16 feet in width, giving access to all units from a public street. All driveways and roads within the park shall be paved so as to have natural drainage and shall be well-lighted at night and unobstructed. 
(d)  All sites abutting a street or drive of less than 30 feet in width shall have at least one paved off street parking space. 
(e)  Connections for sanitary sewer facilities, water, gas and electricity shall be provided in a common location at each mobile home site. Electrical connections must be sufficient for 50-ampere circuit and a 50-ampere circuit breaker installed at each site. 
(f)  Every mobile home site shall be provided with garbage disposal facilities according to the provisions of the city ordinances. 
(g)  Each site shall be improved by the construction of a 200-square foot concrete patio and an anchor pad containing 24 cubic feet of concrete with one-half-inch galvanized rings or bolts. 
(Prior Code, § 14-45; LDC 1991, § 12-725) 
Sec. 12-726. - Attendant. 
(a)  In every mobile home park there shall be a building in which shall be located the office of the person in charge of the park. A copy of the city license issued by the city, together with a copy of this article pertaining thereto, and a plan of the area involved, shall be posted for public view. The park register shall be kept at all times in such office and subject to inspection by city authorities at all times. 
(b)  It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge, and licensee, of such park to: 
(1)  Keep a register at all times of all guests showing: 
a.  Name of the person owning the mobile home; 
b.  A license number of the mobile home and the owner's car license number, together with the name of the state where such license was issued; 
c.  Date of entrance into the park; and 
d.  Number of people residing in the mobile home and their names; 
(2)  Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times; 
(3)  Ensure that the provisions of this article are complied with by the occupants of the park and report promptly to city authorities violations of this article or other ordinances; 
(4)  Report to the city authorities all cases of persons or animals suspected of being infected with any communicable disease; and 
(5)  Maintain in convenient places at least one three-quarter-inch water hydrant for each mobile home site for convenience in fighting fires. 
(Prior Code, § 14-46; LDC 1991, § 12-726) 
Sec. 12-727. - Codes applicable. 
(a)  All plumbing, electrical, building, and other work on any park licensed under this article shall be performed in accordance with the ordinances of the city regulating the same unless such ordinances are specifically made inapplicable under the terms thereof or under the terms of this article. However, any employee of any park licensed under this article may connect and disconnect water, gas and sewage facilities to mobile homes located in any park operated under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Sewer connection inspection fees for mobile home parks shall be those applicable to multifamily dwellings and each site within the park shall be deemed a family living unit. The monthly sewer service charge for mobile home parks shall be that applicable to multifamily dwellings. 
(c)  The provisions of the city housing code shall be applicable to this article unless specifically excepted. 
(Prior Code, § 14-47; LDC 1991, § 12-727) 
Sec. 12-728. - Required area of parks. 
(a)  In the mobile home park there shall not be more than 12 mobile home sites per acre, inclusive of streets, alleys and public ways. 
(b)  Recreation and playground areas shall consist of not less than five percent of the total area within the confines of such park and shall be maintained by the park owner. 
(Prior Code, § 14-48; LDC 1991, § 12-728) 
Sec. 12-729. - Freestanding mobile home permit; location and other pertinent regulations. 
(a)  One freestanding mobile home shall be permitted to be located, stored or parked on any five-acre tract of land or larger which is zoned A-1 Rural Agricultural District or A-2 Suburban Agricultural District and situated within the corporate limits of the city, subject to compliance with the city's zoning regulations. 
(b)  Permits for such freestanding mobile homes shall be issued by the building official to the applicant but only after the applicant has obtained the written consent of at least 60 percent of the property owners outside of the subject tract and within 300 feet of the property line of the subject tract. 
(c)  A freestanding mobile home, however, shall not be located, parked or stored on any such tract of land where dwellings or residences are not permitted under the city zoning ordinances. 
(d)  A freestanding mobile home shall not be located, stored or parked on any such tract of land where there is located more than one single-family dwelling. 
(e)  A freestanding mobile home shall be subject to and required to comply with the building code as the same applies to a dwelling. A freestanding mobile home shall be subject to all inspections and inspection fees applicable to a dwelling under the building code, electrical code and plumbing code and the health ordinances. A freestanding mobile home shall be subject to and comply with the provisions of all ordinances, including, but not limited to, ordinances pertaining to disposal of refuse, waste and sewerage, safety, water supply, garbage, drainage, fire prevention, tie-down and skirting requirements, health inspections and health department licenses and approvals where applicable and as may be determined and required by the city or health inspector. 
(f)  A freestanding mobile home shall be of at least the length, width and size as required or defined for mobile homes under this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 14-49; LDC 1991, § 12-729) 
CHAPTER 8. - FLOODS AND DRAINAGE 
ARTICLE A. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 12-801. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the state has, in (statutes) 82 O.S. §§ 1601-1618, as amended, chapter 23 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city ordains the following. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-801; Ord. No. 625(08), 7-21-2008) 
Sec. 12-802. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood loses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-802; Ord. No. 625(08), 7-21-2008) 
Sec. 12-803. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-803; Ord. No. 625(08), 7-21-2008) 
Sec. 12-804. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-804; Ord. No. 625(08), 7-21-2008) 
Sec. 12-805. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principle structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principle structure (such as garages and storage sheds). 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO or A1-99. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation means the elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base flood or one percent chance flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Board means the state water resources board. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, the term "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
    Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocity. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See Flood or flooding. 
    Floodplain administrator means a person accredited by the board and designated by a floodplain board, to administer and implement laws and regulations relating to the management of the floodplains. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term "floodplain management regulations" describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure, and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)) includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10) or (d)(3) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-805; Ord. No. 625(08), 7-21-2008) 
Sec. 12-806. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Cleveland County, Oklahoma and Incorporated areas," dated February 20, 2013, with the accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. However, the current effective flood maps for the city identified by "The Flood Insurance Study for Cleveland County, Oklahoma and Incorporated Areas," dated September 26, 2008, shall be used for this purpose until February 20, 2013. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer or liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-806; Ord. No. 625(08), 7-21-2008; Ord. No. 729(12), 12-3-2012) 
Sec. 12-807. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of the floodplain administrator. The community development director or his designee shall hold the position as floodplain administrator for the city to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of these regulations. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of these regulations. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval are required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, the state water resources board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  Require the applicant and/or developer to provide the base flood elevation data in order to administer the provisions of section 12-806. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, and AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first complies with 44 CFR 65.12. 
(11)  Become accredited by the board in accordance with 82 O.S. §§ 1601-1618, as amended. 
(12)  After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in the city, determine if the residential and nonresidential structures and manufactured homes have been substantially damaged and enforce the substantial improvement requirement. 
(c)  Permit procedures. 
(1)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 12-808(b)(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
e.  A record of all such information in accordance with section 12-807(b)(1). 
(2)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of these regulations and the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
c.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
d.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
e.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
f.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
g.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
h.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
i.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
j.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(d)  Variance procedures. 
(1)  The appeal board as established by the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(3)  Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection (c)(2) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article as identified in section 12-803. 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)  Prerequisites for granting variances. 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances. 
c.  A written notice will be provided to any person granted a variance to build a structure below the base flood elevation. This notice will inform the variance applicant that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built lower than the base flood elevation. 
(11)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria outlined in subsections (d)(1) through (9) of this section are met, and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(12)  Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the floodplain board, accompanied by a filing fee in an amount established in adopted fee schedule. 
(13)  A copy of any variance issued shall be sent to the board within in 15 days of issuance. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-807; Ord. No. 625(08), 7-21-2008) 
Sec. 12-808. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in (d)(1) of this section is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all floodproofing certifications that includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which each structure has been floodproofed. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at one foot above the base flood elevation. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces and a licensed installer shall install the home and place the required placard on the dwelling. 
b.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood; 
are required to be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the I-beam of the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Also, a licensed installer shall install the home. 
c.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (b)(4) of this section are required to be elevated so that the bottom of the I-beam of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement support the manufactured home chassis and also installed by a licensed installer that complies with state law. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM are required to either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of section 12-807(c), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(6)  Accessory structure. Requirements for accessory structures are as follows: 
a.  Structure is low valued and represents a minimal investment. 
b.  Structure shall be small and not exceed 600 square feet in size. 
c.  Structure shall be unfinished on the interior. 
d.  Structure can be used only for parking and limited storage. 
e.  Structure shall not be used for human habitation (including work, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas). 
f.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be elevated to or above the BFE or floodproofed. 
g.  Structure is constructed and placed on building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
h.  Structure is designed to have low flood damage potential (i.e., constructed with flood resistance materials). 
i.  Structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
j.  Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the structure. 
k.  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below the BFE. 
l.  Structure is to be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent and nearby structures. 
(c)  Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with this section. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of section 12-807(c), subsection (c) of this section and the provisions of section 12-806(b). 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 12-807(b), or 12-807(b)(8). 
(4)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(d)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 12-806 (b), are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flows may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zones AH and AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(e)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 12-806(b), are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (e)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community complies with all of 44 CFR 65.12. 
(f)  Severability. If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-808; Ord. No. 625(08), 7-21-2008) 
Sec. 12-809. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in accordance with the city schedule of fines for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city council or the city attorney from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-809; Ord. No. 625(08), 7-21-2008) 
ARTICLE B. - DRAINAGE 

Sec. 12-821. - Purpose and scope. 
    It is the intent of this article to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the public from the hazards and damages of flooding from the various drainage areas in the city, to provide clean and sanitary channels for runoff; to prevent pollution of watershed, streams and natural drainage channels; to prevent the encroachment of buildings or improvements on natural drainage channels; to equitably apportion the cost of improvements; to protect natural scenic areas; and to provide for the conservation of the natural resources in the area. All subdivisions of land and all developments or improvements of any character which affect drainage in any portion of the city shall be subject to the provisions of these regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 10-16; LDC 1991, § 12-821; Ord. No. 5(91), 11-18-1991) 
Sec. 12-822. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Developer means the owner of property or his agent engaged in the subdivision or improvement of, or the construction of, structures upon land within the city. 
    Primary drainage channels mean all drainage channels, streams or creeks which drain an area of 500 acres or more. 
    Secondary drainage channels means all drainage channels, streams and creeks which drain an area of less than 500 acres. 
(Prior Code, § 10-17; LDC 1991, § 12-822; Ord. No. 5(91), 11-18-1991) 
Sec. 12-823. - Responsibility for improvements. 
    It is intended by this article that improvements of primary drainage shall be the long range responsibility of the developer and the community as a whole, since the developer and the whole community is benefited materially. The developer of land or improvements within an area containing a primary drainage channel shall design, plan and carry out his developments in a manner that will not interfere with or restrict the natural flow of water or materially change the condition of runoff within the calculated area below the 100-year maximum flood elevation. Increased runoff and changes in primary channels which are created by such developments within primary drainage areas shall be the planning responsibility of the developer and shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this article. The improvement of secondary drainage channels shall be the responsibility of the developer, since the primary benefit is to the area served by the secondary channel and not to the community as a whole. 
(Prior Code, § 10-18; LDC 1991, § 12-823; Ord. No. 5(91), 11-18-1991) 
Sec. 12-824. - Methods for calculating stream flow and runoff. 
    The maximum condition of rainfall for a 50-year frequency shall be used for the purpose of determining all runoff for the sizing of drainage channels and structures, unless otherwise specified herein. The following formula and values shall be used for calculating all stream flow and runoff for the policies and regulations established herein: 
(1)  Runoff from drainage areas of 500 acres or less shall be determined by the rational formula: 
    Q = AIR 
    Where: 
    Q = Flow in cubic feet per second. 
    A = Area to be drained in acres, determined by field surveys for areas less than 100 acres, and by latest government quadrangle maps for larger areas. 
    I = Percent of imperviousness of the area; may vary between 50 percent and 95 percent. Coefficients lower than these indicated values may be used; however, in such instances individual block calculations will be submitted with plans. 
    R = Rate of rainfall over entire drainage area in inches per hour, based on time for concentration and latest government records for area. 
(2)  Runoff from drainage areas greater than 500 acres will be determined by use of accepted engineering principles as approved by the community development director. 
(3)  The size of closed storm sewers, open channels, culverts and bridges shall be determined by using the Manning Formula which may be modified for use with runoff determined by the rational formula to: 
    Q = 1.486 r 2/3 s1/2 A / n 
    Where: 
    Q = Discharge in cubic feet per second. 
    A = Cross-sectional area of water in conduit in square feet. 
    r = Hydraulic radius in feet. 
    s = Mean slope of hydraulic gradient in feet of vertical fall per foot of horizontal distance. 
    n = Roughness coefficient. 
(Prior Code, § 10-19; LDC 1991, § 12-824; Ord. No. 5(91), 11-18-1991) 
Sec. 12-825. - Primary drainage channel requirements. 
    All primary drainage channels which are located within, or immediately adjacent to, an improvement, development or subdivision, shall be protected and improved by the developer as follows: 
(1)  All land having an elevation below the 100-year maximum flood elevation for the final improved channel and not protected by levees or dikes shall be dedicated for the purpose of providing drainage for public park and/or utility easement use; 
(2)  The existing channel lying within or immediately adjacent to the subdivision or parcel of land proposed for development or redevelopment shall be cleaned to provide for the free flow of water, and the channel shall be straightened, widened and improved to the extent required to prevent overflow, resulting from a 50-year frequency rainfall; 
(3)  Site improvement shall provide for the grading of all building pads to an elevation above the highwater elevation from a 100-year frequency flood and in a manner that will provide for the rapid runoff of stormwater; 
(4)  Whenever channel improvements are carried out, sodding, blacksloping, cribbing and other bank protection shall be designed and constructed to control erosion for the anticipated conditions and flow resulting from a 50-year frequency rainfall; 
(5)  A drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement unless it is placed in an enclosed storm sewer except under the following conditions: 
a.  Where a paved street surface at least two lanes wide is provided on both sides of a paved channel so as to provide access to abutting properties; 
b.  Where lots are platted to back up to the street right-of-way where the drainage channel is located between the rear lot line and the paved street, provided that there is no access to the rear of the lot from the street, and further provided that at no time in the future shall access be allowed or constructed over the open drainage channel to the rear of a lot so platted. For the purpose of these regulations, a lot which sides to a public street is not considered to back up to the street right-of-way; 
c.  When a condition outlined in either subsection (5)a or b of this section is present, adequate space shall be dedicated as right-of-way to provide for maintenance of the paved drainage channel and its unpaved bank; 
(6)  Culverts, bridges and other drainage structures shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications and design criteria of the city when the city shall have present or future maintenance responsibility. 
(Prior Code, § 10-20; LDC 1991, § 12-825; Ord. No. 5(91), 11-18-1991) 
Sec. 12-826. - Secondary drainage channels and surface drainage requirements. 
    All secondary drainage channels which are within, or immediately adjacent to, an improvement, development or subdivision shall be protected and improved by the developer as follows: 
(1)  All land having an elevation below the 100-year maximum flood elevation for the final improved channel and not protected by levees or dikes shall be dedicated for the purpose of providing drainage for public park or utility easement use; 
(2)  Secondary drainage channels which have a primary function of collecting surface water from adjacent properties or intercepting and diverting side hill drainage shall be improved open channels; 
(3)  Secondary drainage channels which have a primary function of transporting water through the block or collecting water from cross channels and which have a drainage area of less than 40 acres shall be improved with closed storm sewers; and where the secondary drainage channel has a drainage area of greater than 40 acres, an improved open channel or closed storm sewer shall be provided. When the unit area to be drained is less than four acres, the city engineer may modify the requirements of the first part of this provision to permit a paved open channel, designed to serve any common recreation or open space, public or private; 
(4)  Site improvement shall provide for the grading of all building pads to an elevation above the high water elevation from a 100-year frequency flood and in a manner that will provide for the rapid runoff of stormwater; 
(5)  A drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement unless it is placed in an enclosed storm sewer except under the conditions as set out in section 8-825(5); 
(6)  In single-family residential, duplex or mobile home development, site grading shall be carried out in such a manner that surface water from each dwelling lot will flow directly to a storm sewer, improved channel, sodded swale or paved street without crossing more than four adjacent lots; 
(7)  Surface water collected on streets shall be diverted to storm drains at satisfactory intervals to prevent overflow of six-inch-high curbs during a 25-year frequency rain for the area and grades involved. Drainage area allowed for surface flow on streets at point of diversion shall not exceed 20 acres, regardless of flow; 
(8)  Drainage easement of satisfactory width to provide working room for construction and maintenance shall be provided for all storm sewers; 
(9)  Open channels shall be improved by providing a paved section that will carry the runoff from a rain of 25-year frequency within the concrete lined section and a sodded section to carry the additional runoff from a rain of 50-year frequency. Whenever an open improved channel is required or authorized for a secondary drainage channel under the provisions of these regulations and the channel crosses residential lots which have been developed under the community unit plan of development or where the channel improvement is to be designed as an area that will be maintained by a property owners' association, the community development director may modify the requirements of the first part of this provision to permit a channel improvement design in keeping with landscaping architectural plans, providing all hydraulic requirements to support the overflow resulting from a 100-year frequency rainfall are met in such a manner as to prevent flooding of all building pads. 
(Prior Code, § 10-21; LDC 1991, § 12-826; Ord. No. 5(91), 11-18-1991) 
Sec. 12-827. - Bridge and culvert requirements. 
    All flow of water across continuous streets or alleys shall be through culverts or bridges. Bridges and culverts shall be sized to accommodate a 50-year frequency rain. Structural design of bridges and culverts shall conform to the state highway department's standards and/or design criteria. Construction shall comply with city specifications. 
(Prior Code, § 10-23; LDC 1991, § 12-827; Ord. No. 5(91), 11-18-1991) 
Sec. 12-828. - Closed storm sewers. 
    Closed storm sewers shall be constructed of precast or prefabricated pipe or built in place of closed box design to conform with city construction specifications. Sizing shall be calculated by the Manning Formula, provided that storm sewers carrying runoff from streets may be designed to serve a ten-year frequency rain for the drainage area involved except that in sump areas the storm sewer shall be designed to serve a 50-year frequency rain with a concrete flume being constructed over the storm sewer to ensure that overflow from a 100-year frequency rain can reach a suitable outlet without inundating any building pad. 
(Prior Code, § 10-24; LDC 1991, § 12-828; Ord. No. 5(91), 11-18-1991) 
Sec. 12-829. - Open paved storm drainage. 
(a)  Open paved storm drainage channels shall be constructed in accordance with the city's specifications. Side slopes above the paved section shall be shaped and sodded on a slope of four horizontal to one vertical (4:1) or flatter. Fences shall not be erected within the limits of open channel easements except upon application for and receipt of a permit issued by the community development director. 
(b)  The community development director will establish a procedure to confirm the following requirements prior to the issuance of such permits: 
(1)  The control or erosion of side slopes above the paved section with grass sod or by other means have been established; 
(2)  Channel siltation has been eliminated or minimized by established ground cover of the area drained by the channel; 
(3)  The location of the fence with respect to the paved section will be prescribed by the permit with due consideration being given to the problem of maintenance as evidenced by the condition and effectiveness of the channel improvement at the time of application for the permit. Fences erected in violation of these requirements are subject to removal or damage by the city maintenance operations without recourse by the owner. 
(Prior Code, § 10-25; LDC 1991, § 12-829; Ord. No. 5(91), 11-18-1991) 
Sec. 12-830. - Areas outside subdivision. 
    The city reserves the right to require improvements to preclude any backup of tail water inundating any areas outside of the dedicated drainage easements in the subdivision as a result of a 50-year frequency flood. 
(Prior Code, § 10-26; LDC 1991, § 12-830; Ord. No. 5(91), 11-18-1991) 
Sec. 12-831. - Administration. 
    Prior to authorization of any building permit by the building official, the community development director shall review and approve all such stream flow and runoff calculations as he may require of a developer under the terms of this article, and the community development director shall have final authority of engineering interpretations of all required 50- and 100-year flood elevations necessary to this article. 
(Prior Code, § 10-27; LDC 1991, § 12-831; Ord. No. 5(91), 11-18-1991) 
CHAPTER 9. - OIL AND GAS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 12-901. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned well means: 
(1)  Each well in which no production casing has been run, and for which drilling or testing operations have ceased for 30 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Any other well for which there is no current city permit. 
    Artificial production means the raising to the surface of the earth, by means other than natural flow, of petroleum or natural gas. 
    Block means a tract of land within the corporate limits of the city, having for its exterior boundaries, public streets, roads, highways, corporate limits of the city, railway rights-of-way, roads or streets and highways shown on the recorded plat of the original town and additions thereto, but which are not open for public use, or bounded at its exterior limits by a combination of such. However, if the laws and regulations of the United States or the state prevent or make it impracticable to drill an oil well in an area as small as a city block of the city, then it is the intention of this chapter that the term "block" as herein used shall mean and include, and be construed to mean and include such area of the city in addition to an ordinary block, as will make the total area great enough to comply with such laws and regulations. Further in the building up an area sufficient in size to comply with such laws and regulations, the area taken to be added to a block, shall not be less than one-half the area of the block from which taken, and may be divided either north and south or east and west. 
    Corporation commission means the state corporation commission. 
    Deleterious substance means any chemical, salt water, oil field brine, waste oil, waste emulsified oil, basic sediment, mud or injurious substances produced or used in the drilling, development, producing, transportation, refining and processing of oil, gas or condensate. 
    Enhanced recovery means an operation by which fluid or energy is introduced into a source of supply for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom. 
    Mayor means the chief elected official of the city. 
    Natural production means the raising to the surface of the earth, by natural flow, petroleum or natural gas. 
    Oil and gas inspector means that person, firm or corporation qualified and employed by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or his authorized representatives. 
    Oil well means the ordinary and accepted meaning of such expression, or name, and in addition thereto shall include natural gas wells, casinghead gas well and salt water well. 
    Permittee means the person to whom is issued a permit under the terms of this chapter. 
    Person means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, trust, cooperative, or other type of organization. 
    Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological properties of any natural waters of the city, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any water of the city as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety, or welfare; to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other beneficial uses; or to livestock, animals or aquatic life. 
    Pressure maintenance means an operation by which gas, water or other fluids are injected into a supply of oil to maintain pressure or retard pressure decline therein for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom, and which has been approved by the corporation commission after notice and hearing. 
    Salt water means any water containing more than 500 mg/l chlorides. 
    State means the State of Oklahoma, its branches, departments, agencies, boards or the officers thereof. 
    Treatable water means surface and subsurface water in its natural state which may or may not require treatment to be useful for human consumption, and contains less than 10,000 ppm total dissolved solids or 5,000 ppm chlorides. 
    Water, waters of the city or city water means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the city or any portion thereof. 
    Well means, unless specifically qualified, any hole or bore to any depth for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas or liquefied petroleum matter or deleterious substances, or for the injection or disposal of any of the foregoing. 
(b)  All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. 
(Prior Code, § 6-161; LDC 1991, § 12-901) 
Sec. 12-902. - Permits required. 
(a)  No person shall drill, re-enter, maintain an oil, gas, injection or disposal well, or otherwise mine or produce other minerals, without having previously obtained a permit as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Each such permit shall cover and provide for the drilling, maintaining and operating only one oil well, and not more than one oil well shall be drilled in any one block. However, in the discretion of the city manager, a permit as herein provided for may be issued for the drilling of a second well in any one or more blocks if the first well is producing in substantially paying quantities, and such second well may then be drilled to a new horizon, or source of supply, where such new horizon, or source of supply, is substantially different from that to which the first well was drilled and in which the first well is operating. 
(Prior Code, § 6-162, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-902) 
Sec. 12-903. - Application; contents. 
    Each permit shall cover only a single site and applicants desiring a permit to drill, re-enter, maintain or operate an oil, gas, injection or disposal well shall submit: 
(1)  A description of the location of the well, specifying and identifying the well location within a particular ten-acre tract within a specific quarter, section, township and range, including thereon the distance to all existing dwelling houses, buildings or other structures designed for the occupancy of human beings or animals within 600 feet of any such well, and the location of all known existing oil, gas or fresh water wells within the ten-acre tract; 
(2)  A list of all equipment that will be utilized in the drilling, operation or maintenance of the particular well; 
(3)  The mud program to be utilized on that particular well; 
(4)  A copy of the approved drilling permit from the corporation commission and a copy of the staking plat; 
(5)  The size, depth and quality of surface and production casing; 
(6)  A statement of the provisions for water for the drilling rig; 
(7)  A written plan for disposal of deleterious substances produced during the drilling operations and any deleterious substances produced as a result of production from the well. This plan shall include the method of transportation for the deleterious substances and the name and location of the permitted disposal site, including a copy of the permit for the disposal site and a contract with the owner of the permitted site for the disposal of the deleterious substances, or in the alternative, provide proof of ownership of the permitted disposal site. The permittee shall provide monthly reports to the city of the amount of salt water and other deleterious substances produced, along with receipts for disposal of same; 
(8)  The names of the surface and surface lease owners; 
(9)  A drilling prognosis, to specify in detail the amount, weight and size of conductor pipe and surface pipe and the procedures to be used for cementing such. Plugging procedures to be used in the event production is not established shall also be specified; 
(10)  A statement of verification by the applicant that all submitted information is accurate; 
(11)  Each applicant shall deposit with the city clerk cash or other certified funds as nonrefundable application fee in an amount as determined by the city council by motion or resolution and contained on the city schedule of fees and charges. 
(Prior Code, § 6-162, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-903; Ord. No. 227(98), 3-16-1998) 
Sec. 12-904. - Purpose. 
    Whereas the imprudent operation of an oil and gas facility can constitute a menace to the public health, safety and welfare of the city, it is the intent and purpose of this chapter that oil and gas operations be reasonably regulated for the public good. 
(Prior Code, § 6-163; LDC 1991, § 12-904) 
Sec. 12-905. - Issuance restricted; bond as prerequisite. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall deposit with the city clerk, cash or certified check in the amount as set by the city council to cover the administrative overhead and inspection enforcement during the first year's operation. The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some duly authorized representative and contain the information required in sections 12-902 and 12-903 and be accompanied by bond/insurance outlined in section 12-906. 
(Prior Code, § 6-164; LDC 1991, § 12-905) 
Sec. 12-906. - Permittee's insurance and bond. 
(a)  In the event a permit shall be issued by the oil and gas inspector, no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the city bonds and a certificate of insurance as follows: 
    A bond in the principal sum of $25,000.00. The bond shall be executed by a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and with the applicant as principal, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the operation of the well for either natural or artificial production, injection or disposal. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city and remain in force and effect for at least 12 months subsequent to the expiration of the permit term, and in addition the bond will be conditioned that the permittee will promptly pay fines, penalties and other assessments imposed upon the permittee by reason of his breach of any of the terms, provisions and conditions of this chapter, and that the permittee will promptly restore the streets, sidewalks and other public property of the city which may be disturbed or damaged in permittee's operations, to their former condition; and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste, and other substances, and will, after abandonment, grade, level and restore the property to the same surface condition, as practicable as is possible, as existed prior to commencing operations; and further that the permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability attributable to granting the permit. If, after the completion of a producing well, the permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, such as removing derrick and clearing the premises, he may apply to the oil and gas inspector to have the bond reduced to a sum of not less than $10,000.00 for the remainder of the time the well produces without reworking. During reworking operations the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount. 
(b)  In addition to the bond required in subsection (a) of this section, the permitee shall submit and maintain a pollution insurance policy which meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Said insurance policy shall be a standard pollution liability insurance policy providing for a minimum coverage of $1,000,000.00 for each occurrence. 
(2)  Said insurance policy must be issued by a reliable insurance broker licensed to do business in the state, with the applicant/permittee and the city named as co-insured. 
(3)  Said insurance policy shall be maintained in full force and effect from commencement of drilling operations until the well is plugged and abandoned in accordance with this chapter, including the entire period during which production activities are conducted. The legal description of the well location shall be specified in the insurance policy, or any endorsement thereto, with respect to each well covered by such insurance. 
(4)  All insurance policies shall provide that the policy may not be canceled without written notice to the inspector at least 30 days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event said policy is canceled, the permit granted shall immediately terminate without any action on the part of the inspector, and the applicant/permittee's rights to operate under said permit shall cease until the applicant/permittee files additional insurance required herein. 
(5)  The deductible for any pollution insurance policy shall not exceed $25,000.00. 
(6)  In addition to the insurance policy, the permittee shall be responsible for the following: 
a.  Will comply with every applicable federal and state law, rule, regulation, standard or directive relating to the maintenance of the safe and beneficial physical, chemical and biological properties of any natural waters of the city; 
b.  Shall obtain the necessary permits from the city and state with regard to any operations which have the potential of rendering such waters harmful or detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety and welfare; 
c.  Shall bear all the costs necessary and incidental to the correction of any pollution to the waters caused by the permittee or permittee's agents, servants, employees, subcontractors or independent contractors; 
d.  Shall pay all fines, penalties, assessments or judgement resulting directly or incidentally from the permittee's activities and which result in pollution of city waters; and 
e.  Shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability resulting from the pollution of city waters. 
(c)  In addition to the bonds required in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the permittee shall carry a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the city, issued by an insurer authorized to do business within the state. The policy or policies in the aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverage: 
(1)  Bodily injuries, $100,000.00 per person; $300,000.00 per accident; and 
(2)  Property damage, $200,000.00. 
The permittee shall file with the city certificates of the insurance as above stated, and shall obtain the written approval thereof of the oil and gas inspector who shall act thereon promptly after the date of such filing. 
(d)  The insurance policy or policies shall not be cancelled without written notice to the oil and gas inspector at least 30 days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event the policy or policies are cancelled, the permit granted shall immediately thereupon terminate without any action on the part of the oil and gas inspector, and the permittee's rights to operation under the permit shall cease until the permittee files additional insurance as provided herein. 
(e)  If, after completion of a producing well, the permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, such as removing derricks, clearing premises, and the like, he may apply to the oil and gas inspector to have the insurance policy or policies reduced as follows: 
(1)  Bodily injuries, $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident; and 
(2)  Property damage, $50,000.00. 
(Prior Code, § 6-165; LDC 1991, § 12-906; Ord. No. 442(04), 2-2-2003) 
Sec. 12-907. - Enhanced recovery and saltwater or deleterious substances disposal wells. 
    No person shall re-enter any well or drill an original well to be used for enhanced recovery or disposal of saltwater or other deleterious substances without first obtaining the necessary permit therefor. Such permit shall consist of two separate parts: 
(1)  Permit to drill or re-enter and construct; and 
(2)  Permit to operate. 
(Prior Code, § 6-166, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-907) 
Sec. 12-908. - Application. 
(a)  An application for the permit to drill or re-enter a well for enhanced recovery or substance disposal shall be in the same form as that required for a permit to drill an original well, and shall contain complete information required by the oil and gas inspector, including the following: 
(1)  A block map of the well site, showing all equipment to be used thereat, location of pipelines, access road, and distances from the well to any and all fences, public roadways, and buildings within a radius of 330 feet; 
(2)  A block map of the project, showing the location of: 
a.  All water supply wells within a one-fourth mile radius of each injection or disposal well; 
b.  All public water supply wells, disposal wells, injection wells, producing wells and plugged and abandoned wells within the project area and those sections immediately adjacent; 
c.  All conduits; and 
d.  Tank battery, pumping station and appurtenant equipment; 
(3)  All wells within the project area and those sections immediately adjacent shall be indicated by status (e.g., plugged and abandoned, injection, salt water, oil, etc.), and show the following additional information: 
a.  Footage location (surface casing); 
b.  Derrick floor and ground level elevation; 
c.  Drilled total depth; 
d.  Packer body total depth; 
e.  Size, depth and quality of surface and production casing, including zones from which casing has been removed; 
f.  Location of all plugs, packers, cement plugs, and tubing anchors, with the well bore; 
g.  Depth and nature of all cement squeeze jobs; 
h.  Formation name and depth of all open perforations in a producing open hole; 
i.  Volume and type of cement used on surface and production strings; and 
j.  Top of cement; 
(4)  One copy of all electric, mechanical, sample and driller's logs, if available; 
(5)  Fee and operation name for each well; 
(6)  One copy of all cement bond logs and production logs; 
(7)  One copy of all work performed of the well; and 
(8)  Copies of all information supplied to the corporation commission, and the commission's approval of the project. 
(b)  All operators, contractors, drillers, service companies, pipe-pulling and salvaging contractors, or other persons, shall be knowledgeable of and prepared to implement, if necessary, emergency procedures as detailed in the state corporation commission's "Guidelines for Petroleum Emergency Field Situations in the State of Oklahoma." 
(Prior Code, §§ 6-162, in part, 6-166, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-908) 
Sec. 12-909. - Maintenance of test water well required for enhanced recovery or disposal wells. 
(a)  During the entire period of maintenance or operation of any enhanced recovery or disposal well, the permittee and the operator thereof shall be under the duty to maintain the test water well required to be drilled pursuant to section 12-913. 
(b)  Every six months from and after the issuance of the permit for the enhanced recovery or disposal well, the permittee and the operator thereof shall cause water samples to be obtained from the test water well by a registered professional engineer. The engineer shall then subject the water sample to an analysis to determine all the following: 
(1)  Chloride content; 
(2)  pH; 
(3)  Conductivity; 
(4)  Total dissolved solids; 
(5)  Sulphates; and 
(6)  Barium content. 
A certified report containing the results of such analysis shall then be forthwith filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
(c)  The testing and analysis required by subsection (b) of this section shall be the responsibility of the permittee and operator and at their expense, and shall be conducted by a registered professional engineer approved by the oil and gas inspector. The oil and gas inspector shall be notified in writing ten days in advance of such testing and may be present therefor. 
(d)  The oil and gas inspector is hereby empowered to require further water testing procedures to be conducted or test water wells to be drilled as are necessary, in his judgment, to safeguard all waters of the city from pollution. 
(Prior Code, § 6-166, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-909) 
Sec. 12-910. - Action by city. 
    Upon the completion of the application required hereunder, the oil and gas inspector shall have 30 business days to review same and make a recommendation of approval or disapproval to the mayor and city council. 
(Prior Code, § 6-166, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-910) 
Sec. 12-911. - Right to refuse. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the city council may, in its discretion, direct the city inspector to refuse to grant to any person a permit to drill, maintain or operate an oil well within the city limits and may refuse to grant a renewal of any permit; provided however, the applicant has complied with all provisions of the Charter and the original permit was prior to the effective date of this order. 
(Prior Code, § 6-167; LDC 1991, § 12-911) 
Sec. 12-912. - Suspension. 
    The city manager is hereby granted authority to suspend the oil well permit issued under this chapter where any of the provisions of this chapter or any amendments thereto are violated, which suspension shall be effective until such time as such person shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. Before suspending any such permit, the city manager shall cause written notice to be served upon the licensee advising such licensee that a hearing will be had at a time and place fixed in such notice to determine whether the permit held by such permittee shall be suspended. Five days' notice of the time of the hearing shall be given. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate any well during any period in which the permit covering the operation of such well is so suspended. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit or interfere with the enforcement of the penal ties for the violation of ordinances generally, but shall be cumulative and in addition to such penalties. 
(Prior Code, § 6-168; LDC 1991, § 12-912) 
Sec. 12-913. - Drilling and operation regulations, oil and gas wells. 
    In the drilling, operation or maintenance of any oil or gas well in the city, all of such operations shall be subject to the following regulations, and violations thereof are hereby declared unlawful and an offense: 
(1)  No oil or liquid with oil content, gasoline or other oil product, surface mud or rotary mud, sand or salt water shall be disposed of by draining or diverting the same into or upon any public highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, gutter or paving; nor shall any of such substances be permitted to escape from the property owned, leased or controlled by the person carrying on such operations by seepage or overflow. 
(2)  No steam engine, gasoline, natural gas, diesel or other internal combustion engine shall be operated within the corporate limits of the city without being muffled. 
(3)  No earthen pits or other excavations shall be constructed. All pits are restricted to steel vessels for circulation of fluids. 
(4)  All storage tanks or other tanks intended to contain inflammable substances shall be protected by earthen embankments thrown up about the same in such manner as to adequately contain all the contents or intended contents of such tanks; and no such tanks shall be erected or installed nearer than 600 feet to any dwelling, house, established business structure, street, highway, industry, church or school. However, this subsection shall not apply to those oil or gas wells or any of its appurtenances or tanks which were permitted prior to the passage and effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but those previous wells shall comply with the setback and distance requirements in full force and effect at the time of the issuance of the initial permit. 
(5)  No oil or gas well shall be drilled, operated or maintained, nor shall any of the operations in connection therewith be carried on, nearer than 600 feet, by the shortest distance, to any church, school building, residence, industry, commercial building, public or private water well, or any other structure where people congregate. However, this subsection shall not apply to those oil or gas wells or any of its appurtenances or tanks which were permitted prior to the passage and effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but those previous wells shall comply with the set back and distance requirements in full force and effect at the time of the issuance of the initial permit. 
(6)  Approved equipment, devices and methods for the safety of life and property, such as are commonly known in the oil drilling and producing business, must be used in the city in the carrying on of all the operations covered by this chapter, and the failure to use any of such equipment, devices or methods in any substantially important question, shall be a ground for immediately stopping further work until such failure has been corrected. 
(7)  Surface pipe shall be set in each and every oil well drilled in the city to a depth of not less than 1,300 feet from the surface of the ground on which such well is drilled, and cemented at that depth by the pressure cementing process such as is used by the Halliburton Cementing Company. Such well shall not again be entered for drilling or deepening purposes until the elapse of 24 hours. The cement shall have 800 pounds compression strength and shall be so certified by the cementer to the city inspector. This section is for the purpose of preventing the contamination of the water wells which supply water for domestic purposes to the city. 
(8)  The premises upon which any oil well is drilled, operated or maintained shall be kept free from accumulations of rubbish, litter, unused materials or equipment, excessive rotary mud and waste oil or oily substances or other waste oil product, so far as such premises may be reasonably kept free of the same in the carrying on the operations covered by this chapter. 
(9)  Where, in installation, erection or construction work by virtue of permits issued under this chapter, sidewalks or the surface of streets, alleys or other rights-of-way, or any other public property is disturbed, damaged or destroyed, the same must be replaced, or restored to its original condition, or better, in as short a period of time thereafter as the same may be reasonably done. 
(10)  All piping, pipelines, connections and fixtures shall be equivalent, both as to installation as well as material used, to the specifications of the National Gas Safety Code as adopted and approved by the United States Department of Commerce as the same is now in force and effect. 
(11)  All derricks erected must be carried on in compliance with the rules, regulations and specifications promulgated by the corporation commission of the state, and the various departments of such commission. Failure to abide by such rules, regulations and specifications in the case of any substantially important operation shall, in addition to the other penalties provided in this chapter, automatically operate as a forfeiture and cancellation of all permits obtained in the case of the particular well where such violations occur, and automatically terminate the right to continue such work or any part thereof excepting such as may be necessary for safety or to prevent serious loss; and such operation shall not be continued until a new permit has been obtained and paid for on the same basis as a new and original permit. 
(12)  Full and accurate drilling floor information, and any and all other full and accurate information pertaining to operations under permits procured under this chapter, shall be furnished the city manager or the chief of police or any of his duly authorized agents at any time. Such information shall be supplied upon demand and without unnecessary delay. 
(13)  Full police authority for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter are hereby given to the city inspector or to any other duly authorized agent of the city manager. 
(14)  No pipelines of any kind, no power transmission system of any kind, no communication systems of any kind and no other transmission systems of any kind shall be erected or installed in, along, across, under or over any street, alley, highway or railroad right-of-way in the city except by special consent of the city manager. 
(15)  All roads leading from existing public or private roads to the drilling, pumping or tank area shall be graveled or otherwise hard-surfaced and maintained in a manner to prevent rutting during severe rains, snow or other inclement weather. 
(16)  Any person who owns, operates or maintains any oil or gas well, and/or storage tanks associated with an oil or gas well, that is located within 300 feet of residentially zoned property, including zoning districts RE through R-4, shall comply with the following: 
a.  Said oil or gas well and/or storage tanks shall be enclosed by a sight-proof fence constructed of treated pine wood or better with spaces no more than one-fourth inch between each slat with posts made of metal and set in concrete for stability. 
1.  The fencing shall be between six feet to eight feet in height; 
2.  The construction of said fence shall be of professional quality with the tops of the wood slats or panels level and the supporting posts level with the fencing; 
3.  The fencing shall be kept in good repair at all times. A fence having any of the following characteristics shall be considered to be in violation of this chapter: 
(i)  Three or more missing or broken panels; 
(ii)  Lean posts being used to keep the fence erect; 
(iii)  Patches made to the fence that are not in the original fence material; 
(iv)  Three or more broken or missing slats; 
(v)  Broken fence posts; and 
(vi)  Leaning panels or fence posts; or 
b.  In lieu of the sight-proof fencing requirements, any person who owns, operates or maintains any oil or gas well, and/or storage tanks associated with oil or gas well, shall install an approved landscaping package and maintenance plan that satisfies the intent of subsection (19) of this section, in addition to a non-opaque fence as outlined in subsection (19) of this section. 
1.  The tree and shrub placement plan and species shall be approved by the community development director prior to installation. 
2.  The maintenance plan shall detail the actions to be taken by the applicant within a five-year period to maintain the trees and/or shrubs, including, but not limited to, a watering schedule, irrigation, if applicable, pruning schedule, and replacement plan for dead or diseased trees. 
c.  To determine if any oil or gas well and/or storage tank falls within 300 feet of a residentially zoned property, the apparent center of the pump jack and/or the storage tanks shall be the basis for determining the 300-foot radius. The community development department shall review each oil or gas well and/or storage tank as they relate to the current zoning map at the date of the annual permit renewal to determine the oil and gas wells and/or storage tanks that shall comply with the sight-proof fencing or landscaping requirements. 
(17)  Any person who owns, operates or maintains any oil or gas well, and/or storage tanks associated with oil or gas well, is required to keep all facilities secure within a fence. All fences, regardless of the required fencing material, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Fences shall be between six feet to eight feet in height. 
b.  All gates or openings in the fence shall be kept locked when authorized persons are not within the enclosure. 
c.  The fence posts shall be of metal and set in concrete for stability. 
d.  Barbed wire along the top of the fence shall be utilized for security purposes. 
(18)  Any person who owns, operates or maintains any oil or gas well, and/or storage tanks associated with an oil or gas well, shall be required to keep all fences and lease equipment facilities in good repair, and shall be painted as necessary to eliminate rust and/or corrosion. The paint shall be of earth-tone to blend in with the landscape. 
(19)  Any person who completes or re-enters any oil or gas well, and/or erects new storage tanks, located within the city limits after the passage and effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall meet the following landscaping requirements: 
a.  Such persons shall install evergreen trees completely around the well site, storage tanks, fencing, and/or lease equipment of facilities at a spacing of 30 feet off-center, excluding the maintenance entrance, and such trees shall be a minimum of two-inch-caliper at time of planting. 
b.  The vegetation shall be a minimum of six feet in height at maturity. 
c.  The vegetation shall be sufficient to screen from view the structures sought to be screened at maturity. 
d.  The vegetation shall be kept in an attractive state, alive and in good condition at all times by the permittee. 
(Prior Code, § 6-169, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-913; Ord. No. 574(07), 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 615(08), 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 12-914. - Drilling and operation regulations, injection and disposal wells. 
(a)  Every injection or disposal well shall be constructed so as to seal the injection zone from the upper portion of the casing. The annulus between the injection tubing and the casing shall be filled with a noncorrosive fluid, then sealed, and a one-fourth inch female fitting with cut-off valve shall be attached so that the pressure in the annulus may be measured by the oil and gas inspector by attaching a gauge having a one-fourth inch male fitting. A pressure shall be maintained in the annulus sufficient to monitor the fluids in the annulus. Any significant deviation from the established pressure shall be cause to shut down the well and may result in cancellation of the operating permit until such time as established pressure can once again be maintained. 
(b)  Each application for injection or disposal wells shall be in the same format as for a permit to drill an original well and shall additionally require the following information: 
(1)  A block map of the project locating all existing oil wells, their status, surface casing depths and producing horizons within one-half mile of the proposed well; 
(2)  All public water supply wells within one-half mile of the proposed well; 
(3)  All existing conduits, tank batteries and pumping stations; 
(4)  All dwellings of human habitations within 1,000 feet; and 
(5)  A schematic of the proposed completed site showing casing schedules, injection zones and associated formation data. 
(c)  Injection lines shall be buried in a trench of a depth no less than four feet, and shall be pressure tested (static) annually, at a minimum of 150 percent of the pressure normally encountered at the injection pump discharge, for a period of hours to be fixed by the oil and gas inspector. The oil and gas inspector shall be notified five days in advance of such test and may supervise same. Test results shall be filed with the city upon completion. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a permit for any enhanced recovery or disposal well, the applicant shall submit a report by a registered professional engineer by which the engineer certifies to all of the following: 
(1)  A test water well has been drilled within 200 feet of the proposed enhanced recovery or disposal well location; 
(2)  The test water well has been drilled in the direction from the proposed enhanced recovery or disposal well location which represents the direction of the greatest risk to the Garber-Wellington aquifer; 
(3)  The test water well has been drilled to the greatest depth at which treatable water was first encountered, cemented back and perforated in the lower most potable water zone; and 
(4)  A sample of water has been taken from the test water well and has been subjected to analysis to determine all of the following: 
a.  Chloride content; 
b.  pH; and 
c.  Barium content. 
The report submitted shall also indicate the results of the water sample analysis required under subsection (d)(4) of this section. The permittee or the operator of the enhanced recovery or disposal well shall also be under a duty to conduct further periodic water well tests. 
(Prior Code, § 6-169, in part; LDC 1991, § 12-914) 
Sec. 12-915. - Annual inspections and fee. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee as set by the city for each succeeding year after each oil well is drilled, operated or maintained in the city. The initial fee paid with and accompanying the application in the first instance, shall also include the granting of the permit; each such successive annual fee paid after the first one shall also cover and include permission to continue such drilling, operation and maintenance operations. 
(b)  An annual inspection shall be required to maintain a permit in good standing with the city. The inspection shall include reviewing all of the following requirements as stated in section 12-913, and shall specifically include the following, but not limited to: 
(1)  All oil, gasoline, oil product, or product surface mud or rotary mud shall be completely contained on the property owned, leased, or controlled by the operator. 
(2)  All internal combustion engines shall be muffled. 
(3)  Storage tanks shall utilize earthen berms sufficient to contain the contents of the tanks. 
(4)  The premises shall be free from accumulations of rubbish, litter, unused materials or equipment, excessive rotary mud, waste oil or oily substance. 
(5)  All oil or gas well equipment and/or storage tanks shall be painted to prevent rust or corrosion using an earth-tone color. 
(6)  All oil or gas wells and/or storage tanks shall be enclosed by a six-foot-high sight-proof fence. 
(7)  All oil or gas well and/or storage tanks shall be landscaped with alive and healthy evergreen trees, as required in section 12-913, if applicable. 
(8)  A sign shall be posted on the premises stating the owner and a 24-hour emergency contact. 
(Prior Code, § 6-170; LDC 1991, § 12-915; Ord. No. 599(07), 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 12-916. - Pooling of city lots or blocks. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or be construed to prevent the pooling of city lots or blocks of the city with land adjacent to and outside the corporate limits of the city for oil wells drilled, maintained or operated on any such city blocks or lots so pooled without compliance with this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 6-171; LDC 1991, § 12-916) 
Sec. 12-917. - Slush pits prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to build, excavate, construct or maintain any earthen excavation commonly known as a slush pit for the deposit of oil, liquid with oil content, gasoline or other oil product, surface or rotary mud, sand or salt water, or other waste in connection with oil wells, and it shall be unlawful for the same to stand open and exposed within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-173; LDC 1991, § 12-918) 
Sec. 12-918. - Deleterious substances, prohibited. 
    The drilling or operation of injection wells injecting salt water, mineral brines, waste oil or other deleterious substances, produced from or obtained or used in connection with the drilling, exploration for or development and producing of oil and gas into or back into the earth, is prohibited. 
(Prior Code, § 6-174; LDC 1991, § 12-919) 
CHAPTER 12. - WATER MAIN RECOUPMENT AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 12-1201. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter to provide the equitable distribution of the costs of constructing public water main extension projects; to provide for the receipt and distribution of tap fees to recover certain expenses of water main extension projects; to coordinate this policy with the need for and availability of public services and facilities; and to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this city and the customers of the city water system. 
(b)  The city council may, by resolution, authorize recoupment agreements with developers extending water services to benefit other properties in situations where the other benefitting property owners would normally extend the water main but lack the funding to do so. Such agreements must provide that the water mains will be built in accordance with city plans and specifications and dedicated to the city for public use and maintenance. The city may agree to partially reimburse the developer extending a water main from project connection fees charged to benefitting property owners in the project area. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1301; Ord. No. 248(99), 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 731(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1202. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Benefitting property means the property which abuts or includes the easement or right-of-way within which a water main extension project is constructed. 
    City means the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
    City engineer means the consulting engineer for the city or his designated representative. 
    Connection means any connection or tap of a water main extension project to directly or indirectly provide water service, less and except an "extension," as defined herein, shall not be considered a connection. 
    Cost of construction means the final cost of construction of the entire water main extension project, including, but not limited to, the bid amount and any additions, deletions, change orders, field changes, amendments or addenda, including a total of five percent of the actual direct cost for engineering fees. However, the "estimated cost of construction" shall mean the estimate of the final cost of construction project. 
    Developer means the applicant for an approved water main extension project who is financially responsible for constructing, or causing to be constructed, the water main extension project prior to project acceptance. 
    Director means the director of the community development department and his designated representative. 
    Extension means an attachment of a grid main to an existing water main extension project or facilities constructed by the city or the trust. 
    Grid main means water mains 12 inches in diameter which run in the easement or right-of-way along a section line or section line road and/or as otherwise officially designated by the director in writing. 
    Oversized mains means water mains in excess of 12 inches in diameter which run in the easement or right-of-way along a section line or section line road and/or as otherwise officially designated by the director in writing. 
    Policy or chapter means this policy, the "water main recoupment agreement policy," and amendments and supplements thereto. 
    Private lines or service lines means privately owned water lines for the provision of water service. An extension shall not be deemed a private line. 
    Tap fee means the contribution from a property owner or party desiring water service connection who is not the city, the trust, or developer of the project. 
    Trust means the MPWA and any successor thereto. 
    Water main extension project or project means an approved or authorized project for the construction of a grid main or oversized main, and all associated improvements, appurtenances and facilities, to be connected to the city water system. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1302; Ord. No. 248(99), 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 731(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1203. - Water main recoupment agreement application. 
(a)  To commence a water main recoupment agreement, the developer desiring to install or construct the project shall make application to the director in writing. 
(b)  The developer shall submit plans and specifications for the proposed project and a cost estimate to the director. The plans and specifications must be completed to the satisfaction of the director, and approved prior to commencing the project. 
(c)  The director shall preliminarily determine the developer's required contribution for the cost of construction based upon the estimate of the developer's engineer prior to approving any application or recommending approval of any application to the trust. Upon acceptance by the developer of the director's determination of cost, the developer shall execute a recoupment agreement for MPWA consideration and approval. 
(d)  Any application for installation of a water main recoupment agreement may be denied for any reasonable basis or may be conditionally approved for any reasonable basis. 
(e)  Upon approval or conditional approval of a recoupment agreement, the applicant shall be designated the developer of that water main extension project and shall be financially responsible for any and all costs designated as costs to be paid by the developer in accordance with this policy. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1303; Ord. No. 248(99), 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 731(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1204. - Determination of developer's cost of construction. 
    After the application is approved, the developer or his engineer will provide complete construction plans, engineering studies, and/or specifications as needed. Subsequently, the developer shall competitively solicit bids for the construction of the project. 
(1)  The project shall be competitively bid and the developer shall document it to the satisfaction of the director; 
(2)  The project shall be constructed by the developer to city standards; 
(3)  Should the developer notify the director in writing that the developer desires to withdraw his application and not proceed with the project, then the developer shall be liable for all costs and expenses made or contracted to be paid up to the time of actual receipt of notice. Should the developer not commence the project within a reasonable time, then, upon notice to the developer, the MPWA may withdraw its proposed investment. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1304; Ord. No. 248(99), 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 731(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1205. - Developer's required contributions. 
    The developer shall pay its share of the cost of construction of a 12-inch water main, or its equivalent, as set forth in this chapter. 
(1)  Grid mains. The developer shall pay 100 percent of the cost of construction for grid main-water main extension projects; 
(2)  Oversized mains required by the construction criteria. The developer and the trust shall share in the cost of construction of an oversized main-water extension project wherein the size, capacity and/or length of the proposed improvements are increased from the developer's requirements. The developer shall pay the equivalent cost of a 12-inch diameter water main project as the cost is determined by the director. 
a.  The director shall review the plans and specifications submitted by the developer with the application. 
b.  The director shall determine the cost of the water main designed for the size, flow, and location of his development and the cost of the oversized improvements. The cost difference between the two projects shall be the amount available for recoupment. 
c.  The developer shall pay the contractor for project construction, including any addition, deletion, change order, field change, amendment or addendum to the oversized main project. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1305; Ord. No. 248(99), 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 731(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1206. - Ownership of new water main extensions. 
(a)  The city owns the city water system. The city water system is leased to the trust. 
(b)  All water main extension projects to be connected to the city water system shall be the property of the city upon acceptance of the construction contractor's work by the city. The developer shall be deemed to have dedicated its interest, if any, in the project to the city upon completion of the project in accordance with the construction criteria. Should the project meet the construction criteria, then the director shall recommend the acceptance of the project. 
(c)  All water main extension projects shall be deemed dedicated by the developer to the city without any payment or contribution by the city or the trust to the developer; provided, however, whenever the developer is the lowest and best responsible bidder on a competitive bid for construction of the project, the trust shall pay its share of an oversized main project, if any, as provided in this policy. However, the city and the trust shall not contribute to the cost or pay the developer as successful bidder for the cost of mains, which are larger than that required or recommended by the construction criteria. 
(d)  Should the director so request, the developer shall execute a formal conveyance memorializing the dedication of the project. 
(e)  After acceptance of the completed project, the developer shall have no interest in the project. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1306; Ord. No. 248(99), 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 731(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1207. - Service after acceptance. 
    No connection shall be made to any water main extension project and no water service shall be provided until the project is determined to be complete by the director or his designee. The prohibition against connections and water services until the project is determined to be complete shall apply to the developer and all other persons and entities except the city and the trust. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1307; Ord. No. 248(99), 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 731(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1208. - Conformance with city standards. 
    All water mains and lines and all associated improvements, facilities and appurtenances to water mains and lines, including, but not limited to, valves, fire hydrants, service connections and meters, to be connected to any project or to the city water system must meet the construction criteria. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1308; Ord. No. 248(99), 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 731(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1209. - Reimbursement of costs. 
(a)  Developers may recover the share of the cost of construction paid by the developer on a water main extension project through tap fees from persons and entities desiring water service connections to the project; provided, however, no tap fee shall be paid to any developer who has not paid its entire share of the cost of construction. Reimbursement for the cost of construction of a water main extension project shall only be pursuant to the receipt of tap fees as set forth herein. 
(1)  No tap fees shall be collected or received on projects where the water main constructed is greater in size than that required by the construction criteria; 
(2)  The developer shall receive such reimbursement through tap fees actually paid to the trust within a period of 15 years from the date the project was accepted by the city, except as otherwise provided herein; 
(3)  The developer may not recover more than the developer's share of the cost of construction; 
(4)  All persons or entities who shall desire a water service connection shall pay a tap fee as set forth in this policy, except the developer, the city, and the trust. Except a benefitting property owner whose ownership pre-existed the project application date and that is used for a residential purpose shall be permitted to make a connection for water service to each preexisting residential structure of one inch or less without paying a tap fee, pending MPWA approval. This provision is not intended and shall not be deemed to permit a water service connection by a developer to a project which has not been accepted or for which the developer has not paid developer's entire share of the cost of construction. The requirement to pay tap fees shall not be affected by whether the property to be served is zoned residential, commercial, industrial or any other designation; 
(5)  Tap fees, as required herein, shall be paid to the trust prior to making any connection or obtaining any water service from the project; 
(6)  No one, other than the city, the trust, or a benefitting property owner, may make a connection for water service from a water main extension project; provided, however, the director may permit a connection by a non-benefitting property owner upon payment of a tap fee as determined by the director. The city and the trust may connect to any water main extension project without paying a tap fee regardless of whether the city or the trust is a benefitting property owner; 
(7)  The city shall maintain records of all projects where tap fees are applicable. Tap fees shall be due prior to connection to a project, but neither the city nor the trust shall be liable for nonpayment by any party making a connection or non-reimbursement to the developer; 
(8)  No tap fee shall be charged to or collected from the city or the trust; 
(9)  No tap fee shall be charged for an extension; 
(10)  The developer shall not receive tap fees in excess of its share of the cost of construction. 
(b)  Benefitting property owners and others permitted to make a water connection by the director shall pay a tap fee for their share of cost of construction except as otherwise expressly exempted. 
(1)  The director shall determine the cost of the water main designed for the size, flow, and location of his development and the cost of the oversized improvements. The cost difference between the two projects shall be the amount available for recoupment. A five percent engineering fee may be added to the amount available for recoupment. 
(2)  The reimbursement agreement shall stipulate the pro rata unit cost of the water main extension project. The pro-rata unit cost shall be determined by dividing the total amount available for recoupment by the linear foot of the water main extension, which is the per linear foot cost of the project. For each benefitting property, the per linear foot cost of the water main extension shall be multiplied by the linear foot of property frontage along the water main extension project, which shall equal the tap fee. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1309; Ord. No. 248(99), 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 731(12), 12-17-2012) 
CHAPTER 13. - SEWER MAIN RECOUPMENT AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 12-1301. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter to provide the equitable distribution of the costs of constructing public sewer main extension projects; to provide for the receipt and distribution of connection fees to recover certain expenses of sewer main extension projects; to coordinate this policy with the need for and availability of public services and facilities; and to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and the customers of the city sewer system. 
(b)  The city council may, by resolution, authorize recoupment agreements with developers extending sewer services to benefit other properties in situations where the other benefitting property owners would normally extend the sewer main but lack the funding to do so. Such agreements must provide that the sewer mains will be built in accordance with city plans and specifications and dedicated to the city for public use and maintenance. The city may agree to partially reimburse the developer extending a sewer main from project connection fees charged to benefitting property owners in the project area. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1401; Ord. No. 730(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1302. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Benefitting property means the area, zone, or district which will directly benefit by a specific sanitary sewer extension. 
    City means the City of Moore, Oklahoma. 
    City engineer means the consulting engineer for the city or his designated representative. 
    Cost of construction means the final cost of construction of the entire sewer main extension project, including, but not limited to, the bid amount and any additions, deletions, change orders, field changes, amendments or addenda, including a total of five percent of the actual direct cost for engineering fees. However, the estimated cost of construction shall mean the estimate of the final cost of construction project. 
    Developer means the applicant for an approved sewer main extension project who is financially responsible for constructing, or causing to be constructed, the sewer main extension project prior to project acceptance. 
    Director means the director of the community development department and his designated representative. 
    Interceptor means the sanitary sewer main for a particular drainage basin which serves the entire basin and follows the primary drainage pattern and shall not exceed the linear footage recommended by the city engineer. 
    Lateral means a minimum eight-inch diameter collector line for serving abutting properties. 
    MPWA means the Moore Public Works Authority. 
    Policy or chapter means this policy, the "sewer main recoupment agreement policy," and amendments and supplements thereto. 
    Private lines or service lines means privately owned sewer lines for the provision of sewer service. An extension shall not be deemed a private line. 
    Sewer main extension project or project means all necessary sanitary sewer extensions and improvements of the city sanitary sewer system necessary to serve the developer's subdivision and to meet any increased sizing required by the city engineer to properly serve the basin, including, but not limited to, trunk lines, interceptor mains, and lift stations. 
    Trunk means a line of at least eight inches diameter, which collects lateral mains and connects to an interceptor. 
    Trust means the MPWA and any successor thereto. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1402; Ord. No. 730(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1303. - Sewer main recoupment agreement application. 
(a)  To commence a sewer main recoupment agreement, the developer desiring to install or construct the project shall make application to the director in writing. 
(b)  The developer shall submit plans and specifications for the proposed project and a cost estimate to the director. The plans and specifications must be completed to the satisfaction of the director, and approved prior to commencing the project. 
(c)  The director shall preliminarily determine the developer's required contribution for the cost of construction based upon the estimate of the developer's engineer prior to approving any application or recommending approval of any application to the trust. Upon acceptance by the developer of the director's determination of cost, the developer shall execute a recoupment agreement for MPWA consideration and approval. 
(d)  Any application for installation of a sewer main recoupment agreement may be denied for any reasonable basis or may be conditionally approved for any reasonable basis. 
(e)  Upon approval or conditional approval of an agreement, the applicant shall be designated the developer of that sewer main extension project and shall be financially responsible for any and all costs designated as costs to be paid by the developer in accordance with this policy. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1403; Ord. No. 730(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1304. - Determination of developer's cost of construction. 
    After the application is approved, the developer or his engineer will provide complete construction plans, engineering studies, and/or specifications as needed. Subsequently, the developer shall competitively solicit and price the construction of the project. 
(1)  The project shall be competitively bid and the developer shall document it to the satisfaction of the director; 
(2)  The project shall be constructed by the developer to city standards; 
(3)  Should the developer notify the director in writing that the developer desires to withdraw his application and not proceed with the project, then the developer shall be liable for all costs and expenses made or contracted to be paid up to the time of actual receipt of notice. Should the developer not commence the project within a reasonable time, then, upon notice to the developer, the MPWA may withdraw its proposed investment. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1404; Ord. No. 730(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1305. - Developer's required contributions. 
    The developer shall pay his share of the cost of construction of the sanitary sewer main and lift station projects as set forth in this chapter. 
(1)  Lateral lines. The developer shall pay 100 percent of the cost of construction for lateral sanitary sewer main extensions. 
(2)  Trunk lines and interceptor mains. The developer shall pay 100 percent of the cost of construction for sanitary sewer trunk lines and interceptor main extensions. 
(3)  Lift stations. The developer shall pay 100 percent of the cost of construction for sanitary sewer lift station projects. 
(4)  Oversized improvements. The developer and trust may share in the cost of construction of oversized sanitary sewer trunk lines, interceptor mains, and lift stations wherein the size, capacity, or length of the proposed improvements are increased from the developers requirements due to the required servicing of the drainage basin. The developer shall pay the equivalent cost of the sanitary sewer trunk lines, interceptor mains, and lift stations designed for the size and flow of his development as determined by the director. 
a.  The director shall review the plans and specifications submitted by the developer with the application; 
b.  The director shall determine the cost of the sanitary sewer trunk lines, interceptor mains, and lift stations designed for the size, flow, and location of his development and the cost of the oversized improvements. The cost difference between the two projects shall be the amount available for recoupment; 
c.  The developer shall pay the contractor for project construction, including any addition, deletion, change order, field change, amendment or addendum to the oversized main project. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1405; Ord. No. 730(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1306. - Ownership of new sewer main extensions. 
(a)  The city owns the city sewer system. The city sewer system is leased to the trust. 
(b)  All sewer main extension projects to be connected to the city sewer system shall be the property of the city upon acceptance of the construction contractor's work by the city. The developer shall be deemed to have dedicated its interest, if any, in the project to the city upon completion of the project in accordance with the construction criteria. Should the project meet the construction criteria, then the director shall recommend the acceptance of the project. 
(c)  All sewer main extension projects shall be deemed dedicated by the developer to the city without any payment or contribution by the city or the trust to the developer; provided, however, whenever the developer is the lowest and best responsible bidder on a competitive bid for construction of the project, the trust shall pay its share of an oversized main project, if any, as provided in this policy. However, the city and the trust shall not contribute to the cost or pay the developer as successful bidder for the cost of mains, which are larger than that required or recommended by the construction criteria. 
(d)  Should the director so request, the developer shall execute a formal conveyance memorializing the dedication of the project. 
(e)  After acceptance of the completed project, the developer shall have no interest in the project. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1406; Ord. No. 730(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1307. - Service after acceptance. 
    No connection shall be made to any sewer main extension project and no sewer service shall be provided until the project is determined to be complete by the director or his designee. The prohibition against connections and sewer services until the project is determined to be complete shall apply to the developer and all other persons and entities except the city and the trust. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1407; Ord. No. 730(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1308. - Conformance with city standards. 
(a)  All laterals, trunks, interceptors and lift stations to be connected to the city sanitary sewer system, either directly or indirectly, shall be: 
(1)  Constructed in accordance with the standards and requirements of the city; 
(2)  Constructed at locations and alignments approved by the city engineer; 
(3)  Constructed in easements dedicated to the city; 
(4)  Constructed in a size required by the city engineer; 
(5)  Inspected by the city engineer prior to acceptance. 
(b)  Interceptors, trunks and laterals to be maintained by the city or MPWA must be dedicated or donated to the city and must be approved and accepted by the city prior to use. 
(c)  Developers, contractors or others dedicating laterals, trunks and interceptors to become part of the city sanitary sewer system shall provide or cause to be provided a maintenance bond to the benefit of the city in an amount, for a period, and in a form acceptable to the city engineer as a precondition to acceptance of the facilities. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1408; Ord. No. 730(12), 12-17-2012) 
Sec. 12-1309. - Reimbursement of costs. 
(a)  Developers may recover the share of the cost of construction paid by the developer on a sewer main extension project through connection fees from persons and entities desiring sewer service connections to the project; provided, however, no connection fee shall be paid to any developer who has not paid its entire share of the cost of construction. Reimbursement for the cost of construction of a sewer main extension project shall only be pursuant to the receipt of connection fees as set forth herein. 
(1)  No tap fees shall be collected or received on projects where the sewer main constructed is greater in size than that required by the construction criteria; 
(2)  The developer shall receive such reimbursement through connection fees actually paid to the trust within a period of 15 years from the date the project was accepted by the city except as otherwise provided herein; 
(3)  The developer may not recover more than the developer's share of the cost of construction. The developer's cost of construction, as used in this policy, shall mean the cost actually paid by the developer for interceptors and truck lines outside the developer's subdivision, less any investment by MPWA. The developer may not recover any cost of construction within the subdivision. However, the developer may include in the cost of construction, five percent of the cost of the interceptors and trunk lines outside the subdivision as engineering design fees; 
(4)  All persons or entities who shall desire a sewer service connection shall pay a connection fee as set forth in this policy, except the developer, the city, and the MPWA. Except a benefitting property owner whose ownership pre-existed the project application date and that is used for a residential purpose shall be permitted to make a connection for sewer service to each preexisting residential structure without paying a tap fee, pending MPWA approval. This provision is not intended and shall not be deemed to permit a sewer service connection by a developer to a project which has not been accepted or for which the developer has not paid the developer's entire share of the cost of construction. The requirement to pay tap fees shall not be affected by whether the property to be served is zoned residential, commercial, industrial, or any other designation; 
(5)  This policy shall not exempt the developer from connection fees for connection of another subdivision or facility to this project; 
(6)  Connection fees, as required herein, shall be paid to MPWA prior to making any connection or obtaining any sanitary sewer service from the project; 
(7)  No one, other than the city, the MPWA, or a benefitting property owner in the drainage basin, may make a connection for sewer service from a sewer main extension project; provided, however, the MPWA director may, at its sole discretion, permit a connection by a non-benefitting property owner outside the drainage basin upon payment of a connection fee as determined by the MPWA. The city and the MPWA may connect to any sewer main extension project without paying a connection fee regardless of whether the city or the MPWA is in the drainage basin; 
(8)  The city shall maintain records of all projects where connection fees are applicable. Connection fees shall be due prior to connection to a project, but neither the city nor the trust shall be liable for nonpayment by any party making a connection or non-reimbursement to the developer; 
(9)  No connection fee shall be charged to or collected from the city or the trust; 
(10)  No connection fee shall be charged for an extension; 
(11)  The developer shall not receive connection fees in excess of its share of the cost of construction. 
(b)  Benefitting property owners and others permitted to make a sewer connection by the director shall pay a connection fee for their share of cost of construction except as otherwise expressly exempted. 
(1)  The director shall determine the cost of the sewer main project designed for the size, flow, and location of his development and the cost of the oversized improvements. The cost difference between the two projects shall be the amount available for recoupment. A five percent engineering fee may be added to the amount available for recoupment. 
(2)  The reimbursement agreement shall stipulate the pro rata unit cost of the sewer main extension project. The pro-rata unit cost shall be determined by dividing the total amount available for recoupment by the acreage served by the sewer main extension, which is the per acre cost of the project. For each benefitting property, the per acre cost of the sewer main extension shall be multiplied by the acreage of property being served by the sewer extension project, which shall equal the tap fee. 
(LDC 1991, § 12-1409; Ord. No. 730(12), 12-17-2012) 
CHAPTER 14. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 12-1401. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the city and the short-term and long-term public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by controlling discharges of pollutants to the city's stormwater system and to maintain and improve the quality of the community water into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation, the lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, sinkholes, and groundwater of the city. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-101; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1402. - Scope. 
    This chapter establishes methods to regulate the introduction of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including, but not limited to, the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), the Oklahoma Environmental Quality Act (27A O.S. § 1-1-101 et seq.) and the stormwater regulations (40 CFR 122). The objectives of this chapter are to allow the city to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by stormwater discharges by any user; 
(2)  Control the introduction to the municipal separate storm sewer system of spills, dumping, or the disposal of materials other than stormwater; 
(3)  Prohibit illicit discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(4)  Carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with this chapter; 
(5)  Comply with NPDES municipal stormwater discharge permit conditions and any other federal or state law pertaining to stormwater quality which the city is subject. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-102; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1403. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this chapter into the community waters or to the waters of the state which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and any addition or amendment thereto. 
    Agricultural stormwater runoff means any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and other non-point source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR 122.24 and any addition or amendment thereto. 
    Best management practice (BMP) means the best available practices or devices that, when used singly or in combination, eliminate or reduce the contamination of surface waters and/or groundwaters. BMPs are divided into two categories: 
(1)  Nonstructural best management practices are those which require modified or additional operational or behavior practices, such as sweeping a parking lot or having spill response equipment on-site; and 
(2)  Structural best management practices are those which require the construction of a structure or other physical modification on the site. 
    City means the City of Moore, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation, and the duly authorized offices or agents of the city. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, codified at 33 USC 1251 et seq., and any amendment or addition thereto. 
    Commercial means property devoted in whole or in part to the commerce, that is, the exchange and buying and selling of commodities or services. The term "commercial" shall include, by way of example, but not of limitation, any business that would fall under the commercial use unit classifications as defined in section 12-206. 
    Community waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the city or the waters into which the composite sample stormwater system outfalls flow. 
    Confidential information means a document or information regarding or describing a process, product or information which has been determined by the manager to be confidential or has been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be exempt from disclosure to third parties under the Oklahoma Open Records Act and any amendment or supplement thereto. 
    Construction activity means clearing, grading, mining, and excavation activities, except operations which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale. 
    Construction stormwater discharge permit means permits to establish, to the maximum extent practicable, measures effectively prohibiting non-stormwater discharged from construction sites to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and, where necessary, contain applicable water quality-based controls. 
    Contaminated means containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
    Days means calendar days. 
    DEQ means the state department of environmental quality. 
    Director means the director of community development, or the person succeeding to his duties and functions by whatever name known, or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Discharge means to cause or allow to throw, drain, release, dump, spill, empty, emit, blow or pour any pollutants or harmful quantity of any substance into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into community waters, waters of the state or waters of the United States. 
    Discharger means any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility; owner of commercial, residential or agricultural property; or owner or transporter of source of discharge. 
    Domestic sewage means human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing, showers, dish washing, and food preparation), other wastewater from household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, or commercial properties and institutions, that is free from industrial waste. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term "EPA" may also be used as a designated for the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan means a written plan, including drawings or other graphic representations, for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. 
    Fire protection water means any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person other than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Harmful quantity means the amount of any substance that will cause pollution of water in the state, or that will cause lethal or sub-lethal adverse effects on representative, sensitive aquatic monitoring organisms belonging to the city, upon their exposure to samples of any discharge into the MS4, community waters, or waters of the state. 
    Hazardous substance means any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR 302 and any amendment or addition thereto. 
    Hazardous waste means any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR 261. 
    Illicit discharge means any intentional discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to any NPDES permit, or discharges resulting from firefighting activities. 
    Industrial means a business engaged in industrial production or service that is a business characterized by manufacturing or productive enterprise or a related service business. The term "industrial" shall include, by way of example, but not of limitation, any business that would fall under the industrial use unit classifications and/or extractive use unit classifications as defined in section 12-206. 
    Industrial activity means any activity which is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial facility. The term "industrial activity" includes, but is not limited to, industrial plant yards; immediate access roads and rail lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials, manufactured products, waste material, or byproducts used or created by the industrial facility; sites where material handling activities are performed; refuse sites; sites used for the applications or disposal of process wastewaters; sites used for the storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; sites used for residual treatment, storage or disposal; shipping and receiving areas; manufacturing buildings; and storage areas (including tank farms) for raw materials, and immediate and finished products. 
    Industrial facility or industry means a premises whose function is classified in the latest edition of Standard Industrial Classification Manual (United States Office of Management and Budget). 
    Industrial stormwater discharge permit means regular discharges from facilities who may control any conveyance which is used for collecting and conveying stormwater and which is directly related to material storage areas at an industrial plant or site. 
    Industrial waste means any airborne particulates, waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industrial, manufacturing, mining, production, trade, or business activities, including concrete washout. 
    Institutional means an established organization, especially of a charitable or public character. The term "institutional" shall include, by way of example, but not of limitation, any use that would fall under the public and quasi-public use unit classifications as defined in section 12-206. 
    Manager means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of stormwater quality management and the stormwater management system and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Material handling activities means the storage, loading and unloading, transportation or conveyance of any raw material, immediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product. 
    Monitoring means the performance of stormwater flow measurements, stormwater sampling, sample analysis, and like procedures necessary to determine compliance with stormwater discharge activity. 
    Multifamily residential means an apartment building or other residential structure built for three or more family units, mobile home parks, and condominiums of three or more units. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned or regulated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
    Municipal solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial, institutional, or recreational activities, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and other solid waste other than industrial waste. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit means a permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342 (b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Nonpoint source means any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a point source. 
    Notice of intent (NOI) means a written notice by a discharger or potential discharger to the stormwater manager, or his designee, that the person wishes his discharge to be authorized under a general permit authorized by state law or regulation. 
    Notice of termination (NOT) means a written notice by a discharger to the stormwater manager, or his designee, that the project permitted has 70 percent revegetation of all bare areas and all soil disturbing activities are concluded, allowing the termination of the permit issued under this chapter, or the discharger is no longer the operator of the facility and another has assumed the responsibility and obtained a NOI. 
    ODEQ means the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
    OPDES means the Oklahoma Pollution Discharge Elimination System Act, 27A O.S. § 2-6-201 et seq., and any amendment or addition thereto. 
    Operator means a person that: 
(1)  Has operational or supervisory control over the premises or equipment; or 
(2)  Has the day-to-day operational or supervisory control of activities at a work site or construction location sufficient to comply with or to ensure compliance with plan requirements and permit conditions (e.g., is authorized to direct workers at a work site to carry out activities identified in an ordinance, permit or work plan). 
    Overburden means any material of any nature, consolidated or unconsolidated, that overlies a mineral deposit, excluding topsoil or similar naturally occurring surface material that is not disturbed by mining operation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. The term "person" includes all federal, state, or local governments. 
    Point source means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. 
    Pollutant means any dredge spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, oil, grease, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical waste, industrial waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial waste, and characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor). 
    Pollution prevention plan means a written site-specific plan to eliminate or reduce and control the pollution of stormwater through designed facilities, sedimentation ponds, natural or constructed wetlands, and best management practices. 
    Premises means any plot or tract of ground, regardless of size or plat, owned by a person or used by a person and any contiguous plots. 
    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), community waters, waters of the state, or the waters of the United States. 
    Rubbish means non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consists of: 
(1)  Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and 
(2)  Non-combustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 degrees Fahrenheit to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
    Sanitary sewer or sewer means the system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to a sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
    Sewage means industrial waste and/or domestic sewage. 
    SIC code means the Standard Industrial Classification Code of Executive Office of the President of the United States, Office of Management and Budget. 
    Significant spills means and includes, but is not limited to, releases of oil or hazardous substances in excess of reportable quantities under section 311 of the Clean Water Act (see 40 CFR 110.10 and CFR 117.21) or section 102 of CERCLA (see 40 CFR 302.4) and any amendment or addition thereto. 
    Solid waste means any garbage, rubbish, refuse, municipal solid waste, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, agricultural operations, community and institutional activities, including metal shavings, plastic pellets, paint chips, carpet fibers, wood chips, sawdust, grass clippings and leaves. 
    Spills means any release that, in the opinion of the manager, negatively impacts the quality of water within or discharges from the city's municipal separate storm sewer system or causes damaging or deleterious effects to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system including all structures or appurtenances, and/or the waters to the storm sewers. 
    Stormwater means any rainwater runoff, surface runoff, and drainage related to rain or storm events or snow melt. 
    Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity means stormwater from areas of industrial activity or areas where industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant materials remain and are exposed to stormwater. 
    Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this chapter and its terms, including, but not limited to, measures that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
    Stormwater management plan or SWMP means the set of drawings and other documents that comprise all of the information and specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts, and techniques for the control of stormwater and which is incorporated as part of the NPDES permit for the city, and as part of this chapter. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in 40 CFR 401 promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of 33 USC 1317 and any amendment or addition thereto. 
    Uncontaminated means not containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
    User means any source of direct or indirect discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    Utilities means a television, electric, gas, water, sewer, cable TV, or other company or legal or government entity that provides service to the public. 
    Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements contained in this chapter and the stormwater management plan for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    Water of the state or water means any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state. 
    Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
    Water quantity means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff. 
    Waters of the United States means all waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of waters of the United States at 40 CFR 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(b)  The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BAT: Best available technology. 
BCT: Best conventional technology. 
BMP: Best management practice. 
BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand. 
CF: Code of Federal Regulations. 
COD: Chemical oxygen demand. 
EPA: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Gpd: Gallons per day. 
L: Liter. 
mg: Milligrams. 
mg/l: Milligrams per liter. 
NOI: Notice of intent. 
NOV: Notice of violation. 
NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system. 
OPDES: Oklahoma Pollution Discharge Elimination System. 
RCRA: Resource Conservation Recovery Act. 
RQ: Reportable quantities. 
SARA: Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986. 
SCS: Soil conservation service. 
SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.). 
TSD: Treatment, storage and disposal facilities. 
TSS: Total suspended solids. 
USC: United States Code. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-103; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
ARTICLE B. - APPLICATION AND PERMITS FOR INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL, AND CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 12-1411. - Existing facilities required to obtain permit. 
(a)  Any existing industrial, commercial, institutional or multifamily or group residential facilities that discharge stormwater into community waters and that do not have current NPDES permits issued by the DEQ authorizing a discharge of stormwater into the waters of the state will be required to develop a pollution prevention plan and apply for an industrial stormwater discharge permit. The industrial stormwater discharge permit shall be required in addition to any permits required by EPA or the state. Facilities that have the following standard industrial classification codes must apply and receive an industrial stormwater discharge permit: 
SIC Code Title 10 Metal mining 12 Coal mining 13 Oil and gas extraction 14 Nonmetallic minerals, except fuels 20 Food and kindred products 21 Tobacco products 22 Textile mill products 23 Apparel and other textile products 24 Lumber and wood products 25 Furniture and fixtures 26 Paper and allied products 27 Printing and publishing 28 Chemicals and allied products 29 Petroleum and coal products 30 Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products 31 Leather and leather products (except 311) 32 Stone, clay, and glass products 33 Primary metal industries 34 Fabricated metal products 35 Industrial machinery and equipment 36 Electronic and other electric equipment 37 Transportation equipment 38 Instruments and related products 39 Miscellaneous manufacturing industries 40 Railroad transportation 41 Local and interurban passenger transit 42 Trucking and warehousing 43 United States Postal Service 44 Water transportation 45 Transportation by air 5015 Motor vehicle parts, used 5093 Scrap and waste materials 5171 Petroleum bulk stations and terminals  
(b)  These plans will be submitted to the manager of stormwater quality management for approval or denial. Upon approval, a permit will be issued which will incorporate any approved pollution prevention plans into the permit. The permit may require the facility to implement structural and non-structural best management practices (BMPs) to reduce pollution discharge. If the application is disapproved, the manager shall notify the applicant of deficiencies and allow 90 days for the application to be revised and resubmitted. If the noted deficiencies are not corrected within 90 days and the application re-submitted for approval, or if after being submitted is disapproved, any discharge of stormwater after that date into waters of the community shall be unlawful. Once issued, a permit shall be valid for five years, unless sooner revoked for violations of permit conditions, changes in applicable law, changes in discharge, or other good cause. 
(c)  The application for an industrial stormwater discharge permit for an existing facility shall include the following: 
(1)  A site map of facility showing buildings, parking, drives, materials loading and access areas, type of each impervious surface, ditches, pipes, catchbasins, drainage basin limits, area of facility, acreage of off-site water draining onto facility, discharge points to waters of the state or community waters with name of the water or drainage basin. This map will be a minimum of scale of one inch equals 100 feet; 
(2)  Description of facility, nature of work performed, and type of facility; 
(3)  A narrative description of significant materials (as defined at 40 CFR 122.26, November 16, 1990) that are currently or in the past have been treated, stored, or disposed outside; method of on-site storage or disposal; materials management practices used to minimize contact of these materials with stormwater runoff currently and for the past three years; materials loading and access area; the location and description of existing structural and non-structural control measures to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff; and a description of any treatment the stormwater receives; 
(4)  Cleanup schedule for debris, material storage areas, garbage storage or disposal areas, or other areas that have the potential to pollute stormwater; 
(5)  Description of plan of instruction to employees of all levels in ways to prevent pollution and spill response. The plan shall identify periodic dates for such training; 
(6)  Name of contact person for permit compliance, including job title, address, and phone number; 
(7)  Maintenance schedule of sweeping or vacuuming of facility to prevent washout of a build-up of emissions laden with hydrocarbons, oxides, salts, metals, worn pavement particulates, hydrocarbons for leaks and spills, trash, debris, garbage, metals, tire particles, brake lining particles and various chemicals from the wear, deterioration, and deposition from vehicles; 
(8)  Description of other ways the facility plans to implement programs to reduce the discharge of pollutants through stormwater flow. For each area of the facility that generates stormwater discharges associated with an activity with a reasonable potential for containing significant amounts of pollutants, a prediction of the direction of flow, and an estimate of the types of pollutants which are likely to be present in stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity; 
(9)  Each application shall include plans showing the construction of an appropriately sized grit sediment basin and oil skimmer structure for discharge outfalls into community waters in accordance with detailed drawings of these structures which are shown in the stormwater management section of the best management practices manual; 
(10)  Each application shall include a record of available sampling data describing pollutants in stormwater discharges; 
(11)  Each application shall include a preventive maintenance program that includes regular inspection and maintenance of stormwater management devices (e.g., cleaning grit chambers, catchbasins) as well as inspecting and testing plant equipment and systems to uncover conditions that could cause breakdowns or failures resulting in discharges of pollutants to surface waters; 
(12)  Each application shall designate a person to keep record of incidents such as significant spills of toxic pollutants or other discharges which materially affect the stormwater, along with other information describing the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges. Inspections and maintenance activities shall be documented and recorded. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-201; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1412. - New facility permits. 
(a)  All new utilities, industrial, commercial, institutional, and multifamily residential facilities, and all residential subdivisions shall obtain a construction stormwater discharge permit prior to construction of the facility. This permit shall be required in addition to any permits required by the state or elsewhere in this Code for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity or for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity or land disturbing activity. 
(b)  The minimum standards for issuance of a construction stormwater discharge permit shall be a pollution prevention plan, and an approved OPDES permit from the state department of environmental quality for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity. The application for a new facility permit shall include: 
(1)  If the facility is to be covered under the state department of environmental quality OPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, an OPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity, or an industrial OPDES permit, the owner or developer shall obtain such permits or file the notice of intent (NOI) and shall submit copies to the manager; 
(2)  To reduce the "first flush" pollutant load, facilities that serve an area with ten or more disturbed acres shall be designed to capture the design storm in a detention or retention basin providing 3,600 cubic feet of storage per acre drained. Where providing 3,600 cubic feet of storage per acre drained is not attainable, small sediment basins of equivalent total volume should be used; 
(3)  Detention or retention ponds shall also have permanent vehicle access for maintenance purposes. A plan for the routine maintenance of the ponds will be incorporated in the pollution prevention plan; 
(4)  Constructed wetlands may be used to deal with the first flush pollutant load instead of the pond of 3,600 cubic feet per acre storage. Grit trap and oil separators are to be installed upstream of the wetland to prevent contamination; 
(5)  A pollution prevention plan shall be prepared for the facility. This plan shall demonstrate how the facility will collect, control, and treat stormwater so as to control the quantity and quality of stormwater leaving the site. The plan shall include, as necessary, structural controls and non-structural best management practices (BMPs) adequate to prevent the violation of any water quality standard, and shall meet the provisions of sections 301 and 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (BCT and BAT treatment requirements). 
(c)  The pollution prevention plan must be reviewed by the manager prior to the issuance of a construction permit. 
(d)  A notice of termination (NOT) must be received for a certificate of occupancy. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-202; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1413. - Permit application fees. 
    Each application for the issuance of a new facility permit, a construction stormwater discharge permit, land disturbance permit, and/or an existing facility permit shall be required to pay the permit fee as required by the most current schedule of fees. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-203; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1414. - Maintenance and submittal of records. 
    Appropriate proof and records of compliance with the provisions of the stormwater discharge permit or land disturbance permit will be maintained in the office of the designated contact person and be made available for review at any time by the manager. Each permit shall be renewed on an annual basis. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-204; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1415. - Transfer of permit. 
(a)  An industrial, construction stormwater discharge permit or land disturbance permit may be transferred only upon the filing of an amendment to the permit application or an amended or restated application containing all changes from the original application, providing there are no changes in the operation of the facility which may affect the quantity or quality of the stormwater runoff. 
(b)  If there are to be any changes in the operation of the facility which may affect the quantity or quality of stormwater runoff, then the new owner or operator shall re-submit, by NOI, for a stormwater discharge permit or land disturbance permit prior to the beginning of operation of the facility. The filing of an amended or restated application shall be treated as an interim permit allowing the continued operation of the facility pending review of the application by the manager, which shall remain in force until the application shall be approved or denied by the manager. 
(c)  In subdivision developments, the developer may transfer the construction stormwater discharge permit to an individual builder using forms provided by the city. However, the transfer of permit does not release the developer of record who obtained the original permit of responsibility and/or liability for maintaining the storm sewer system by maintaining appropriate erosion control throughout the build-out stage to keep the infrastructure reasonably clear of sedimentation, siltation and trash. 
(1)  Prior to utilizing the funds for stormwater violation abatements, the developer shall receive a ten-day notice outlining all violations. If the violations have not been corrected after the ten-day notice period, the city shall cause the violations to be abated utilizing the city's contractor, and will add an administrative fee established in the city's fee schedule for preparing, posting, and distributing notices, and any other cost associated with the abatement. 
(2)  A portion of the amount deposited with the city shall be reimbursed at regular intervals to equal $300.00 per lot that has received a final occupancy permit. 
(3)  The developer shall maintain in the deposit account an amount equal to $300.00 per lot that has not received an occupancy permit throughout the build-out of the subdivision. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-205; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 641(08), 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 12-1416. - Signatory requirements. 
(a)  All applications and reports required by this article to be submitted to the manager shall be signed as follows: 
(1)  Responsible party (e.g., the developer, owner, or contractor) with operational control over the project specifications and daily operations; 
(2)  Corporation: a president or secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation, as authorized, and in charge of a principal business function, or any other person as authorized to perform similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; 
(3)  Partnership or sole proprietorship by a general partner or the proprietor, respectively; 
(4)  Municipality, state, federal, or other public facility: by either a principal executive officer or the chief executive officer of the agency, or a senior executive officer having responsibility for the overall operations of a principal geographic unit of the agency; 
(5)  Other legal entity recognized under state law in accordance with such law. 
(b)  Any person signing any document above shall make the following certification: 
    "I certify under the penalty of law that I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in the attached document; and based on my inquiry of those individuals, immediately responsible for obtaining the information. I believe the submitted information is true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and civil penalty." 
(LDC 1991, § 15-206; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1417. - Construction activity sediment and erosion control. 
    All construction activity shall be conducted within the city in such manner that: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted so as to minimize erosion. Clearing and grubbing must be held to the minimum necessary for grading and equipment operation. Pre-construction vegetative ground cover shall not be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than 20 calendar days prior to grading or earth moving. Construction must be sequenced to minimize the exposure time of cleared surface area; 
(2)  Property owners and/or developers shall be responsible, upon completion of land disturbing activities, for leaving slopes so that they will not erode. Such methods should include re-vegetation, sodding, mulching, or rip-rapping. Regardless of the method used, the objective will be to leave the site as erosion-free and maintenance-free as practicable; 
(3)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented; 
(4)  Permanent or temporary soil stabilization must be applied to disturbed areas to the extent feasible within seven days on areas that will remain unfinished for more than 14 calendar days. Permanent soil stabilization with perennial vegetation shall be applied as soon as practicable after final grading is reached on any portion of the site. Soil stabilization refers to measures which protect soil from the erosive forces of wind, raindrop impact, and flowing water, and includes the growing of grass, sod, application of straw, mulch, fabric mats, and the early application of gravel base on areas to be paved; 
(5)  A permanent vegetative cover shall be established on disturbed areas not otherwise permanently stabilized; 
(6)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, silt fences, check dams or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized; 
(7)  Neighboring persons and property shall be protected from damage or loss resulting from excessive stormwater runoff, soil erosion or deposition upon property or public streets of water transported silt and debris. Adjacent property owners shall be protected from land devaluation due to exposed bare banks; 
(8)  Controlled construction entrance/exit shall be maintained in a condition that will prevent tracking or flowing of sediment onto the public right-of-way; 
(9)  Erosion and sediment control measures must be in place and functional before earth moving operations begin, and must be constructed and maintained throughout the construction period. Temporary measures may be removed at the beginning of the workday, but must be replaced at the end of the workday; 
(10)  Structural controls shall be designed and maintained as required to prevent pollution. All surface water flowing toward the construction area shall, to the extent practicable, be diverted by using berms, channels, or sediment traps as necessary. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be designed according to the size and slope of disturbed or drainage areas, to detain runoff and trap sediment. Discharges from sediment basins and traps must be through a pipe or lined channel so that the discharge does not cause erosion. Muddy water to be pumped from excavation and work areas must be held in settling basins or treated by filtration prior to its discharge into surface waters where practicable. Waters must be discharged through a pipe or lined channel so that the discharge does not cause erosion and sedimentation. All channels, outlets, storm sewer inlets, streets, creeks, and streams must be protected from the introduction of garbage, rubbish, yard waste, sediment, or floatable materials; 
(11)  All control measures shall be inspected, and repaired as necessary, bi-weekly in dry periods and within 24 hours after any rainfall of 0.5 inches within a 24-hour period. During prolonged rainfall, daily inspections and repairing is necessary. The permittee shall maintain record of such inspections and repairs; any land disturbing activity located in the watershed of any creek or stream that is listed as impaired by the ODEQ shall be inspected, and repaired as necessary, on a weekly basis in dry periods and within 24 hours after any rainfall of 0.5 inches within a 24-hour period. During prolonged rainfall, daily inspections and repairing is necessary. The permittee shall maintain record of such inspections and repairs; 
(12)  A specific individual shall be designated to be responsible for erosion and sediment controls on each site. A notice shall be posted on each site with the OKR10 permit number, contact name and telephone number, project name and location of the SWP3 if not on-site; 
(13)  There shall be no distinctly visible floating scum, oil or other matter contained in the stormwater discharge. The stormwater discharge must not cause an objectionable color contrast in the receiving water. The stormwater discharge must result in no materials in concentrations sufficient to be hazardous or otherwise detrimental to humans, livestock, wildlife, plant life, or fish and aquatic life in the receiving stream; and 
(14)  Concrete washout areas must be designated, utilized, and maintained to minimize pollutant discharges. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-207; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
ARTICLE C. - LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY AND EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 12-1421. - General land disturbing activity. 
    All land disturbing activities shall be in compliance with and permitted under this article. Application must be applied for under the state general OPDES permit for stormwater discharged associated with construction activity. If a general OPDES permit is applied for, a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) must be sent to the manager of stormwater quality management. To seek coverage under the state department of environmental quality general permit, the NOI must be submitted to the state department of environmental quality, water quality division. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-303; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1422. - Land disturbing activity regulated. 
(a)  Unlawful without permit, defined. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, or to permit another person to conduct, any land disturbing activity upon land without a permit issued under this article. Upon request, any owner of the land and the operator of any land disturbing activity shall provide a copy of the permit and personal identification to the manager or the manager's representatives. For purposes of this article, the term "land disturbing activity" is defined as follows: 
    Land disturbing activity means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water and wind and the movement of sediments into community waters or onto lands and roadways within the community, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, stockpiling, mining, and filling of land, except that the term "land disturbing activity" shall not include the following: 
(1)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, home repairs, home maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(2)  The construction of single-family residences when built separately on lots less than one acre not within a subdivision or which have been recorded in the office of stormwater quality management, and have been issued building permits, provided that excavation is limited to trenches for the foundation, basements, service and sewer connections, and minor grading for driveways, yard areas and sidewalks, with no offsite discharge of pollutants; 
(3)  Individual service and sewer connections for single- or two-family residences; 
(4)  Agricultural practices involving the establishment, cultivation or harvesting of products of the field or orchard, preparing and planting of pasture land, forestry land management practices including harvesting, farm ponds, dairy operations, and livestock and poultry management practices, and the construction of farm buildings; 
(5)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(6)  Installation, maintenance and repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surface road, street or sidewalk, provided the activity maintains pollution control and is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced; and 
(7)  Construction, repair or rebuilding of tracks of a railroad company. 
These activities may be undertaken without a permit; however, the persons conducting these excluded activities shall remain responsible for otherwise conducting those activities in accordance with the provisions of this article and other applicable laws, including responsibility for controlling sedimentation and runoff. 
(b)  Best management practices for land disturbing activities. The minimum standards for controlling erosion and sedimentation from land disturbing activities shall be set forth in the best management practices manual, as adopted and amended from time to time by resolution approved by the city council. A copy of same shall be maintained on file in the offices of the manager of stormwater quality management. A copy of same shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and may be viewed and copied in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-304; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1423. - Land disturbance permit. 
    No person shall conduct, allow or permit land disturbing activity, whether temporary or permanent, on any premises within the city until a land disturbing permit has been issued by the manager allowing such activity pursuant to the provisions of this article. Such permit shall be available for inspection by the manager or manager's representative on the job site at all times during which land disturbing activities are in progress. Such permit shall be required in addition to any building permit or other permit required by this Code for the site. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-305; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1424. - Permit application. 
(a)  Any application for the issuance of a land disturbance permit under this article shall include the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Business or residence address of applicant; 
(3)  Name and address of owner of subject property; 
(4)  Address and legal description of subject property; 
(5)  Name and address of the contractor and any subcontractor who shall perform the land disturbing activity and who shall implement the erosion and sediment control plan; 
(6)  A statement setting forth the nature, extent, and purpose of the land disturbing activity, including the size of the area for which the permit shall be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates of the land disturbing activity; 
(7)  A copy of the NOI and erosion and sediment control plan. 
(b)  Each application for a land disturbance permit shall be accompanied by a map or plat of the premises showing the present contour lines and the proposed contour lines resulting from the land disturbing activity in relation to all parts of the premises and the properties immediately adjacent thereto and in relation to all abutting street grades and elevations; such map or plat shall show all existing drainage facilities and the proposed permanent disposition of surface waters upon completion of the land disturbing activity. 
(c)  Each application for a land disturbance permit shall be accompanied by an erosion and sediment control plan which shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from the land disturbing activity and shall explain and illustrate the measures which are to be taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition, and the potential for off-site damage; the plan shall contain a description of the existing site conditions, a description of adjacent topographical features, a description of soil types and characteristics of the area, potential problems of soil erosion and sedimentation, stabilization specifications, stormwater management considerations, a time schedule for completion of the land disturbing activity and for maintenance after completion of the project, clearing and grading limits, and all other information needed to accurately depict solutions to potential soil erosion and sedimentation problems. Any erosion and sediment control plan must meet the standards established in the best management practices manual and shall be reviewed for record by the manager prior to the issuance of the land disturbing permit. 
(d)  At any time the manager determines that an erosion and sediment control plan does not comply with the provisions of this article, the manager shall notify the applicant in writing of all deficiencies within said plan. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-306; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1425. - Sediment and erosion control. 
(a)  No land disturbing activity shall be conducted within the city except in such manner that: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted so as to minimize erosion. Clearing and grubbing must be held to the minimum necessary for grading and equipment operation. Pre-construction vegetative ground cover shall not be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than 20 calendar days prior to grading or earth moving. Construction must be sequenced to minimize the exposure time of cleared surface area; 
(2)  Property owners and/or developers shall be responsible, upon completion of land disturbing activities, for leaving slopes so that they will not erode. Such methods should include re-vegetation, sodding, mulching, or rip-rapping. Regardless of the method used, the objective will be to leave the site as erosion-free and maintenance-free as practicable; 
(3)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented; 
(4)  Permanent or temporary soil stabilization must be applied to disturbed areas to the extent feasible within seven days on areas that will remain unfinished for more than 14 calendar days. Permanent soil stabilization with perennial vegetation shall be applied as soon as practicable after final grading is reached on any portion of the site. Soil stabilization refers to measures which protect soil from the erosive forces of wind, raindrop impact, and flowing water, and includes the growing of grass, sod, application of straw, mulch, fabric mats, and the early application of gravel base on areas to be paved; 
(5)  A permanent vegetative cover shall be established on disturbed areas not otherwise permanently stabilized; 
(6)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, silt fences, check dams or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized; 
(7)  Neighboring persons and property shall be protected from damage or loss resulting from excessive stormwater runoff, soil erosion or deposition upon property or public streets of water transported silt and debris. Adjacent property owners shall be protected from land devaluation due to exposed bare banks; 
(8)  Controlled construction entrance/exit shall be maintained in a condition that will prevent tracking or flowing of sediment onto the public right-of-way; 
(9)  Erosion and sediment control measures must be in place and functional before earth moving operations begin, and must be constructed and maintained throughout the construction period. Temporary measures may be removed at the beginning of the workday, but must be replaced at the end of the workday; 
(10)  Structural controls shall be designed and maintained as required to prevent pollution. All surface water flowing toward the construction area shall, to the extent practicable, be diverted by using berms, channels, or sediment traps as necessary. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be designed according to the size and slope of disturbed or drainage areas, to detain runoff and trap sediment. Discharges from sediment basins and traps must be through a pipe or lined channel so that the discharge does not cause erosion. Muddy water to be pumped from excavation and work areas must be held in settling basins or treated by filtration prior to its discharge into surface waters where practicable. Waters must be discharged through a pipe or lined channel so that the discharge does not cause erosion and sedimentation. All channels, outlets, storm sewer inlets, streets, creeks, and streams must be protected from the introduction of garbage, rubbish, yard waste, sediment, or floatable materials; 
(11)  All control measures shall be inspected, and repaired as necessary, bi-weekly in dry periods and within 24 hours after any rainfall of 0.5 inches within a 24-hour period. During prolonged rainfall, daily inspections and repairing is necessary. The permittee shall maintain record of such inspections and repairs; any land disturbing activity located in the watershed of any creek or stream that is listed as impaired by the ODEQ shall be inspected, and repaired as necessary, on a weekly basis in dry periods and within 24 hours after any rainfall of 0.5 inches within a 24-hour period. During prolonged rainfall, daily inspections and repairing is necessary. The permittee shall maintain record of such inspections and repairs; 
(12)  A specific individual shall be designated to be responsible for erosion and sediment controls on each site. A notice shall be posted on each site with the OKR10 permit number, contact name and telephone number, project name and location of the SWP3 if not on-site; 
(13)  There shall be no distinctly visible floating scum, oil or other matter contained in the stormwater discharge. The stormwater discharge must not cause an objectionable color contrast in the receiving water. The stormwater discharge must result in no materials in concentrations sufficient to be hazardous or otherwise detrimental to humans, livestock, wildlife, plant life, or fish and aquatic life in the receiving stream; and 
(14)  Concrete washout areas must be designated, utilized, and maintained to minimize pollutant discharges. 
(b)  When the land disturbing activity is finished and stable, and perennial vegetation has been established on all remaining exposed soil, the permittee shall notify the manager of these facts and summit a notice of termination (NOT) of the permit issued under this article. The manager shall then provide a final inspection of the site and, when advisable, may require additional measures to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion. If such requirements are given by letter, the permittee shall continue to be covered by this provision of this section, until a request for termination of the permit has been accepted by the manager. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-307; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
ARTICLE D. - STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 12-1431. - Program; implementation. 
    The department of community development shall design and implement compliance programs protecting the community's natural resources, and such program shall be known as stormwater quality management. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-401; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1432. - Authority of stormwater quality management. 
(a)  Stormwater quality management shall be headed by a person to be known as the manager of stormwater quality management. 
(b)  With respect to the city's compliance with environmental laws, the manager and/or the manager's authorized representatives may do the following: 
(1)  Carry out all inspections, surveillance, enforcement, and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance; and administer the city's compliance with its NPDES MS4 permit to discharge from the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(2)  Inspect city and commercial (see SIC codes, section 12-1411) properties for the presence of hazardous substances, and develop and administer whatever remediation programs are required; 
(3)  Audit city departments to determine whether the city is in compliance with federal and state Clean Water Act laws; whether the city has obtained all permits required by federal and state environmental laws; and whether the city is in compliance with the permits it has; 
(4)  Audit use of herbicides, fertilizers, and pesticides to determine compliance with Clean Water Act laws and to recommend alternative solutions where practicable for the reduction of their use through education and outreach programs; 
(5)  Control the discharge of spills and the dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater (e.g., industrial and commercial waste, trash, motor vehicle fluids, leaf litter, grass clippings, animal waste, etc.) into the MS4; and provide technical support for HAZMAT response when necessary; 
(6)  Administer programs to identify and control pollutants from the transportation, storage, treatment, and disposal of hazardous wastes; and monitor hazardous waste facilities which receive the city's RCRA hazardous waste for treatment or disposal for compliance with NPDES MS4 permit requirements; 
(7)  Provide assistance to the public works department regarding the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, and compliance with NPDES MS4 permit requirements; 
(8)  Monitor the city's compliance with all federal, state, and local laws; except that: 
a.  Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws relating to discharge from the wastewater treatment plant is the responsibility of the city; 
b.  Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws relating to the production and distribution of drinking water is the responsibility of the city manager; 
c.  Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws relating to the operation of the city's landfill programs are the responsibility of the city manager; and 
d.  Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws relating to risk management and safety operations training programs are the responsibility of the department of risk management; 
(9)  Perform such other administrative duties as may be assigned by the manager. 
(c)  With respect to enforcement, the manager and his authorized representatives may do the following: 
(1)  Investigate violations of and enforce those aspects of the Clean Water Act which are within the authority of local governments; 
(2)  Investigate violations of and enforce this chapter; 
(3)  Investigate violations of and enforce those provisions that relate to hazardous substances and spills although primary enforcement will remain with the fire chief; 
(4)  Investigate all other violations of and enforce environmental laws within the city and within the city's extended jurisdiction; 
(5)  Perform other environmental activities as may be required to ensure compliance of environmental regulations by city departments and others within the city and its extended jurisdiction. 
(d)  With respect to other programs, the manager and his authorized representatives may do the following: 
(1)  Monitor and coordinate with other city departments on the city's response to releases of hazardous substances; 
(2)  Review and assess the environmental hazards of real property involved in city land transactions; 
(3)  Monitor the use of city rights-of-way, property, and easements by persons with use agreements for environmental monitoring; 
(4)  Establish and supervise a program for the collection of hazardous household waste; 
(5)  Create, promote, and publicize educational programs for environmental awareness; and 
(6)  Provide quantitative data through field screening programs. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-402; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
ARTICLE E. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 12-1441. - Monitoring. 
    The manager shall monitor the quantity of, and the concentration of, pollutants in stormwater discharges from the areas and locations as determined by the manager. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-501; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1442. - Illicit connections and improper disposal. 
(a)  The manager shall take appropriate steps to detect and eliminate illicit connections to the city stormwater system, including the adoption of a program to screen illicit discharges and identify their sources. 
(b)  The manager shall take appropriate steps to detect and eliminate improper discharges, including programs to screen for improper disposal and programs to provide for public education, public information and other appropriate activities to facilitate the proper management and disposal of used oil, toxic materials, and hazardous household waste. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-502; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1443. - Inspections. 
(a)  The manager or his designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, may enter and inspect all properties for regular periodic inspections, investigations, monitoring, observation, measurement, enforcement, sampling, and testing, to effectuate the provisions of this chapter and the stormwater management program. The manager or his designee shall duly notify the owner of said property or the representative on-site and the inspection shall be conducted at reasonable times. 
(b)  In the event the manager or his designee reasonably believes that discharges from the property into the city's stormwater system may cause an imminent and substantial threat to human health or the environment, the inspection may take place at any place at any time and without notice to the owner of the property or a representative on-site. The inspector shall present proper credentials upon reasonable request by the owner or representative. 
(c)  Upon refusal by any property owner to permit an inspector to enter or continue an inspection, the inspector shall terminate the inspection or confine the inspection to areas concerning which no objection is raised. The inspector shall immediately report the refusal and the grounds to the manager. The manager may seek appropriate compulsory process. 
(d)  At any time during the conduct of an inspection or at such other times as the manager or his designee may request information from an owner or representative, the owner or representative may identify areas of the property, facility or establishment, material or processes which contains or might reveal confidential information. If the manager or his designee has no clear and convincing reason to question such identification, the inspector shall none the less inspect, however, the inspection report shall note that confidential information. To the extent practicable and permitted by applicable law, the manager shall not release information which is designated as a confidential information by the manager. Should the owner or his representative contend certain information to be confidential which has not been so determined or deemed by the manager, then the owner shall be obligated to seek a declaratory judgment to so protect the alleged confidential information. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-503; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
ARTICLE F. - ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT 

Sec. 12-1451. - Unauthorized discharge a public nuisance. 
    No person shall conduct, allow or permit the discharge of stormwater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any condition of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or a stormwater discharge permit issued by the state. Such discharge is hereby declared a public nuisance and must be immediately corrected by any owner or any operator or summarily abated by the city. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-601; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 703(11), 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 12-1452. - Illicit discharge and illegal dumping. 
    No person shall conduct, allow or permit the direct or indirect discharge of any material other than stormwater into the MS4, the community waters or waters of the state. The following direct or indirect discharges are examples of prohibited discharges: 
(1)  Sewage dumping or dumping of sewage sludge; 
(2)  Chlorinated swimming pool discharge; 
(3)  Discharge of any polluted household wastewater, such as, but not limited to, laundry washwater and dishwater, except to a sanitary sewer or septic system; 
(4)  Leaking sanitary sewers and connections; 
(5)  Leaking water lines; 
(6)  Commercial, industrial or non-exempt public vehicle wash or power wash discharge and commercial, industrial or non-exempt cosmetic cleaning; 
(7)  Garbage, rubbish, or sanitary waste disposal; 
(8)  Dead animals or animal fecal waste; 
(9)  Non-stormwater discharges, except pursuant to a permit issued by the state and the city; 
(10)  Dredged or spoil material; 
(11)  Solid waste and commercial or industrial process byproducts; 
(12)  Chemical waste; and 
(13)  Wrecked or discarded vehicles, appliances or equipment. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-602; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1453. - Prohibition of pollutant discharge not covered by the NPDES program. 
(a)  A permit is a license to conduct an activity, which is regulated by the Clean Water Act, the Water Pollution Control Act, or this chapter. 
(b)  Every person who is or who is planning to carry out any of the activities requiring a permit shall obtain such a permit prior to carrying out such activities. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry out any of the following activities, except in accordance with the conditions of a valid permit: 
(1)  The alteration of the physical, chemical, radiological, biological, or bacteriological properties of any of waters of the state or community waters; 
(2)  The construction, installation, modification, or operation of any treatments works or part thereof, or any extension or addition thereto; 
(3)  The increase in volume or strength of any wastes in excess of permissive discharges specified under any existing permit; 
(4)  The development of a natural resource or the construction, installation, or operation of any establishment or any extension or modification thereof or addition thereto; the operation of which will or is likely to cause an increase in the discharge of wastes into the waters of the state or would otherwise alter the physical, chemical, radiological, biological, or bacteriological properties of any waters of the state in any manner not already lawfully authorized; 
(5)  The construction or use of any new outlet for the discharge of any wastes into the waters of the state; 
(6)  The discharge of sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into waters, or a location from which it is likely that the discharged substance will move into waters; and 
(7)  The discharge of sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into a well or a location where it is likely that the discharged substance will move into a well, or the underground placement of fluids and other substance which do or may affect the waters of the state. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-603; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1454. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  In the event of any discharge of a hazardous substance in amounts which could cause a threat to public drinking supplies, a significant spill, or any other discharge which could constitute a threat to human health or the environment, the owner or operator or the facility shall give notice to the manager and the field office of the state department of environmental quality as soon as practicable, but in no event later than the close of business on the day following the accidental discharge or the discharger becomes aware of the circumstances. If an emergency response by governmental agencies is needed, the owner or operator should also call 911 immediately to report the discharge. A written report must be provided within five days of the time the discharger becomes aware of the circumstances, unless this requirement is waived by the manager for good cause shown on a case-by-case basis, containing the following particulars: 
(1)  A reasonably precise description of the discharge; 
(2)  The exact date and time of discharge; and 
(3)  Steps being taken to eliminate and prevent recurrence of the discharge. 
(b)  The owner and operator shall take all reasonable steps to minimize any adverse impact to the community waters or the waters of the state, including such accelerated or additional monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and impact of the discharge. It shall not be a defense for the discharger in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the business or activity of the facility in order to maintain water quality and minimize any adverse impact that the discharge may cause. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-604; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1455. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public emergency violation means and includes emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or property or the substantial risk of flood or fire hazards or impairment of water quality which requires immediate corrective work. 
(b)  Notification of violation. Whenever the manager finds that any permittee or any person discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this article, or a stormwater permit or order issued hereunder, the manager or his designee may: 
(1)  Serve upon said person or permittee written notice of the violation. Within ten calendar days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability or criminal prosecution for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(2)  Serve upon said person or permittee written notice of a public emergency violation. Within 24 hours of receipt of a public emergency violation notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted in writing to the manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability or criminal prosecution for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of public emergency violation. 
(c)  Consent orders. The manager is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the compliance and for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger, operator and owner to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Show cause hearing. The manager may order any person who causes or contributes to violation of this chapter or stormwater permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served specifying the time and place for the hearing for the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any individual or the individual or the principal executive, general partner or manager of any legal entity or person of legal age at the office or business address of the permittee. In the case of a public emergency violation, the show cause hearing shall be held within 24 hours of notice. 
(e)  Compliance order. When the manager finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued thereunder, the manager may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a specified time period, adequate structures or devices be installed or procedures implemented and properly operated, supervised and administrated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices, self-monitoring, and best management practices. If an imminent hazard exists, the issuing authority may require that the corrective work begin immediately. 
(f)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other notice, order or administrative process provided by this section, when the manager finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or finds that such violation may cause an impairment of water quality or that a permit is required and has not been issued, the manager may issue a stop work order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
a.  Comply forthwith; or 
b.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations or terminating the discharge, or both. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, a stop work order is validly posted by posting a copy of the stop work order on the site of the land disturbing activity in reasonable proximity to a location where the land disturbing activity is taking place. A copy of the order, in the case of work for which there is a permit, shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed by the permittee on the permit. In the case of work for which there is no permit, a copy of the order shall be mailed to the person listed as owner of the property by the county assessor. If the permittee does not immediately cease the activity or obey the compliance order the city may revoke the permit. If the owner or land user where no permit has been issued does not cease the land disturbance activity, the city may pursue injunctive relief. 
(g)  Appeal. A person receiving an order may file a written notice of appeal with the city manager, no later than the tenth calendar day after receipt of the order or within 24 hours after posting of notice of public emergency violation. Such notice shall include an explanation as to why the person believes the enforcement action should not be taken. A person receiving a stop work order may file a written notice of appeal with the city manager and obtain relief from such order upon a showing that the alleged violation will not cause an impairment of water quality or that a permit is not required. A hearing on the appeal will be scheduled within a reasonable time after receipt of the notice of appeal and the required explanation. All notices of appeal shall be signed by the owner or operator of the premises or activities in controversy, and shall include name and address of the person filing the notice of appeal. Notice of hearing on the appeal may be served by facsimile, first-class mail or hand delivered at the number or address given in the written notice of appeal. 
(h)  Violation. Failure of the permittee to comply with the directives of this section will be considered a nuisance pursuant to state statutes and this Code and the city may summarily abate the nuisance with restoration of the cite at the expense of the owner. The permittee will be billed for the expenses incurred by the city. Failure to pay the assessment within 30 days shall constitute a lien upon the property. The cost of collection of any delinquent assessment payment shall constitute a lien upon the property. The city may seek recovery of costs and damages as appropriate. If the city incurs costs to enforce the provisions of this section, reimbursement of city costs associated with the correction work completed by the city must occur prior to the issuance of a letter certifying completion. 
(i)  Reasonable access. Any city employee may enter upon the property of the permittee at any reasonable time to perform inspection for compliance with this Code, to post a stop work order or to summarily abate the nuisance. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-605; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 703(11), 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 12-1456. - Unlawful acts, misdemeanor. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Violate any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  Violate the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(3)  Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful notice to abate issued by the manager within the time specified by such notice; or 
(4)  Violate any lawful order of stormwater quality management or fail to comply with such an order within the time allowed by such order. 
(b)  Any person who commits any act declared unlawful or fails to perform any act required by or under this chapter or otherwise violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense against the city and punishable pursuant to section 1-108. Each and every day on which a violation shall occur or continue to occur shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-606; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1457. - Judicial proceedings and relief. 
(a)  The city may authorize the manager by and through the municipal counselor to initiate proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction against any person who has or is about to: 
(1)  Violate the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Violate the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(3)  Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order issued by the manager, which has not been timely appealed to the appropriate court within the time allowed by this chapter; 
(4)  Violate any lawful order within the time allowed by such order. 
(b)  Any person who is required by any provision of this chapter or by any other law to obtain a permit prior to engaging in conduct that is regulated by this chapter, and who fails or neglects to obtain such a permit, or who fails to exhibit such a permit upon request by a city official, shall be guilty of an offense against the city and punishable pursuant to section 1-108. Each and every day on which a violation shall occur or continue to occur shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  The manager, with consent of the city council, may also initiate civil proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking monetary damages for any damages caused to publicly owned stormwater facilities by any person, and to seek injunctive or other equitable relief to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to enforce compliance with any lawful orders. 
(d)  The manager may petition the state department of environmental quality to regulate and prosecute stormwater dischargers which cannot be adequately controlled by municipal resources. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-607; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1458. - Reconsideration. 
(a)  Any person subject to a denial of a permit issued under this chapter; a compliance order; a stop work order; an emergency suspension of utility service; or any other enforcement action in this chapter which allows for reconsideration and hearing under this section, may petition the manager or his designee who took such action to reconsider the basis for the action. In order for the petition to be re-considered, it shall be filed with the manager no later than the tenth calendar day after receipt of the notice/order. 
(b)  Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the action. 
(c)  In its petition, the petitioner shall indicate the action objected to, and the reasons for the objection, any facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's view of the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, whether the petitioner requests a hearing on its petition and the address where notice of hearing will be received and accepted. 
(d)  The effect of a compliance order or stop work order shall be stayed pending the manager's reconsideration of the petition, and any hearing thereon, unless the manager expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effect of an emergency suspension of utilities shall not be stayed pending the manager's reconsideration or any hearing, unless the manager expressly, and in writing, stays the emergency order. 
(e)  Within a reasonable time of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the manager shall either grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order or modify or grant the permit accordingly; deny the petition if no material issue of fact is raised; or if a hearing has been requested and/or a material issue of fact has been raised, set a hearing on the petition. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-608; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1459. - Hearings. 
(a)  The manager may also set a hearing if the manager determines that a show cause hearing should be conducted, if grounds exist to revoke or suspend a permit issued under this chapter, or if grounds exist to terminate utilities on a non-emergency basis. 
(b)  Written notice of the hearing shall be served on a petitioner/violator at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be served in person or by fax or mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  Notices shall specify the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(d)  Notice that is mailed shall be deemed received five calendar days after it is placed in a mail receptacle of the United States Postal Service. 
(e)  No decision may be rendered at a hearing by reason of the petitioner/violator's failure to appear unless proof of service is shown. 
(f)  Whenever any deadline specified in this section falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or a city-recognized holiday, the deadline shall be the next regular city business day. 
(g)  The date of an order or ruling required to be made under this section shall be deemed to be the date it is signed. 
(h)  Decisions shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence. The city shall have the burden of proof in all hearings except permit denial hearings. In permit denial hearings, the burden of proof shall be on the petitioner. 
(i)  The manager shall act as the hearing officer. 
(j)  After the conclusion of the hearing, the manager shall make written findings of the fact and conclusions of law and shall issue a written decision without undue delay. 
(k)  A hearing shall exhaust all administrative remedies of the petitioner/violator. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-609; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 12-1460. - Variances. 
(a)  The manager may grant a revocable variance from the requirements of this chapter, providing to do so would not result in the violation of any state or federal law or regulation and if exceptional circumstances applicable to the site exist such that strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and will not result in a condition contrary to the intent of this chapter. 
(b)  A written petition for a variance shall be required and shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons, with supporting data, why a variance should be granted. The request shall include all information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance. The petition shall be filed with the manager. 
(c)  The manager shall conduct a review of the request for a variance and may either support the petition or may object to the petition. If the manager objects to the variance, the manager shall state the reasons therefor. 
(d)  Once the manager's review is complete, the petition shall be subject to action at the discretion of the manager. 
(LDC 1991, § 15-610; Ord. No. 600(07), 11-5-2007) 
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - PRIOR CODE 
    This table gives the location within the Land Development Code of sections of the Prior Code. 
Prior Code 
Section Section 
this LDC 5-356 12-641 5-357 12-642 5-358 12-643 5-359 12-644 5-360 12-645 5-386 12-661 5-387 12-662 5-388 12-663 5-389 12-664 5-390 12-665 6-161 12-901 6-162 12-908 6-162, in part 12-902 - 12-903 - 12-908 6-163 12-904 6-164 12-905 6-165 12-906 6-166, in part 12-907 - 12-908 - 12-909 - 12-910 6-167 12-911 6-168 12-912 6-169, in part 12-913 - 12-914 6-170 12-915 6-171 12-916 6-173 12-917 6-174 12-918 6-186 12-671 6-187 12-672 6-188 12-673 6-189, in part 12-674 - 12-675 - 12-676 - 12-677 - 12-678 - 12-679 - 12-680 - 12-681 6-190, in part 12-682 - 12-683 - 12-684 - 12-685 - 12-686 - 12-687 - 12-688 - 12-689 - 12-690 - 12-691 - 12-692 - 12-693 - 12-694 - 12-695 - 12-696 10-16 12-821 10-17 12-822 10-18 12-823 10-19 12-824 10-20 12-825 10-21 12-826 10-23 12-827 10-24 12-828 10-25 12-829 10-26 12-830 10-27 12-831 14-16 12-701 14-17 12-702 14-19 12-704 14-20 12-705 14-21 12-706 14-22 12-707 14-23 12-708 14-24 12-709 14-25 12-710 14-26 12-711 14-41 12-721 14-42 12-722 14-43 12-723 14-44 12-724 14-45 12-725 14-46 12-726 14-47 12-727 14-48 12-728 14-49 12-729 app. A, § 4-18 12-703 app. B, § 54.3 12-284 app. B, § 16-24 12-201 - 12-222 app. B, § 16-25 12-202 app. B, § 16-26 12-203 app. B, § 16-27 12-473 app. B, § 16-28 12-204 app. B, § 16-29 12-205 app. B, § 16-30 12-221 app. B, § 16-32 12-223 app. B, § 16-33 12-224 app. B, § 16-34 12-231 app. B, § 16-35 12-232 app. B, § 16-36 12-233 app. B, § 16-37 12-234 app. B, § 16-38 12-235 app. B, § 16-43 12-251 app. B, § 16-44 12-252 app. B, § 16-45 12-253 app. B, § 16-46 12-254 app. B, § 16-47 12-261 app. B, § 16-48 12-262 app. B, § 16-49 12-263 app. B, § 16-50 12-264 app. B, § 16-51 12-271 app. B, § 16-52 12-272 app. B, § 16-53 12-273 app. B, § 16-54 12-274 app. B, § 16-54.1 12-281 app. B, § 16-54.2 12-282 app. B, § 16-54.3 12-284 app. B, § 16-54.4 12-291 app. B, § 16-54.5 12-292 app. B, § 16-54.6 12-294 app. B, § 16-55 12-301 app. B, § 16-56 12-302 app. B, § 16-57 12-304 app. B, § 16-58 12-311 app. B, § 16-59 12-312 app. B, § 16-60 12-314 app. B, § 16-61 12-321 app. B, § 16-62 12-322 - 12-323 app. B, § 16-63 12-324 app. B, § 16-64 12-325 app. B, § 16-65 12-326 app. B, § 16-66 12-331 app. B, § 16-67 12-332 - 12-333 app. B, § 16-68 12-334 app. B, § 16-69 12-335 app. B, § 16-70 12-336 app. B, § 16-71 12-341 app. B, § 16-72 12-342 - 12-343 app. B, § 16-73 12-344 app. B, § 16-74 12-345 app. B, § 16-75 12-351 app. B, § 16-76 12-352 - 12-353 app. B, § 16-77 12-354 app. B, § 16-78 12-361 app. B, § 16-79 12-362 - 12-363 app. B, § 16-80 12-364 app. B, § 16-81 12-371 app. B, § 16-82 12-372 - 12-373 app. B, § 16-83 12-374 app. B, § 16-84 12-381 app. B, § 16-85 12-382 app. B, § 16-86 12-383 app. B, § 16-87 12-384 app. B, § 16-88 12-391 app. B, § 16-89 12-392 app. B, § 16-90 12-394 app. B, § 16-91 12-395 app. B, § 16-93 12-396 app. B, § 16-94 12-397 app. B, § 16-95 12-398 app. B, § 16-96 12-399 app. B, § 16-97 12-400 app. B, § 16-98 12-400 app. B, § 16-99 12-400 app. B, § 16-100 12-400 app. B, § 16-101 12-400 app. B, § 16-102 12-400 app. B, § 16-103 12-400 app. B, § 16-104 12-400 app. B, § 16-105 12-402 app. B, § 16-105A 12-403 app. B, § 16-106 12-411 - 12-412 - 12-413 - 12-414 - 12-415 app. B, § 16-107 12-405 app. B, § 16-108 12-121 - 12-122 app. B, § 16-109 12-122 app. B, § 16-110 12-122 app. B, § 16-111 12-122 app. B, § 16-112 12-122 - 12-128 app. B, § 16-113 12-124 - 12-125 - 12-126 app. B, § 16-114 12-127 - 12-128 app. B, § 16-114, in part 12-123 app. B, § 16-115 12-128 app. B, § 16-117 12-129 app. B, § 16-118 12-421 app. B, § 16-119 12-422 app. B, § 16-120 12-423 app. B, § 16-121 12-424 app. B, § 16-122 12-425 app. B, § 16-123 12-431 app. B, § 16-124 12-432 app. B, § 16-125 12-433 app. B, § 16-126 12-434 app. B, § 16-127 12-435 app. B, § 16-128 12-436 app. B, § 16-130 12-437 app. B, § 16-131 12-438 app. B, § 16-132 12-439 - 12-440 app. B, § 16-133 12-441 app. B, § 16-134 12-101 - 12-102 - 12-103 - 12-104 - 12-105 - 12-107  
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1991 LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
    This table gives the location within the Land Development Code of sections of the 1991 Land Development Code, as supplemented through November 4, 2013. 
1991 LDC 
Section Section 
this LDC 12-101 12-101 12-102 12-102 12-103 12-103 12-104 12-104 12-105 12-105 12-106 12-106 12-107 12-107 12-108 12-108 12-109 12-109 12-110 12-110 12-111 12-111 12-121 12-121 12-122 12-122 12-123 12-123 12-124 12-124 12-125 12-125 12-126 12-126 12-127 12-127 12-128 12-128 12-129 12-129 12-130 12-130 12-201 12-201 12-202 12-202 12-203 12-203 12-204 12-204 12-205 12-205 12-206 12-206 12-210 12-221 12-211 12-222 12-212 12-223 12-213 12-224 12-220 12-231 12-221 12-232 12-222 12-233 12-223 12-234 12-224 12-235 12-230 12-241 12-231 12-242 12-232 12-243 12-233 12-244 12-240 12-251 12-241 12-252 12-242 12-253 12-243 12-254 12-250 12-261 12-251 12-262 12-252 12-263 12-253 12-264 12-260 12-271 12-261 12-272 12-262 12-273 12-263 12-274 12-270 12-281 12-271 12-282 12-272 12-283 12-273 12-284 12-280 12-291 12-281 12-292 12-282 12-293 12-283 12-294 12-290 12-301 12-291 12-302 12-292 12-303 12-293 12-304 12-300 12-311 12-301 12-312 12-302 12-313 12-303 12-314 12-310 12-321 12-311 12-322 12-312 12-323 12-313 12-324 12-314 12-325 12-315 12-326 12-320 12-331 12-321 12-332 12-322 12-333 12-323 12-334 12-324 12-335 12-325 12-336 12-330 12-341 12-331 12-342 12-332 12-343 12-333 12-344 12-334 12-345 12-340 12-351 12-341 12-352 12-342 12-353 12-343 12-354 12-350 12-361 12-351 12-362 12-352 12-363 12-353 12-364 12-360 12-371 12-361 12-372 12-362 12-373 12-363 12-374 12-370 12-381 12-371 12-382 12-372 12-383 12-373 12-384 12-380 12-391 12-381 12-392 12-382 12-393 12-383 12-394 12-384 12-395 12-386 12-396 12-387 12-397 12-388 12-398 12-389 12-399 12-390 12-400 12-391 12-401 12-392 12-402 12-393 12-403 12-394 12-404 12-395 12-405 12-396 12-406 12-398 12-407 12-410 12-411 12-411 12-412 12-412 12-413 12-413 12-414 12-414 12-415 12-420 12-421 12-421 12-422 12-422 12-423 12-423 12-424 12-424 12-425 12-430 12-431 12-431 12-432 12-432 12-433 12-433 12-434 12-434 12-435 12-435 12-436 12-436 12-437 12-437 12-438 12-438 12-439 12-439 12-440 12-440 12-441 12-450 12-451 12-451 12-452 12-452 12-453 12-453 12-454 12-454 12-455 12-455 12-456 12-456 12-457 12-457 12-458 12-458 12-459 12-460 12-461 12-461 12-462 12-470 12-471 12-471 12-472 12-472 12-473 12-501 12-501 12-502 12-502 12-503 12-503 12-504 12-504 12-505 12-505 12-506 12-506 12-511 12-511 12-521 12-521 12-522 12-522 12-523 12-523 12-524 12-524 12-525 12-525 12-531 12-531 12-532 12-532 12-533 12-533 12-534 12-534 12-535 12-535 12-536 12-536 12-537 12-537 12-538 12-538 12-541 12-541 12-542 12-542 12-543 12-543 12-551 12-551 12-552 12-552 12-553 12-553 12-554 12-554 12-555 12-555 12-556 12-556 12-557 12-557 12-558 12-558 12-559 12-559 12-561 12-561 12-562 12-562 12-563 12-563 12-564 12-564 12-565 12-565 12-566 12-566 12-567 12-567 12-571 12-571 12-572 12-572 12-573 12-573 12-574 12-574 12-575 12-575 12-576 12-576 12-578 12-581 12-579 12-582 12-581 12-591 12-582 12-592 12-582.1 12-593 12-583 12-594 12-584 12-595 12-585 12-596 12-586 12-597 12-587 12-598 12-588 12-599 12-589 12-600 12-590 12-601 12-591 12-611 12-592 12-612 12-593 12-613 12-594 12-614 12-595 12-615 12-596 12-616 12-597 12-617 12-598 12-618 pt. 12, ch. 5, art. L 12-621 pt. 12, ch. 5, art. M 12-631 12-602 12-642 12-603 12-643 12-604 12-644 12-605 12-645 12-611 12-661 12-612 12-662 12-613 12-663 12-614 12-664 12-615 12-665 12-621 12-671 12-622 12-672 12-623 12-673 12-624 12-674 12-625 12-675 12-626 12-676 12-627 12-677 12-628 12-678 12-629 12-679 12-630 12-680 12-631 12-681 12-632 12-682 12-633 12-683 12-634 12-684 12-635 12-685 12-636 12-686 12-637 12-687 12-638 12-688 12-639 12-689 12-640 12-690 12-641 12-691 12-642 12-692 12-643 12-693 12-644 12-694 12-645 12-695 12-646 12-696 12-647 12-697 12-701 12-701 12-702 12-702 12-703 12-703 12-704 12-704 12-705 12-705 12-706 12-706 12-707 12-707 12-708 12-708 12-709 12-709 12-710 12-710 12-711 12-711 12-721 12-721 12-722 12-722 12-723 12-723 12-724 12-724 12-725 12-725 12-726 12-726 12-727 12-727 12-728 12-728 12-729 12-729 12-801 12-801 12-802 12-802 12-803 12-803 12-804 12-804 12-805 12-805 12-806 12-806 12-807 12-807 12-808 12-808 12-809 12-809 12-821 12-821 12-822 12-822 12-823 12-823 12-824 12-824 12-825 12-825 12-826 12-826 12-827 12-827 12-828 12-828 12-829 12-829 12-830 12-830 12-831 12-831 12-901 12-901 12-902 12-902 12-903 12-903 12-904 12-904 12-905 12-905 12-906 12-906 12-907 12-907 12-908 12-908 12-909 12-909 12-910 12-910 12-911 12-911 12-912 12-912 12-913 12-913 12-914 12-914 12-915 12-915 12-916 12-916 12-917 12-917 12-918 12-918 12-919 12-919 12-1301 12-1201 12-1302 12-1202 12-1303 12-1203 12-1304 12-1204 12-1305 12-1205 12-1306 12-1206 12-1307 12-1207 12-1308 12-1208 12-1309 12-1209 12-1401 12-1301 12-1402 12-1302 12-1403 12-1303 12-1404 12-1304 12-1405 12-1305 12-1406 12-1306 12-1407 12-1307 12-1408 12-1308 12-1409 12-1309 15-101 12-1401 15-102 12-1402 15-103 12-1403 15-201 12-1411 15-202 12-1412 15-203 12-1413 15-204 12-1414 15-205 12-1415 15-206 12-1416 15-207 12-1417 15-303 12-1421 15-304 12-1422 15-305 12-1423 15-306 12-1424 15-307 12-1425 15-401 12-1431 15-402 12-1432 15-501 12-1441 15-502 12-1442 15-503 12-1443 15-601 12-1451 15-602 12-1452 15-603 12-1453 15-604 12-1454 15-605 12-1455 15-606 12-1456 15-607 12-1457 15-608 12-1458 15-609 12-1459 15-610 12-1460  
TABLE OF ORDINANCES[1] 
I. Disposition Table 
Ord. No. Date Subject Disposition 302(00) 12/18/00 Added open space 12-383 I. 303(00) 12/18/00 Automotive and equipment: Light/Heavy 12-206 E.9., 10. 304(00) 12/18/00 Added closing a public way 12-397 306(01) 2/5/01 Miscellaneous aesthetic requirements 12-396 314(01) 3/5/01 Retail sales and services: General 12-206 E.47. 317(01) 3/19/00 Added closing a public way 12-397.1 326(01) 5/21/01 Access and operational standards for controlled access gates and gated subdivisions 12-582 327(01) 5/21/01 Occupancy permits 12-433-12-435 339(01) 11/5/01 Added closing a public way 12-397.2 340(01) 11/5/01 Side yard setbacks 12-353 361(02) 5/6/02       Rpld 12-385 368(02) 5/20/02 Miscellaneous aesthetic requirements 12-396 393(02) 12/2/02 Subdivision regulations 12-501-12-506 12-511 12-521-12-525 12-531-12-538 12-541-12-543 12-551-12-559 12-561-12-567 12-571-12-576 12-578, 12-579 12-581-12-598 413(03) 7/7/03 Requirements and regulations for the installation of sidewalks 12-566B., C. 428(03) 10/20/03 Maintenance standards for fences 12-386A., B.3. 439(04) 2/2/04 Closing of public easement 12-397 442(04) 2/2/03 Permittee's insurance and bond 12-906B., D. 483(04) 10/18/04 Added requirements and regulations for a fee-in-lieu of drainage and detention 12-582.1 511(05) 7/5/05 Establishing new transportation fees 12-1106 533(06) 2/21/06 Land disturbing activity       Added 12-590.1 539(06) 6/5/05 Construction sales and services: Light/Heavy 12-206 E.19., 19a. 12-206 (Table) 542(06) 4/3/06 Non-accessory billboard sign regulations 12-632 547(06) 6/19/06 Minor variances       Added 12-130 556(06) 9/18/06 Retail sales and services: Restricted 12-206 E.46. 558(06) 10/2/06 C-3 District: Uses permitted       Rpld 12-311 32. Uses permitted on review       Added 12-312 14. 574(07) 10/1/07 Adding fencing, painting and landscaping requirements for gas and oil wells and storage tanks 12-913 576(07) 10/1/07 Deleting provisions of certain oil wells to be enclosed by fence 12-917 593(07) 6/18/07 Amending area and height regulations in C-3, C-4, C-5, C-6, I-1, I-2 and I-3 zoning districts 12-313 7. 12-323 8. 12-333 7. 12-343 5. 12-353 6. 12-363 6. 12-373 7. 594(07) 7/16/07 Defining senior housing and providing transportation impact fee 12-1104 5. 12-1106 599(07) 10/1/07 Requirement for annual inspection of oil wells 12-915 600(07) 11/5/07 Adding stormwater management regulations 15-101-15-103, 15-201-15-207, 15-303-15-307, 15-401, 15-402, 15-501-15-503, 15-601-15-610 602(07) 11/5/07 Deleting section pertaining to land disturbing activity 12-590.1 615(08) 3/17/08 Requiring sight-proof fencing requirements for gas and oil wells and storage tanks located within 300' of any residentially zoned property 12-913 625(08) 7/21/07 Added Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 12-801-12-809 626(08) 7/21/08 Repealed Flood Damage Prevention Regulations 12-801-12-817 627(08) 7/21/08 Adding specialty automotive as a special use permit 12-461 F. 630(08) 9/15/08 Amending standards and procedures for planned unit developments 12-410-12-412 12-414 641(08) 12/1/08 Adding provisions for land developer abatement deposits 15-205 647(09) 4/6/09 Requirement for occupancy permits for multifamily residential buildings 12-433 658(09) 10/5/09 Establishing sign maximum size and placement requirements       Added 12-606 662(09) 12/7/09 Automotive and equipment: storage use in C-5 zoning district 12-331, 12-332 679(10) 9/7/10 Adding closing a public easement and vacation       Added 12-397.3 693(11) 4/4/11 Amending minimum threshold requirements and impact fee for sanitary sewer lift stations 12-565 703(11) 9/6/11 Amending stormwater management regulations 15-601 15-605 713(12) 1/17/12 Repealing provisions for political signs       Rpld 12-606 714(12) 2/6/12 Establishing standards and specifications for small wind energy systems 12-125 729(12) 12/3/12 Adopts FEMA flood insurance rate maps effective February 20, 2013 12-806 B. 730(12) 12/17/12 Amending administrative procedures and requirements for sewer main extension recoupments       Rpld 12-1401-12-1408       Added 12-1401-12-1409 731(12) 12/17/12 Amending administrative procedures and requirements for water main extension recoupments Ch. 13 (title) 12-1301-12-1308       Rpld 12-1309, 12-1310       Rnbd 12-1311       as 12-1309       Rpld 12-1312, 12-1313 732(12) 12/17/12 Adding site development standards       Added 12-398 743(13) 3/18/13 Amending architectural design of accessory buildings and fences 12-386 A. 759(13) 11/4/13 Amending transportation impact fee schedule 12-1106 823(16) 7/5/16 Amending provisions regarding final plat and construction documents 12-502 12-531, 12-532 12-536, 12-537 12-594 12-621 824(16) 7/5/16 Amending provisions regarding sanitary sewer and water plans 12-534 825(16) 7/18/16 Amending provisions regarding outdoor advertising 12-672 12-682-12-684 12-697 872(17) 10/16/17 Establishing provisions for building permit fee waivers for redevelopment in natural disaster areas 12-433 889(18) 8/20/18 Amending provisions regarding survey control network preservation 12-561 900(19) 3/4/19 Amending provisions regarding transportation impact fees 12-611-12-618  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
**Section numbers refer to the Code of Moore. S = Superseded by a later ordinance; R = Repealed NC = Not codified Spec. Ord. = Special ordinance (copy on file with clerk) 

STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within the Land Development Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Oklahoma Statutes (O.S.). 
O.S. 
Title Section Section 
this LDC 11 1-102 12-396 44-101 et seq. Pt. 12, Ch. 1, Art. B 44-101 12-122 44-102 12-122 44-104 12-124 44-107 12-124 44-108 12-124 44-109 12-123 44-110 12-129 45-101 et seq. 12-101 45-101-45-105 12-501 45-103 12-104 45-105 12-501 434-109 12-107 12 990.3(A) 12-129 990.4 12-129 27A 1-1-101 et seq. 12-1402 2-6-201 et seq. 12-1403 37 - 12-206 163.1 12-206 163.2 12-206 43A 3-403 12-440 82 1601-1618 12-801 - 12-807  
