CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF MIAMI, OKLAHOMA 
____________ 
Published in 1991 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
Reprinted in 2014 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MIAMI, OKLAHOMA 
(2018) 
____________ 
Rudy Schultz 
Mayor 
____________ 
Brian Forrester, Ward One 
Doug Weston, Ward Two 
Ryan Orcutt, Ward Three 
Vicki Lewis, Ward Four 
City Council 
____________ 
Ben Loring 
City Attorney 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MIAMI, OKLAHOMA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Louis E. Mathia 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dianne Owens 
Glen D. Wiford 
Lloyd Ogle 
David Dallas 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
George G. Russell, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Charles A. Tomlin 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Miami, Oklahoma. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1964 Code, as supplemented through January 30, 1989, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1964 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this republication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the republication. With this system, the republication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the republication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this republication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the republication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice-President of Supplementation, Kelly Heaton-Moniz, Supervising Editor, and Janet Cramer, Editor/Proofreader, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to George G. Russell, Jr., City Attorney, and Krista Duhon, Paralegal, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1298 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Miami, Oklahoma; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Mayor and Board of Commissioners of the City of Miami, Oklahoma as Follows: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Miami, Oklahoma" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 26, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 1, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days or any combination thereof. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 1, 1990, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. It being immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace, health, safety and public good of the City of Miami and inhabitants thereof that the provision of this ordinance be put into full force and effect, an emergency is hereby declared to exist by reason whereof this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after the date of its passage, approval and publication. 
Passed and the Emergency Clause ruled upon separately this 18th day of March, 1991. 
/s/ Louis E. Mathia 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Charles A. Tomlin 
      City Clerk   APPROVED: 
/s/ George G. Russell, Jr. 
      City Attorney   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 1 1623  6- 3-2014 Include 1 1624  6-17-2014 Include 1 1625  7- 1-2014 Include 1 1626  8-19-2014 Include 1 1627 11-18-2014 Omit 1 1628 12- 2-2014 Include 1 1630  1- 6-2015 Omit 1 1631  1-20-2015 Omit 1 1632  1-20-2015 Include 1 1635  3-17-2015 Include 1 1636  4-21-2015 Omit 1 1638  6- 2-2015 Include 1 Supp. No. 2 1637  5- 5-2015 Include 2 1639  7- 7-2015 Omit 2 1640  7- 7-2015 Include 2 1641  7- 7-2015 Include 2 1642  7- 7-2015 Include 2 1643  8-18-2015 Include 2 1644  8-18-2015 Omit 2 1645 10- 6-2015 Include 2 Supp. No. 3 1646 11- 3-2015 Include 3 1647 11- 3-2015 Omit 3 1648 11- 3-2015 Include 3 1649 11- 3-2015 Include 3 1650 11- 3-2015 Include 3 1651 11-17-2015 Include 3 1652 11-17-2015 Include 3 1653 11-17-2015 Include 3 1654 12- 8-2015 Include 3 Supp. No. 4 1655  2-16-2016 Omit 4 1656  6-21-2016 Include 4 Supp. No. 5 1657  8- 2-2016 Include 5 1658  8-16-2016 Include 5 1659  8-16-2016 Include 5 1660  8-16-2016 Include 5 1661 10-18-2016 Include 5 1662 11-15-2016 Omit 5 1663 11-15-2016 Include 5 1664 12- 6-2016 Include 5 2017-01  1- 3-2017 Include 5 2017-03  1-17-2017 Include 5 2017-04  3- 7-2017 Include 5 2017-05  3-21-2017 Include 5 2017-06  4-18-2017 Include 5 2017-07  4-18-2017 Include 5 2017-08  5-16-2017 Include 5 2017-09  5-16-2017 Include 5 Supp. No. 6 CC2017-02 (Res.)  1-17-2017 Include 6 Supp. No. 7 2017-10 12- 5-2017 Include 7 2017-11 12- 5-2017 Include 7 2017-12 12- 5-2017 Include 7 2017-13 12- 5-2017 Include 7 2017-14 12- 5-2017 Include 7 2017-15 12- 5-2017 Include 7 2017-16 12- 5-2017 Include 7 2017-17 12- 5-2017 Include 7 2018-01  1-16-2018 Include 7 2018-02  1-16-2018 Include 7 2018-03  1- 2-2018 Include 7 2018-04  2-13-2018 Include 7 Supp. No. 8 2018-05  5-15-2018 Include 8 2018-06  5-18-2018 Include 8 2018-07  5-15-2018 Include 8 2018-08  6-26-2018 Include 8 2018-09  7-17-2018 Include 8 2018-10  7-17-2018 Omit 8 2018-11  8-21-2018 Omit 8 2018-12  9-25-2018 Include 8 2018-13  9-25-2018 Include 8 2018-14 10- 2-2018 Include 8 2018-15 10- 2-2018 Include 8 Supp. No. 9 2018-16 11- 6-2018 Include 9 2018-17 12- 4-2018 Include 9 2019-01  4- 2-2019 Include 9 2019-02  4- 2-2019 Include 9 2019-03  4- 2-2019 Include 9 2019-04  4- 2-2019 Include 9  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Miami, Ottawa County, Oklahoma, under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma, do ordain and establish this Charter for the City of Miami. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City, Res No. CC2017-02, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, as approved and adopted by special election on April 4, 2017. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Formerly, the Charter was adopted at an election held January 6, 1910. See the Charter Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

ARTICLE I. -   

Sec. 1. - Powers in General. 
    That the inhabitants of the City of Miami, Ottawa County, Oklahoma, within the boundaries as the same now exist and are described by City Ordinances, and such additional territory as may be hereafter added thereto and their successors, be and the same are hereby created and organized as a municipal corporation, with perpetual succession, under the name and style of "City of Miami", and as such they and their successors are by these presents organized and created as a body politic and corporate, and shall succeed to own, possess and control all the books, records, documents and all the property, real, personal or mixed and all the rights, privileges, franchises, powers and immunities now belonging to and possessed or enjoyed by the municipal corporation known as the City of Miami; that it shall be subject to and liable for all legal debts which the present corporation is now or may hereafter become legally bound; that the corporation hereby created and its successors in said corporate name of "City of Miami" shall have the power to sue and be sued, plead and be inter-pleaded, complain, intervene, prosecute and defend in all courts; it shall have the power to make contracts, to take and to acquire property by purchase or otherwise, necessary for the public good and to own, hold, sell, lease, convey or otherwise dispose of any real or personal property within or outside of the city limits; that it shall have, exercise and enjoy other and additional powers, rights, privileges, franchises and immunities as are granted by existing laws or may be granted or conferred by any other provisions hereinafter adopted; that it shall use a corporate seal of such design as the City Council shall designate. This Charter continues the form of government similar to the statutory Council-Manager form with a mayor to be elected at large and one City Council member to be elected from each of the four wards by the citizens of Miami. 
Sec. 2. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries and limits of said city shall exist as at the time of the adoption of this Charter, until altered as provided in the Oklahoma laws as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 3. - Application of State Law. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided for herein, the Constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma as the same may be amended from time to time, control the rights, powers, duties and procedures of the City of Miami, Oklahoma, and all of its officers and employees. 
ARTICLE II. -   

Sec. 1. - Exercise of powers. 
    All powers conferred upon the City of Miami shall, unless otherwise provided in this Charter, be exercised by a governing body consisting of one (1) City Council member from each of four wards and one (1) mayor to be elected at large. 
Sec. 2. - Duties of mayor-Succession of mayor. 
    The mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Council and shall be a voting member thereof. The Mayor may not, however, vote on any appointments that he/she may make under this Charter. The mayor shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor for purposes of military law. The mayor shall have no regular administrative duties except that the mayor will sign all conveyances and other written obligations of the city as the City Council may require. At a regular meeting first after the election and installation into office of the mayor, or any other time there is a vacancy in the position of Mayor Pro Tempore, the mayor shall nominate, subject to confirmation by said City Council, one City Council member who shall hold the office of "Mayor Pro Tempore" who shall continue to hold such title and office until the earlier of the expiration of the term of office for which he/she was elected or the expiration of the term of office of the mayor, unless removed therefrom, but shall receive no extra compensation for such extra service. The mayor pro tempore shall act as mayor during the temporary absence, disability or suspension of the mayor. In the event of the death or other permanent absence of the Mayor for whatever reason, the mayor pro tempore shall assume the position as mayor until the expiration of the term of office for which the mayor had been elected and a vacancy shall be declared on the City Council for the ward from which the mayor pro tempore had been elected. 
Sec. 3. - Qualifications of City Council members. 
    The City Council members and mayor shall be residents and registered voters of the city. The City Council members shall have been residents and registered voters of the City of Miami for at least two years next preceding their election and of their respective ward for at least six (6) months prior to filing a declaration of candidacy and during his/her term of office. The mayor shall have been a resident and registered voter of the City of Miami for at least two years preceding his/her election and during his/her term of office. A City Council member whose residence changes from their ward or a mayor whose residence changes from the city during their term of office shall cause that office to become vacant. 
Sec. 4. - Salaries. 
    The compensation of all City Council members shall be fixed by ordinance. Provided, that if at any time, the Charter or ordinances of the city should be so amended as to increase or diminish the salary of such City Council members, said change shall not become effective during the existing term of any City Council member but shall become effective only at the beginning of the next term when the next or re-elected City Council member is sworn into office. All City Council members shall be reimbursed for actual expenses in the performance of their duties, including but not limited to travel expenses, appropriate meals and lodging. In lieu of reimbursement the city manager may arrange for direct payment of the actual expenses. 
Sec. 5. - Oath and bonds. 
    Each City Council member and such other employees as determined necessary by law or ordinance, before entering upon the duties of his/her office, shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office prescribed by the Oklahoma Constitution. The oath or affirmation shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. The City Council shall require the city treasurer, any officer or employee designated by law or ordinance to sign municipal warrants or municipal checks, and any other officers and employees as the City Council may designate by ordinance, to give bond for the faithful performance of his/her duties within ten (10) days after his/her election or appointment, in such amount and form as the City Council shall prescribe. The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds. 
Sec. 6. - Powers vested in City Council-Designated powers. 
    All powers of the city as set out herein, including the determination of policy, shall be vested in the City Council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the City Council may: 
1.  Appoint and remove the city manager, the city attorney, the city prosecutor, the municipal judge, and the city treasurer as provided by law and this Charter; 
2.  Enact municipal legislation subject to limitations as may now or hereafter be imposed by the Oklahoma Constitution and law; 
3.  Set, and, if necessary, amend the budget, raise revenue, make appropriations, regulate salaries and wages, and all other fiscal affairs of the city, subject to such limitations as may now or hereafter be imposed by the Oklahoma Constitution and law; 
4.  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency, commission or board of the city, and investigate municipal affairs, or authorize and provide for such inquiries; 
5.  Appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, members of commissions and boards and other quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial officers as provided by law or ordinance, or prescribe the method of appointing or electing and removing them; 
6.  Create, change and abolish any necessary or appropriate office, department, agency, commission or board other than those established by this Charter or by law, and assign additional functions and duties to such offices, departments, agencies, commissions or boards so established; and 
7.  Grant pardons for violations of municipal ordinances, including the remission of fines and costs, upon the recommendation of the municipal judge. 
Sec. 7. - Limitation of City Council authority to act through city manager. 
    Except for the purposes of inquiry, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service of the city solely through the city manager. The City Council and its members may not: 
1.  Direct or request the city manager or other authority to appoint or remove officers or employees; 
2.  Participate in any manner in the appointment or removal of officers and employees of the city, except as provided by this Charter or by law; or 
3.  Give orders on ordinary administrative matters to any subordinate of the city manager either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 8. - City manager-Appointment by City Council. 
    The City Council shall appoint a city manager pursuant to this Charter, by a vote of a majority of all its members subject to the terms of employment established by the City Council. It shall choose the city manager solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special preference to the actual experience in, or the knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. At the time of appointment, the city manager need not be a resident of the city or state; but within sixty (60) days and during the tenure of holding office thereafter, the city manager shall reside within the boundaries of the city, any school district or districts that overlap the city boundaries, or within an area which the City Council may approve under the terms of employment established by the City Council. City managers may appoint themselves, or the City Council or other authority may appoint or elect the city manager to other offices and positions in the city government, subject to regulations prescribed by ordinance; but the city manager may not receive compensation for service in such other offices or positions. Neither the mayor nor any members of the City Council may be appointed city manager during the term for which they shall have been elected nor within two (2) years after they cease to hold such office. 
Sec. 9. - City manager-Duties. 
    The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the city government. He/she shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city, and shall be responsible therefor to the City Council. He/she shall: 
1.  Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, remove, demote, lay off or suspend all heads of administrative departments and other administrative officers and employees of the city except the city attorney, the city prosecutor, the municipal judge, or the city treasurer as otherwise provided by law. The manager or the City Council by ordinance may authorize the head of a department, office, or agency to appoint and remove the subordinates in such department, office, or agency; 
2.  Supervise and control all administrative departments, officers, and agencies under his or her control; 
3.  Submit to the City Council a report after the end of the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year; 
4.  Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the City Council and be responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect; and recommend to the City Council any changes in the budget which he/she deems desirable; 
5.  Keep the City Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make recommendations as the city manager deems desirable; 
6.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by policy or ordinance; and 
7.  Except as may be specifically prohibited by law, this Charter, ordinance, or subject to regulations by the City Council, the city manager may delegate any duty to other employees as he/she deems appropriate. 
Sec. 10. - Designation of acting city manager. 
    The city manager, by letter filed with the city clerk, may appoint a qualified administrative officer of the city to be acting city manager during the temporary absence or disability of the city manager which prohibits him/her from performing his/her duties. The City Council may appoint an acting city manager whenever: 
1.  The city manager fails to make such designation; 
2.  The City Council suspends the city manager; or 
3.  There is a vacancy in the office of city manager. 
Sec. 11. - Suspension or removal of city manager. 
    The City Council may suspend or remove the city manager or acting city manager at any time by a vote of a majority of all its members. 
Sec. 12. - Purchases and sales by city manager-Competitive bidding. 
A.  The city manager may enter contracts, work orders and shall purchase, or issue purchase authorizations for all supplies, materials, and equipment for offices, departments, and agencies of the city government, subject to any regulations which the City Council may prescribe. Every contract or purchase exceeding an amount to be established by the City Council shall require the prior approval of the City Council except in the case of a declared emergency as otherwise provided by law. The city manager may also sell or transfer to or between offices, departments, and agencies surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, and equipment, subject to regulations the City Council may prescribe. 
B.  Within the requirements of law, the City Council may prescribe requirements and procedures for competitive bidding. When required by law, ordinance or in accordance with regulations the City Council may prescribe, notice and opportunity for competitive bidding shall be given before a purchase or contract for supplies, materials, or equipment is made, and before a sale of any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment is made. The City Council shall not exempt a particular contract, purchase, or sale from the requirement of competitive bidding except in the case of a declared emergency or as otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 13. - City clerk. 
    The city clerk shall be an officer of the city, appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term. The city clerk shall serve as clerk for the City Council. Subject to regulations the City Council may prescribe, the city clerk shall: 
1.  keep the journal of the proceedings of the City Council; 
2.  enroll all ordinances and resolutions passed by the City Council in a book or set of books kept for that purpose; 
3.  have custody of documents, records, and archives as may be provided for by law or by ordinance, and have custody of the seal of the city; 
4.  attest and affix the seal of the city to documents as required by law or by ordinance; and 
5.  have such other powers, duties, and functions related to his/her statutory duties as may be prescribed by law, policy or by ordinance. The person who serves as city clerk may be employed by the city to perform duties not related to his/her position as city clerk. The salary, if any, for said duties may be provided for separately by ordinance. 
Sec. 14. - City treasurer 
    The city treasurer shall be an officer of the city, appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term. The City Council may allow the same person to hold both the office of city clerk and the office of city treasurer. Subject to such regulations as the City Council may prescribe, the city treasurer shall deposit daily funds received for the city in depositories as the City Council may designate. The city treasurer shall have such other powers, duties, and functions related to his/her duties as may be prescribed by law, policy or by ordinance. The person who serves as city treasurer may be employed by the city to perform duties not related to his/her position as city treasurer. The salary, if any, for said duties may be provided for separately by ordinance. 
Sec. 15. - Departments included. 
    There shall be maintained a department of law headed by a city attorney selected and employed by the City Council and a police department and a fire department as set forth by law or ordinance, and such other administrative departments, offices and agencies as the City Council may establish. 
ARTICLE III. -   

Sec. 1. - City Council meetings. 
    The City Council shall meet at least monthly at such times as it may prescribe by ordinance or otherwise. The mayor, individually, or any two City Council members, collectively, may call special meetings. 
Sec. 2. - City Council-Quorum-Rules. 
    A majority of all the members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn the meeting. The City Council shall determine its own rules. 
Sec. 3. - Vacancy on the City Council. 
    Should a vacancy occur on the City Council, (excepting the mayor) the mayor shall appoint another person to fill such vacancy and shall submit his/her name to the Council; if a nomination shall have the approval of a majority of the remaining City Council, said appointment shall take effect from and after confirmation of such appointee. In the event said City Council shall fail or refuse to confirm such nomination, the mayor shall make another nomination for said office and shall continue to do so until a nomination shall be confirmed by said City Council; and such appointee shall serve as a member of said City Council during the remaining unexpired term of his/her predecessor or until his/her successor is elected and qualified, unless sooner removed, and shall be entitled to the salary and other benefits of said office for the time he/she shall perform the duties thereof. 
ARTICLE IV. -   

Sec. 1. - Notice of City Election. 
    The city adopts the provisions of law as shown at 11 Oklahoma Statutes § 16-101 (Notice of Municipal Elections) as the same may be amended from time to time for its notice requirements for all city elections. 
Sec. 2. - General city elections-When held. 
    General city elections shall be held on the first Tuesday in April or on such other date(s) authorized by law or as may be otherwise approved by resolution or ordinance of the City Council. 
Sec. 3. - Mayor and City Council-Election and terms of office. 
A.  The mayor and City Council members each are elected for three (3) year terms. The mayor is elected at large by the registered voters of the entire city who vote in an election for that purpose. Each City Council member (other than mayor) is elected solely by the registered voters of the respective ward in an election for that purpose. The candidate who receives the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. Each term commences at the first regular meeting in May following the respective election and shall continue until the term expires, the Council member resigns or is removed. The term of the City Council members currently serving will continue until the election as set out in the following subsections. 
B.  Mayor. The mayor's current term is scheduled to end after the 2017 election and at the first meeting of the City Council in May, 2017. 
C.  City Council members from Wards 1 (NE) and 2 (NW). City Council members from Wards 1 and 2 current terms each are scheduled to end after the 2019 election and at the first meeting of the City Council in May, 2019. 
D.  City Council members from Wards 3 (SW) and 4 (SE). City Council members from Wards 3 and 4 current terms each are scheduled to end after the 2018 election and at the first meeting of the City Council in May, 2018 
Sec. 4. - Manner of becoming a candidate-Declaration of candidacy. 
    To become a candidate, a declaration of candidacy must be filed with the county election board within the times provided by law, including Title 11, Oklahoma Statutes, Article XVI as the same may be amended from time to time, or otherwise provided by municipal ordinance. 
Sec. 5. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    Municipal elections shall be nonpartisan and all qualified candidates shall file as independent candidates. No primary elections shall be held in a nonpartisan election. Any election proclamation or notice of election providing for a primary election shall be deemed to be amended by operation of this Charter to delete the call for a primary election and each candidate shall appear on the ballot as an independent candidate without party or other designation. 
Sec. 6. - Filing as a candidate in nonpartisan municipal election. 
    Filing as a candidate in a nonpartisan municipal election or voting for such candidate shall not affect one's political party affiliation. A qualified candidate may have his or her name printed upon the nonpartisan general municipal election ballot as candidate for any office to be filled at the election. 
Sec. 7. - Unopposed candidates in general election. 
    Any candidate who is unopposed for an office in a general municipal election shall be deemed elected and certified; and his/her name shall not appear on the general election ballot. If there is only one candidate for each of the offices which are to be filled at the election, and no questions are to be voted upon at the election, the general municipal election shall not be held. 
Sec. 8. - Special elections-Questions which may be submitted. 
    When the City Council shall deem it advisable, it may, by resolution or proclamation, authorize the mayor to call a special election for the purpose of submitting to the registered voters of the city any appropriate question, including, but not limited to the issuing of municipal bonds, of granting any franchise, of calling for a removal election, as provided in Section 9 of this Article, or for any other purpose authorized by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 9. - City Council member may be removed. 
    Any City Council member (including the mayor) may be removed at any time by the electors of the city qualified to vote for a successor of such incumbent. The removal of an incumbent City Council member shall be as follows: A petition, signed by electors entitled to vote for a successor to the incumbent sought to be removed, equal in number to thirty per centum of the entire vote cast for that position at the last preceding general municipal election demanding an election of a successor of the person sought to be removed shall be filed with the city clerk, which petition shall contain a general statement of the grounds and charges for which the removal is sought. The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper, but each signer shall add to his/her signature his/her place of residence, giving his/her street number; one of the signers of each paper shall make oath before an officer competent to administer the same, that the statements therein made are true as he/she believes and that such signatures to the paper appended is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Within ten days from the date of filing such petition the city clerk shall examine and, from the voters' register, ascertain whether or not said petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified electors and he/she shall attach to said petition his/her certificate showing the result of said examination. If by the clerk's certificate the petition is shown to be insufficient it may be amended within ten days from date of said certificate. The clerk shall within ten days after such amendment, make a like examination of the amended petition and if his/her certificate shall show the same to be insufficient it shall be returned to the persons filing the same without prejudice to the filing of a new petition to the same or similar effect. If the petition shall be found sufficient, the clerk shall submit the same to the City Council without delay. If the petition shall be found sufficient the said City Council shall within thirty days from the date of the clerk's certificate to the said City Council declare by proclamation that a sufficient petition is filed. Such proclamation shall contain the following information: 
1.  The setting of a filing period of three (3) days, on a consecutive Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days from the date of such proclamation; 
2.  The setting of the date of the Special Election, not less than forty-five (45) days nor more than sixty (60) days after the close of the filing period. A copy of the proclamation shall be filed with the secretary of the county election board not less than sixty (60) days preceding the date of the special general election. 
Sec. 10. - Successor of any removed City Council member. 
    The City Council shall make or cause to be made a legal publication of notice and all arrangements for filing for office and holding the election as provided for in Section 9 of this Article and the same shall be conducted, returned and the results thereof declared in all respects as other city elections. Any person sought to be removed may be a candidate to succeed himself/herself and unless he/she requests otherwise in writing, the clerk shall place his/her name on the official ballot without filing. In any such removal election, the candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected at such an election; if some person other than the incumbent receives the highest number of votes and shall be declared elected as such, the incumbent shall thereupon be deemed to be removed from the office held by him/her upon qualification of his/her successor. In case the party who received the highest number of votes fails to qualify within ten days thereafter, having received notice of such election, the office shall be declared vacant by said City Council. The successor of any City Council member so removed shall hold office during the unexpired term of his/her predecessor. If the incumbent receives the highest number of votes cast at such an election, he/she shall continue in office for the balance of that term. This method of removal shall be cumulative and in addition to the other methods provided by law. 
CERTIFICATE 
    I, the undersigned and duly elected Mayor of the City of Miami, Oklahoma, do hereby certify that at a duly and legally called election held in and for the City of Miami on the 4th day of April, 2017, said election being called for the purpose of submitting to the voters of the City of Miami, pursuant to 11 O.S. § 13-112, the question of whether the then existing Charter of the City of Miami, Oklahoma, should be revoked and adopt in its place the within and foregoing Charter. I further certify that the forgoing Charter is the original Charter, adopted by the City Council by Resolution CC2017-02 on the 17th day of January, 2017, and submitted to the voters of the City of Miami on the 4th day of April, 2017; and which was adopted and approved by them with 228 voting for the proposition and 71 voting against the proposition. 
    In witness whereof, I have hereunto executed the foregoing Charter in duplicate this 18th day of April, 2017. 
      Rudy Schultz, Mayor   [Seal] 
Attest: 
      Melissa Moore, 
      Deputy City Clerk   Approved this 21 day of July, 2017, pursuant to 11 O.S. § 13-107. 
      Mary Fallin, Governor of the State of Oklahoma   Attest: 
      Secretary of State   
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
  This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter as amended through 1949, and any amendments thereto. 
     Disposition  Date of 
Adoption Article Section  1- 6-1910 I-IX 11- 8-1966 IX 25  4- 5-1995 IX       Rpld 3 IX 6  
Election Date Effective Date Section Art./Sec. 
this Charter 11- 7-2000  1- 1-2001 1 Art. I, § 1 2 Art. I, § 4 3 Art. II, § 1 4 Art. II, § 2 5 Art. II, § 3 6 Art. II, § 5 7 Art. II, § 6 8-15       Added Art. II, §§ 7-14 16 Art. III, § 1 17       Rpld Art. III, § 33 18-20 Art. III, §§ 34-36 21 Art. IV, § 1 21A Art. IV, § 2 22-24 Art. IV, §§ 3-5 25       Rpld Art. IV, § 6 26 Art. IV, § 7 27-32 Art. IV, §§ 8-13 33 Art. V, § 1 34 Art. V, § 2 35-37 Art. V, §§ 9-11 38 Art. VIII, § 1 39 Art. VIII, § 2 40-45 Art. VIII, §§ 4-9 46 Art. IX, § 1 47 Art. IX, § 2 48 Art. IX, § 4 49 Art. IX, § 5 50 Art. IX, § 11 51 Art. IX, § 14 52 Art. IX, § 17 53 Art. IX, § 22 54 Art. IX, § 23 55-57 Art. IX, §§ 25-27 58, 59       Rpld Art. IX, §§ 28, 29 60 Art. IX, § 31 61 Art. IX, § 32 62 Char. Sched.  2-14-2012 12- 6-2011 1       Rpld Art. VIII, §§ 1-6       Added Art. VIII, §§ 1-9       Rnbd Art. VIII, §§ 7-9       as Art. VIII, §§ 10-12  
  
Ord./Res. No. Adoption
Date Election
Date Section Art./Sec.
this Charter CC2017-02 (Res.)  1-17-2017  4- 4-2017 1, 2 (Att.A) Art. I, 
§§ 1-3, Art. II, 
§§ 1-15, Art. III, 
§§ 1-3, Art. IV, 
§§ 1-10  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Miami, Oklahoma," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Miami Municipal Code." 
(Code 1964, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Codification of ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-108. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the mayor and board of commissioners, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and board of commissioners: 
    Board of commissioners. Whenever the words "board of commissioners," "board," "this board," or "the board" are used, they shall mean the board of commissioners of the City of Miami, Oklahoma. 
    City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Miami, in Ottawa County, Oklahoma. 
    Commissioner. The word "commissioner" shall mean a member of the board of commissioners of the City of Miami, Oklahoma. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed, the day of the act, event, or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday as defined by state law, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays as defined by state law, or any other day when the city offices shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 12 O.S. § 2006. 
    County. The word "county" shall mean Ottawa County, Oklahoma. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    May. The word "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
    May not. The words "may not" state a prohibition. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Must. The word "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, etc. Whenever any officer, department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title alone, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Miami, Oklahoma." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the word "person," as applied to partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Oklahoma. 
    Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place, square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1964, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, references to sections, history notes, footnotes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  All references in this Code to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(c)  All statements of legislative history (history notes) appearing after sections or subsections of this Code are provided for the convenience of the user and are not part of this Code. 
(d)  All editor's notes, Charter references, and state law references appearing in footnote form in this Code are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and are not part of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the mayor and board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Miami, Oklahoma, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of Ordinances, City of Miami, Oklahoma, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1964, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-5. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section a violation of this Code means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(4)  A violation of this Code shall not include the failure of a city officer or employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(5)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate violation punishable as a separate offense. 
(b)  The Municipal Court may not impose a penalty, including fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine and costs, which is greater than that established by a state statute for the same offense. In the event that a state statute provides a specific penalty for the same offense which is less, in whole or in part, than the general penalty provided by this Section, then such lesser penalty provided by state statute shall apply to cap the penalty for a violation of the respective municipal ordinance. 
(c)  The Municipal Court may not impose a penalty, including fine or deferral fee in lieu of fine and costs, which exceeds the authority granted by 11 O.S. § 14-111. In the event that a state statute provides a specific penalty for the same offense which is greater, in whole or in part, than the authority granted by 11 O.S. § 14-111, then the applicable provision of 11 O.S. § 14-111 shall apply to cap the penalty for a violation of the respective municipal ordinance. 
(d)  Except as otherwise restricted by law, a person convicted of a violation of a section of this Code shall be punished as set forth in that section and in the absence of such provision, by the following maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine: 
(1)  The maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine for traffic-related offenses relating to speeding or parking shall not exceed $200.00. 
(2)  The maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine for all other offenses, the maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine shall not exceed $500.00. 
(3)  The City of Miami has determined as a matter of policy that no offence against its Code of Ordinances will be punishable by incarceration for such offense, and therefore there is no imprisonment set for any violation of the City's ordinances. Provided, however, if in the discretion of the municipal judge, incarceration is appropriate as a means to address willful violations of court orders, it is a possible remedy he or she may utilize for contempt of court, within the parameters otherwise set by law. 
(e)  A person convicted of a violation of municipal ordinances regulating the pretreatment of wastewater and regulating stormwater discharges shall be punished by a maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine which shall not exceed $500.00. 
(f)  The Clerk of the Court is authorized to charge and collect court costs and fees in the amount(s) and in the manner provided by State Statutes, including, but not limited to 11 O.S. § 27-126 (Court Costs and Fees) and section 14-34 (Costs taxed to defendant) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(g)  Persons convicted of a violation of this Code may be required to make restitution to their victim. Persons convicted of a violation of this Code may be required to undergo evaluations, counseling, community service and other such remedial programs as may be provided for by this Code or otherwise allowed by law. 
(h)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of any license, permit or franchise. 
(i)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1964, § 1-5; Ord. No. 1478, § 1, 6-17-04; Ord. No. 1594, § 1, 11-5-12; Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 12-5-2017) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to enforce ordinances by fine, Art. III, § 32; collection of fines, Art. III, § 33. 
Cross reference- Municipal court, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Penalties for ordinance violations, 11 O.S. § 14-111. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1964, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any appropriation or budget ordinance; 
(2)  Any ordinance authorizing or relating to the issuance or redemption of bonds; 
(3)  Any ordinance approving or authorizing specific contracts; 
(4)  Any ordinance authorizing a specific sale, lease or purchase of property; 
(5)  Any ordinance levying or assessing taxes not inconsistent with this Code; 
(6)  Any ordinance granting rights-of-way, franchises or easements; 
(7)  Any ordinance annexing territory to, excluding territory from, the city or describing the city boundaries; 
(8)  Any ordinance calling specific elections or providing for special elections; 
(9)  Any ordinance making special assessments for local improvements; 
(10)  Any ordinance creating or relating to specific sewer and paving districts or other specific improvement districts; 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing the grades of specific streets and other public ways; 
(12)  Any ordinance naming or changing the names of specific streets and other public ways; 
(13)  Any ordinance creating, dedicating, vacating or closing specific streets, alleys or other public ways; 
(14)  Any ordinance amending the zoning map or approving or disapproving a subdivision plat; 
(15)  Any ordinance rezoning property; 
(16)  Any ordinance dealing with the compensation, retirement, pensions or other benefits of city officers and employees; 
(17)  Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect; 
(18)  Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect; 
(19)  Any ordinance the purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions deemed continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same in substance as ordinances existing at the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the City in effect on the date of adoption of this Code, except as otherwise provided. 
Sec. 1-10. - State laws adopted. 
    Statutes duly adopted by the State of Oklahoma which are not otherwise in conflict with the Charter and ordinances of the City of Miami but which in fact add to the police power of the City of Miami are hereby adopted and may be prosecuted in Miami's municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 1359, § 1, 3-17-97) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Oklahoma Municipal Code, 11 O.S. § 1-101. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Regulation of cable television rates. 
(a)  The city will follow the FCC rate regulations (as such have been and may be amended from time to time by the FCC) in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television system operating within the city's jurisdiction, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise. 
(b)  In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties by: (1) making available for public inspection, at a time and location to be specified by public notice, a copy of any rate filing submitted by the company to the city (hereinafter "rate filing"); (2) after public notice, accepting written comments submitted by interested parties and convening a public hearing within twenty (20) days (or more, but less than thirty (30) days) of the submission of such rate filing by the company; and (3) accepting additional public comments and/or convening further public hearings as the city deems necessary or desirable in carrying out its rate regulatory function in a fair and efficient manner which assures adequate public participation (for example, if the city avails itself of the additional ninety- or one hundred fifty-day periods permitted by the FCC to complete its review of the company's rate filing). 
(c)  In connection with subsections (a) and (b) above, the city will comply with all state and local requirements that apply to public participation in the city's regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television system operating within the city's jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 1, 2-7-94) 
Secs. 2-2-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Civil defense director, § 7-5 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-26-2-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-36. - Position created. 
    There is hereby created the position of superintendent of public administration of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2-17) 
Sec. 2-37. - Appointment. 
    The mayor shall appoint, by and with the majority consent of the board of commissioners, the superintendent of public administration. Such employee shall hold such position until his successor is chosen and qualified. 
(Code 1964, § 2-18) 
Sec. 2-38. - Responsibilities. 
    The superintendent of public administration shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Attend staff meetings with all departmental heads to inform them of such needed information as to coordination of projects being conducted or planned in other departments within the city. 
(2)  Gather information to make monthly reports to be given to the board of commissioners on a monthly basis. 
(3)  Gather information and related facts so mayor and commissioners can make evaluations of departments to establish needs and priorities that will be placed in a format with other compiled data so that if outside funding, such as state or federal monies are available they may be applied for in the proper manner. 
(4)  Compile information so mayor and commissioners can create and maintain an affirmative action program for the city. 
(5)  Work with any group of citizens or committees designated by the mayor and commissioners to keep both parties informed and to compile such information as both would desire. 
(6)  Assist mayor and commissioners in filing applications for federal or state assistance; after funding is successful, work with those agencies until project is completed and finalized. 
(7)  Attend negotiations on behalf of the city administration with unions of city employees. 
(8)  Work with department heads, city clerk, mayor and commissioners in formulating, preparing and finalizing a budget for the city. 
(9)  Coordinate with each department head in the screening of employees to be hired and to make sure that federal regulations dealing with hiring practices are complied with. 
(10)  Work with departments of other governmental agencies and coordinate with department heads to keep them informed of new regulations, such as wage and hour laws and safety laws that must be adhered to by cities. 
(11)  Cooperate with outside engineering firms so that needed data may be compiled on any project being conducted for the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2-19) 
Secs. 2-39-2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1585, § 1(A.), adopted July 16, 2012, repealed Div. 3, §§ 2-56-2-58, which pertained to the city financial officer and derived from Code 1964, §§ 2-38-2-40; Ord. No. 1540, adopted February 2, 2009. 

Secs. 2-56-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ENGINEER AND BUILDING INSPECTOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6. 

Sec. 2-76. - Position created, appointment. 
    The dual offices of city engineer and city building inspector is hereby created and established. The city engineer and city building inspector positions shall be appointed by the city manager, and can consist of either: 1) an individual employed by the city, or 2) a consultant firm hired on a contract basis. The city manager will further have the discretion to determine if the same individual or firm could fulfill both these positions. If the city manager determines that a consulting firm or firms are appropriate to fill these positions, the city council and public utility board must approve any contract between the city and the firm prior to said firm providing services to the city. 
(Code 1964, § 5-19; Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 6-5-00; Ord. No. 1432, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 2-77. - Qualifications. 
    The city engineer and city building inspector must be able to show proof of appropriate state licensure or certification in the field of civil engineering and building inspections or the equivalent thereof, and be able to demonstrate to the city manager sufficient relevant experience in municipal engineering duties. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 3, 6-5-00; Ord. No. 1432, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 2-78. - Duties and inspections. 
(a)  The city engineer and city building inspector is hereby placed under control and direct supervision of the city manager. 
(b)  The city engineer and city building inspector shall advise the city manager and appropriate boards on all engineering matters referred to their office, and shall perform such duties as are provided by law or ordinance, and in addition thereto, such other duties as from time to time may be imposed upon their office by the city manager. These positions shall, from time to time, as required by the city manager, make reports regarding public improvements, repairs of streets, bridges and sidewalks or such other work as the city manager may request, and shall make such suggestions to the utility board and city council of the City of Miami, regarding the same, as shall in their judgment seem best and proper. The city engineer and city building inspector shall perform additional duties as requested by the city manager, in addition to these enumerated responsibilities. 
(c)  The city engineer and city building inspector shall further examine all buildings or structures in the course of erection or alteration to see that they conform to the provisions of the general statutes of the state, ordinances of the city and plans and regulations approved by city authorities, relating to the construction, repair and alteration and demolition or removal of buildings or structures within the city. They shall also, on complaint or any other information, examine existing and completed buildings or structures when there is reason to believe that an unsafe condition or violation of a provision of this or any other chapter of the Code of Ordinances exists. 
(d)  Whenever either the city engineer or city building inspector find, upon examination, that a violation of the provision of this chapter or of the accepted plans, or an unsafe condition exists, they shall endeavor to compel an immediate correction of the condition. Failing in this, they shall make a full report to the city manager on the conditions deemed to be unsafe or in violation, delivering a copy of said report to the owner or person in control of the premises. In addition, they shall collect all pertinent evidence for the information and use of the utility board and city manager, which shall proceed as provided in the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 5-21; Ord. No. 1408, § 4, 6-5-00; Ord. No. 1432, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Charter reference- Authority to inspect construction of buildings, Art. III, § 31. 
Sec. 2-79. - Right of entry; identification; police powers. 
    The city engineer and city building inspector, in the discharge of his duties, shall have authority at any reasonable hour to enter any premises, building or structure. For the purpose of identification, they shall adopt a badge of authority, which shall be displayed on demand, provided that, in an emergency any other method of identification shall be sufficient, and they shall have the authority of a police officer in all matters and conditions connected with the performance of his duties as city engineer and building inspector. 
(Code 1964, § 5-22; Ord. No. 1408, § 5, 6-5-00; Ord. No. 1432, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 2-80. - Records to be kept. 
    The city engineer and city building inspector shall keep accurate maps, plats and records of all public works, lands or property owned by the city and shall further keep a record, which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, and shall be subject to inspection by any person entitled as well as the city officers as all reasonable hours. The city engineer and city building inspector shall retain on file copies of all papers in connection with building work so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence, except that construction plans need not be retained after the work shown on such plans has been completed and approved and accepted. 
(Code 1964, § 5-23; Ord. No. 1408, § 6, 6-5-00; Ord. No. 1432, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 2-81. - Monthly reports. 
    The city engineer and city building inspector shall make an itemized monthly report to the city manager of all permits granted, fees collected, certificates issued and order promulgated. 
(Code 1964, § 5-24; Ord. No. 1408, § 7, 6-5-00; Ord. No. 1432, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Sec. 2-82. - Building inspector. 
    The city building inspector is hired by the city manager. If the city engineering services are provided on a contract basis as promulgated in section 2-76, the city manager shall have final approval of the building inspector to be provided by said contract, if one is deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 8, 6-5-00; Ord. No. 1432, § 1, 10-1-01) 
Secs. 2-83-2-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-90. - City clerk. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall appoint a person to the position of city clerk. The person who serves as city clerk may be employed by the city to perform other duties. In the absence of the appointment of a specific named individual to the office of city clerk, the city manager shall hold and exercise the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Compensation, benefits and other details of the employment of an individual to serve as city clerk shall be determined by written contract with the city council. 
(c)  The city clerk may, with the authorization of the city council, appoint and employ deputies. The city clerk may, with the authorization of the city manager, appoint individuals employed by the city manager to serve as deputies. The city clerk shall file written instruments evidencing the appointment of deputies in the records of the city clerk, and said deputy or deputies shall have such authority as the city clerk may delegate. 
(d)  In addition to all other responsibilities, powers, duties and functions imposed by state statute, state laws, municipal charter, municipal ordinance, and by employment contract, the city clerk shall, either in person or by deputy: 
(1)  Prepare and post all notice(s) for meetings as follows: 
a.  All regular, special and emergency meetings of the city council. Only the mayor, or two (2) or more council members, or the city manager may issue a call for a special or emergency meeting. 
b.  All regular, special and emergency meetings of the public utility board and all other subsidiary boards and committees of the city. Only the chairperson of such board, or two (2) or more members thereof, or the city manager may issue a call for a special or emergency meeting. 
c.  All regular, special and emergency meetings of a public trust authority for which the City of Miami is the beneficiary. Only the chairperson of such board may issue a call for a special or emergency meeting unless the trust indenture provides otherwise. 
(2)  Prepare and post all agenda(s) for meetings as follows: 
a.  Only the mayor, or two (2) or more council members, or the city manager may place an item or items on the agenda for a city council meeting. 
b.  Only the chairperson, or two (2) or more board members, or the city manager may place an item or items on the agenda for a meeting of the public utility board and all other subsidiary boards and committees of the city. 
c.  Only the chairperson of a public trust authority for which the City of Miami is the beneficiary may place an item or items on the agenda for a trust board meeting. 
(3)  Attend all meetings of the city council, utility board and all subsidiary boards and committees of the city, and all board of trustee meetings for public trust authorities of which the City of Miami is a beneficiary; and 
(4)  Keep the journal and official minutes of the meetings of the city council, utility board and all subsidiary boards and committees of the city; and 
(5)  If requested by any board(s) of trustees for any public trust authorities of which the City of Miami is a beneficiary, to keep the journal and official minutes of such board meeting(s); and 
(6)  Enroll all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council in a book or set of books kept for that purpose in the manner and form required by law, and to ensure that the ordinances of the city council are posted, published, codified, filed and recorded in the manner required by law; and 
(7)  Maintain files of all resolutions passed by the utility board and all subsidiary boards and committees of the city in the manner and form required by law; and 
(8)  If requested by any board(s) of trustees for any public trust authorities of which the City of Miami is a beneficiary, to maintain files of all resolutions passed by such board(s); and 
(9)  Have custody of city council documents, records, and archives. Assist the city manager with general city record-keeping and archival functions; and 
(10)  Have primary responsibility for receipt of and response to Oklahoma Open Records Act requests, and coordinate responses thereto with the city council, city manager and city attorney; and 
(11)  Immediately notify the city manager, city council and city attorney in writing upon receipt of any demand, claim or legal process directed to the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents, boards, commissions or any public trust authority of which the city is a beneficiary; and 
(12)  Have custody of the seal(s) of the city, and attest and affix the seal of the city to documents as required by law or by ordinance; and 
(13)  Maintain current contact information for all city elected officials, appointed officers, board and committee members and trustees of public trusts of which the city is a beneficiary. Maintain a list of all board and committee appointments, the date of appointment(s), the expiration of the term(s) of appointment, and contact information for such board and committee members. Ensure that the oaths of office and loyalty oaths required by state law are on file. Facilitate communication between the city council, city manager and city attorney with each other and with other board and committee members. Notify the city council by written instrument when a pending term of appointment is within thirty (30) days of expiration. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 1, 7-16-12; Ord. No. 1599, § 1, 2-4-13) 
Secs. 2-91, 2-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1592, § 1, adopted Nov. 5, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as Division 5, § 2-88. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of division numbers, these provisions have been included as Division 6, § 2-93. 

Sec. 2-93. - Pay plan. 
    The City of Miami desires to recognize the exceptional performance of its employees through a competitive compensation system. The system will consist of four (4) major components. 
Pay System Components 
1.  Market comparability. 
2.  Cost of living adjustments. 
3.  Merit pool. 
4.  Sensational saver stipend. 
(1)  Market comparability. Biennially, in conjunction with the preparation of the respective year's budget, the city manager shall survey or cause to be surveyed the market of salaries paid by comparative employers. The city manager shall be the sole determinant in the establishment of the methodology and process used in the survey. The city manager shall make recommendations to the city council at the submission of the budget as to changes in the salary structures of the City of Miami based on the results of the salary survey. 
Market Surveyed Salary Range

(2)  Cost of living adjustments. Annually, in conjunction with the preparation of the fiscal year budget, the city manager shall identify an "across the board" adjustment to the pay ranges of the pay plan schedule of the City of Miami an amount equal to the U.S. City Average Consumer Price Index for the preceding month of February. This adjustment to the range shall not directly increase the pay of any employee. 
Cost of Living Adjustment

(3)  Merit pool. Annually, in conjunction with the preparation of the fiscal year budget, the city manager shall budget and recommend the formation of a merit pool line item. The amount of the merit pool shall be determined on the basis of the City of Miami's financial capabilities and performance at that particular point in time. Additionally, the city manager shall submit to the city council a series of performance goals for the city and its trusts to accomplish in the respective fiscal year. Each goal, if successfully met or exceeded, shall represent a respective percentage of the merit pool established in the fiscal year budget. Upon acceptance of city manager's recommendation to award merit funds the city council shall authorize the dispersal "across the board" of the merit pool to all employees in the form of a proportionate annual increase in base salary or a one-time stipend depending on status. For those employees who are below the mid-point of their respective pay range they shall be awarded the increase in an adjustment to their base pay. For employees at or above the mid-point the pay increase shall come in the form of a stipend (one-time payment). 
Merit Pool Award

(4)  Sensational saver stipend (SSS). Annually, in conjunction with the preparation of the fiscal year budget, the city manager shall budget a line item for the recognition of exceptional performance in identifying ways for the city to save money. Each department head in the month of November shall nominate subordinates for the receipt of a special and substantial stipend (one-time payment) for extremely sensational performance in identifying ways for the city to save significant money. The city manager shall convene a group to review the nominations and select award winners. Recipients will be recognized in December at a city function. 
    *Disclaimer, nothing in this pay plan shall constitute a contractual obligation to provide additional compensation to any employee and/or group. Changes in compensation are subject to availability of financial resources and acceptance and approval by the governing body of the City of Miami, which reserves the sole right to approve or disapprove said compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1(2-88), 11-5-12) 
Secs. 2-99, 2-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-96-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Social security for public officers and employees, 51 O.S. § 121 et seq.; plans for coverage of municipal employees, 51 O.S. § 125. 

Sec. 2-116. - Extension of benefits; exclusions. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or this section, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of federal old age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734, 81st Congress. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(b)  There is hereby excluded from this section and the benefits extended hereby any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city, and any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official, compensation for which is on a fee basis, or any position, or any employee who is an elected official of the city, or any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1964, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-117. - Execution of agreements. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state department of public welfare, as agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in this division. 
(Code 1964, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-118. - Withholdings from salaries or wages. 
    Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in this division are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by such laws or regulations. 
(Code 1964, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-119. - Appropriations. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions to the federal old age and survivors insurance program, which shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by such laws or regulations. 
(Code 1964, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-120. - Records and reports. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations relative to old age and survivors insurance. 
(Code 1964, § 2-5) 
DIVISION 3. - ADDITIONAL RETIREMENT 

Sec. 2-121. - 457 Employee deferred compensation plan. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the state, and for the purpose of enabling municipal employees to enhance their retirement security, there is hereby authorized, approved and adopted, effective as of December 1st, 1997, a deferred compensation plan ("plan") of the city, executed counterpart of which is marked Exhibit A and attached to Ordinance No. 1371, on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 1, 11-3-97) 
Sec. 2-122. - Employee retirement system, defined benefit plan. 
(a)  [Created.] That pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the State of Oklahoma, and for the purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the part of city employees and thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby authorized created, established, and approved and adopted, effective as of April 1, 2013, the amended and restated Plan designated "Employee Retirement System of the City of Miami, Oklahoma, Defined Benefit Plan," (hereinafter called System), an executed counterpart of which is marked Exhibit "A" (Joinder Agreement) and Exhibit "B" (amended and restated plan) and attached hereto as part hereof. This plan formerly known as Employees Retirement System of Miami, Oklahoma is hereby renamed to the "Employee Retirement System of the City of Miami, Oklahoma, Defined Benefit Plan" and this amended and restated plan replaces and supersedes the former plan known as Employees Retirement System of Miami, Oklahoma. 
(b)  Fund. A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the persons entitled to benefits under the System. All contributions to such fund shall be paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the city. Such fund shall be pooled for purposes of management and investment with similar funds of other incorporated cities, towns, and municipal trusts in the State of Oklahoma as a part of the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund in accordance with the trust agreement of the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund, a public trust. The city shall hold such contributions in the form received, and from time to time pay over and transfer the same to the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund, as duly authorized and directed by the Board of Trustees. The fund shall be nonfiscal and shall not be considered in computing any levy when the annual estimate is made to the County Excise Board. 
(c)  Appropriations. The City of Miami, Oklahoma, is hereby authorized to incur the necessary expenses for the establishment, operation, and administration of the System, and to appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the City of Miami, Oklahoma, is hereby authorized to appropriate annually such amounts as are required in addition to employee contributions to maintain the System and the fin accordance with the provisions of the Defined Benefit Plan. Any appropriation so made to maintain the System and fund shall be for deferred wages or salaries, and for the payment of necessary expenses of operation and administration to be transferred to the trustees of the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund for such purposes and shall be paid into the fund when available, to be duly transferred to the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund. 
(d)  Government pick-up. Whereas, the Plan contains provisions which are intended to constitute a pick-up program by the employer which satisfies the requirements of Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (the "Code"); and the Plan, as amended and restated, be, and it is, approved and adopted as of the date therein stated; and Mandatory Contributions (as defined in the Plan) are designated "picked-up" by the employer so as to not be included in Plan Participants ' gross income for Federal income tax purposes as provided in Section 414(h)(2) of the Code. All Mandatory Contributions are to be paid by the employer in lieu of contributions by the Plan Participant. No Participant in the Plan shall have the option of choosing to receive the amounts of Mandatory Contributions directly in lieu of having such amounts paid by the employer to the Trustees of the Plan. 
(e)  Execution. The mayor and city clerk be and they are each hereby authorized and directed to execute (in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original) the System instrument, and to do all other acts and things necessary, advisable, and proper to put said System and related trust into full force and effect, and to make such changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same under Sections 401(a) and 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States. The counterpart attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and Exhibit "B", which has been duly executed as aforesaid simultaneously with the passage of this section and made a part hereof, is hereby ratified and confirmed in all respects. 
    This committee is hereby authorized and directed to proceed immediately on behalf of the City of Miami, Oklahoma, to pool and combine the fund into the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund as a part thereof, with similar funds of such other cities and towns, for purposes of pooled management and investment. 
(f)  Survival. The provisions of the Special Retirement Option adopted by the City of Miami on March 5, 2013, by Ordinance #1603 shall survive this subsequent amendment and restatement of the Plan. 
(g)  Severability. If, regardless of cause, any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or clause of this section, including the System as set forth in Exhibit "A" and Exhibit "B", is held invalid or to be unconstitutional, the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, or clauses shall continue in full force and effect and shall be construed thereafter as being the entire provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1510, §§ 1-3, 2-5-07; Ord. No. 1604, §§ 1-7, 3-5-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1510, §§ 1-3, adopted February 5, 2007, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 2-122 was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Note- Exhibits "A" and "B" are not set out herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the city offices. 
Sec. 2-123. - Early retirement program. 
    The city adopts a 2013 Early Retirement Program which is composed of two parts: (i) a Special Retirement Option under the Employees Retirement System of Miami, Oklahoma, as described in subsection (1), below, and (ii) a retiree medical supplement, as described in subsection (2), below. 
(1)  Special Retirement Option: A current employee of the employer who is a participant and meets the eligibility requirements of Alternative #1 or Alternative #2 set forth below on February 28, 2013, and who retires from employment with the employer on or before April 15, 2013, may elect to receive a distribution of his or her Early Pension retirement benefit hereunder, calculated in the manner described in Section 6.2 of the Employees Retirement System of Miami, Oklahoma (the "Plan"), as modified by Alternative #1 or Alternative #2 below, as applicable. Such election must be made by the participant on or before April 5, 2013. The early pension provided hereunder shall be in lieu of any other benefit under the Plan. 
Alternative #1: Plus 5 Alternative 
Participants Eligible: To be eligible for Alternative # 1, a participant must be (i) an active employee as of February 28, 2013, and (ii) either age fifty-five (55) or older and have ten (10) or more years of credited service as of February 28, 2013, or age sixty (60) or older. 
Early Pension Provided: An early pension will be provided to the participant in accordance with Section 6.2 of the Plan, modified as follows: 
1.  Early pension will commence on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following participant's retirement. 
2.  If the participant is under age sixty-five (65), up to five (5) years are added to the participant's age when determining the early retirement reduction under Section 6.2 of the Plan. 
3.  If fewer than five (5) years are used under the prior sentence (because the participant is over age sixty (60)), the remaining part of the five (5) years are added to years of service for purposes of the pension formula in Section 6.2. In no event would the additional service credit be allowed to increase the participant's years of service to more than twenty (20) years (e.g., a participant age sixty-five (65) with twenty (20) or more years would receive no enhancement). 
4.  In the event that the Plan is amended on or prior to May 1, 2013 to enhance the formula for calculating an early pension under the Plan, then the early pension provided pursuant to this Plus 5 Alternative shall be calculated using the enhanced formula for the participant, if such formula yields a greater early pension than the preceding City of Miami Ordinance Amendment for early retirement provisions of this Plus 5 Alternative. 
Alternative #2: Rule of 80 Alternative 
Employees Eligible: To be eligible for Alternative #2, a participant must: (i) be an active employee on February 28, 2013, and (ii) meet the following Rule of 80: Age (rounded to two decimals) + years of credited service (rounded to two decimals) total 80 or more as of the February 28, 2013, measurement date. 
Early Pension Provided: An early pension will be provided to the participant in accordance with Section 6.2 of the Plan, modified as follows: 
1.  Early pension will commence on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following participant's retirement. 
2.  The early retirement reduction under Section 6.2 of the Plan would be eliminated. 
3.  In the event that the Plan is amended on or prior to May 1, 2013, to enhance the formula for calculating an early pension under the Plan, then the early pension provided pursuant to this Rule of 80 Alternative shall be calculated using the enhanced formula for the participant, if such formula yields a greater early pension than the preceding provisions of this Rule of 80 Alternative. 
(2)  [Retiree medical coverage:] With respect to any employee of the City of Miami, Oklahoma who meets the eligibility requirements for the Special Retirement Option described in subsection (1) above and who elects to receive the Special Retirement Option, the city shall provide to such retired employee, at no cost to the retired employee, retiree medical coverage under the city's group medical plan until the earlier of the individual 's attainment of age sixty-five (65) or eligibility for Medicare or any other employer provided group medical plan. Provided, however, in the event that the city concludes that the provision of such no cost retiree medical coverage would be discriminatory under Section 105(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the city may instead pay the employee a taxable cash amount that is intended for the individual to use to pay the premiums for retiree coverage under the city's group medical plan for the period of coverage described in the prior sentence. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 1, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 1603, §§ 1-3, 3-5-13; Ord. No. 1605, §§ 2, 3, 3-19-13) 
Secs. 2-124-2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, ETC.[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Airport authority board, § 5-26; airport zoning board of adjustment, § 5-68; board of appeals, § 6-26 et seq.; fair housing board, § 11-46 et seq.; regional planning commission, § 18-26 et seq.; library board, § 20-26 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 26-111 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-141-2-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-156. - Created; purposes. 
    There is hereby created the economic development commission of the city for the purposes of: 
(1)  Assembling and providing information, ideas, and research results and to conduct research and advance proposals to promote the orderly development and use of the natural and human resources located in and around the city. 
(2)  To develop, maintain and review long-range plans, to accomplish the purposes for which the commission is created. 
(Code 1964, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-157. - Membership; term and compensation. 
(a)  The commission created by this division shall be composed as follows: 
(1)  The mayor. 
(2)  The president of: 
a.  The First National Bank and Trust Company of Miami; 
b.  Security Bank and Trust Company; 
c.  Bank of Miami; and 
d.  Green Country Federal Savings and Loan Association. 
(3)  Chairman of the industrial committee of the Miami Chamber of Commerce. 
(4)  City clerk. 
(5)  The superintendent of public administration of the city and the manager of the Miami Chamber of Commerce shall be ex officio members of this commission. 
(b)  Members of the commission shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation and no members thereof shall receive any compensation from the city or from any trust, donation, or legacy for any service in such connection. 
(Code 1964, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-158. - Duties. 
    The duties of the economic development commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  To support and assist the efforts of the city, local development corporations, industrial authorities and committees, chambers of commerce and other similar public and private agencies, to obtain new and foster expansion of existing agricultural, commercial, industrial and recreational facilities or enterprises. 
(2)  To maintain a continuing evaluation of sources available for the financing of the development or expansion of industrial and commercial facilities in and around this city. 
(3)  To assist in obtaining financing for the development and expansion of industrial and commercial facilities in and around this city. 
(4)  To serve as the city's official liaison agency between persons interested in locating new economic enterprises in and around this city. 
(Code 1964, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-159. - Officers; meetings. 
    The economic development commission shall create and fill such offices as it may determine are necessary for the performance of its functions. The commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions and determinations. 
(Code 1964, § 2-37) 
Secs. 2-160-2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DOWNTOWN REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authority and trust authority shall mean the Miami Downtown Redevelopment Authority, a public trust organized under the laws of this state, for which trust the declaration of trust was originally filed with the secretary of state on the 31st day of March 1987 and the amended declaration of trust was filed with the secretary of state on the 14th day of February 1990. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 6-4-90) 
Sec. 2-172. - Acceptance of beneficial interest. 
    The city does hereby accept the beneficial interest of the trust authority as set out therein. Further, the board of commissioners declares it to be the policy of the city to otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of the agreement of conveyance dated the 29th day of December 1989 between Ann Coleman, Susan C. Bassett and Sara C. Cecconi, d/b/a Coleman Properties and the city, whereby the Coleman Theatre was donated to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 6-4-90) 
Sec. 2-173. - Composition. 
    The trust authority shall consist of seven (7) members. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 6-4-90) 
State Law reference- Public trusts, 60 O.S. § 176 et seq. 
Sec. 2-174. - Appointment of trustees. 
    The trustees of the trust authority shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 6-4-90) 
Sec. 2-175. - Terms of trustees. 
    The initial appointment and confirmation of the trustees of the trust authority shall be such that the first trustee appointed shall serve and hold office for a term of one (1) year, the second for two (2) years, the third for three (3) years, the fourth for four (4) years, the fifth for five (5) years, the sixth for six (6) years and the seventh for seven (7) years. As the term of office of each trustee expires, such office shall be filled with an appointee who shall hold office for seven (7) years. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 6-4-90) 
Sec. 2-176. - Powers and duties. 
    The authority shall have the care, custody and management of the Coleman Theatre and such other properties located within the corporate limits of the city as the board of commissioners may delegate to it. Specifically included in those duties, but not by way of limitation, are the following: 
(1)  Hiring or contracting with a theatre manager and such other employees as it may deem necessary for the efficient administration of the Coleman Theatre and other properties; 
(2)  Overseeing the daily operation of the Coleman Theatre, including but not limited to setting and collecting the fees charged for the use of the Coleman Theatre and rental of business space therein; 
(3)  Receiving gifts, grants and donations of every kind for the renovation, maintenance and operation of the Coleman Theatre and other properties; 
(4)  Investing all monies received for the Coleman Theatre and other properties and expending such monies for the renovation, maintenance and operation of the Coleman Theatre and other properties as the authority deems appropriate so long as such investing and expending is in compliance with all applicable law and subject to audit by the city; 
(5)  Overseeing the renovation of the Coleman Theatre and other properties. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 6-4-90) 
Sec. 2-177. - Establishment of policies. 
    The authority may establish all necessary policies for the proper renovation, maintenance and operation of such facilities owned by the city; provided, however, the board of commissioners may, in its discretion, review, amend, repeal or add to any such policies. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 6-4-90) 
Secs. 2-178-2-187. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL UTILITY AUTHORITY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1315, § 1, adopted July 6, 1993, set forth provisions intended for use as §§ 2-178-2-182. In order to provide room for future growth in Div. 3 of this article, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been renumbered §§ 2-188-2-192. 

Sec. 2-188. - Definition. 
    As used in this division, the term "authority" or "trust authority" shall mean The Miami Special Utility Authority, a public trust organization under the laws of the State of Oklahoma for which trust the declaration of trust was originally filed with the state secretary of state on January 7, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 2-189. - Acceptance of beneficial interest. 
    The city accepted the beneficial interest of the trust authority as set out therein on September 8, 1981. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 2-190. - Composition. 
    The trustees of this trust authority shall, ex officio, be the same persons who currently shall be the acting members of the legally-constituted governing body of the beneficiary without distinction as to the office held, subject to the conditions contained in the declaration of trust. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 2-191. - General powers and duties. 
    The authority shall furnish and supply to the inhabitants utility services and facilities for the purposes of collection and disposing of solid waste. Specifically included in these duties, but not by way of limitation, are the following: 
(1)  Fix, demand, and collect charges, rates and fees for such service and facilities; 
(2)  To employ such agents, servants, and employees as they deem necessary, proper or convenient for the execution of the purposes of this trust; 
(3)  To manage, control and administer the trust, its property, assets and business and shall be absolutely and unconditionally free from direction and control of the beneficiary; 
(4)  To employ personnel necessary to manage and operate the incinerator facility, located in the city, as an enterprise operation; 
(5)  To establish a propriety fund separate and apart from all governmental funds to receive revenues to retire any revenue bonds that are used to acquire, maintain and operate the solid waste operation; 
(6)  To accept the city sanitation department's solid waste collection operation and establish a solid waste disposal regulation enforceable under the provisions of section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 2-192. - Policies. 
    The authority may establish all necessary policies for the proper maintenance and operation of facilities owned by the city to be used in connection with the collection and disposal of solid waste in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Secs. 2-193-2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-201-2-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW 

Sec. 2-221. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a department of law for the city. 
(Ord. No. 1295, 10-1-90) 
Sec. 2-222. - City attorney; [and city prosecutor]-Appointment, removal, qualifications. 
    There shall be a city attorney and a city prosecutor, who shall both be officers of the city and subject to removal by the Mayor and city council. The city attorney shall be director or head of the department of law. The city prosecutor will work within the department of law, and will have as a primary responsibility the prosecution of all municipal violations. Both shall be attorneys duly licensed to practice law within the state. The mayor and city council shall authorize all personnel positions in the department unless it delegates the power to appoint designated personnel to the city attorney subject to the approval of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 1295, 10-1-90; Ord. No. 1417, § 1, 4-2-01) 
Sec. 2-223. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The city attorney shall be director or head of the department of law. The city prosecutor will work within the department of law, and will have as a primary responsibility the prosecution of all municipal violations. The city attorney and city prosecutor shall perform such duties as required of them by the mayor and city council, and as required by this Code, any ordinance, or the City Charter. It shall be the city attorneys duty to advise the mayor and city council upon all law questions, and he shall give opinions in writing when requested and shall represent the city as attorney in all litigations for or against the city unless the mayor and city council secures special counsel for particular proceedings. The city attorney shall perform such other legal services on behalf of the city, its officers and employees as may be required by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 1295, 10-1-90; Ord. No. 1418, § 1, 4-16-01) 
Secs. 2-224-2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-301. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the Identity Theft Prevention Program (ITPP). 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Sec. 2-302. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Sec. 2-303. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply 1 []: 
    City means the City of Miami. 
    Covered account means (i) An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
    Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
    Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
    Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
    Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
    Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
    Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
    Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Other than "city" and "personal identifying information", definitions provided in this section are based on the definitions provided in 16 CFR § 681.2. 

Sec. 2-304. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include electric, electrical, water, sewer, solid waste, municipal court, purchasing, parks, engineering, civic center building rental, library, fire and police. 
(c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: 
Use of personal identifying information of another. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, and transfer of service by name or address have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded for public access. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; or 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; or 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; or 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Sec. 2-305. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with two (2) forms of personal identifying information of the customer to include valid government issued identification card, drivers' license, or passport and must contain a photograph of the customer. For customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and written application stored in locked file cabinets located in a secure area. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Sec. 2-306. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the director of information technology, on a regular basis, shall be at least eight (8) characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager, and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager, and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Sec. 2-307. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Sec. 2-308. - Sources and types of red flags. 
    All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(2)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
i.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
ii.  The social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(3)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
i.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
i.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
ii.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
e.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
f.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
g.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(4)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Sec. 2-309. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the assistant city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the assistant city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the assistant city manager, in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the assistant city manager 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within twenty-four (24) hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the assistant city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the assistant city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the assistant city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the assistant city manager: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Sec. 2-310. - Updating the program. 
    The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Sec. 2-311. - Program administration. 
    The assistant city manager is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The assistant city manager will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The assistant city manager is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The assistant city manager shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Sec. 2-312. - Outside service providers. 
    In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more covered accounts the assistant city manager shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 4-20-09) 
Secs. 2-313-2-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COMPETITIVE BIDS AND PURCHASING CONTROLS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- Competitive bids required, Art. IX, § 6. 

Sec. 2-331. - Competitive bidding. 
(a)  The city shall adhere to the requirements of the City Charter and to the requirements of the laws of the State of Oklahoma as made applicable to this municipality when determining when competitive bidding is required and the manner in which competitive bids will be obtained. 
(b)  In addition the city shall adhere to the requirements of the city purchasing manual. The city manager shall have the authority to create, amend and approve the city purchasing manual provided that the same shall bear the endorsement of the city attorney regarding conformity with state law and the provisions of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 1(a), 8-3-09; Ord. No. 1617, § 1, 11-8-13) 
Sec. 2-332. - Purchases of goods, services and capital. 
(a)  The city purchasing of goods, services and capital will be outlined by the city purchasing manual. The city purchasing manual will be the local authority to set the parameters of all purchasing procedures. 
(b)  The city manager shall designate certain individuals as purchasing officers empowered to purchase or contract against budget appropriations. Only these designated individuals will be empowered to obligate the city. 
(c)  For all purchases of goods, services or capital (all purchases or disbursements other than payroll and debt service) for which the obligation and final invoice for the payment of the obligation does not occur within the same month, purchase orders or contracts shall be prepared and approved, in writing, by a designated purchasing officer prior to the time the purchase commitment is made. The approved purchase order or contract shall be forwarded to an officer or employee charged with keeping the appropriation and expenditure records (encumbering clerk) who shall determine that there exists, available unencumbered appropriation for that purpose. Upon such determination, the encumbering clerk shall attest to that fact in writing. If appropriation is not available for the proposed purchase or commitment, the purchase or commitment shall not proceed until budget amendments are authorized to provide sufficient appropriation. 
Upon approval of the purchasing officer and encumbering clerk, an encumbrance shall be recorded in the appropriation and expenditure records in the amount or estimated amount of the commitment. 
These encumbering requirements shall not apply to the following type of purchases or commitments: 
-  Payroll and payroll related expenses 
-  Utility and telephone services by entities governed by State Corporation Commission 
-  Insurance contracts 
-  Purchases where the obligation and final invoice are processed in the same month 
(d)  For all purchases or contracts for goods, services or capital over the amount set forth in the city purchasing manual, city council approval shall be obtained prior to the time the commitment is made, and such approval shall be recorded in the minutes of the council. 
(e)  After satisfactory delivery of the merchandise or completion of contract provisions, an invoice or claim form shall be obtained adequately documenting request for payment. The officer or employee receiving satisfactory delivery of merchandise or contract service shall acknowledge such fact by signing the invoice, claim form, delivery ticket or receiving advice. 
The invoice or claims form, along with the written acknowledgment of receipt, shall be forwarded to the officer or employee responsible for processing accounts payable who shall review the invoice for accuracy and propriety, including comparison to the authorized purchase order or contract, if applicable. 
Upon completion of the accounts payable officer review, the invoices or claim forms along with the related supporting documentation shall be submitted to the city council for payment authorization. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 1(b), 8-3-09) 
Sec. 2-333. - Bids process. 
(a)  Purchase of supplies, materials and equipment. 
(1)  Materials or supplies: Every contract for purchase of materials or supplies exceeding the amount(s) set forth in the then current Oklahoma Central Purchasing Act shall be let and awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, by free and open competitive bidding after solicitation for sealed bids. The bidding process shall be controlled by the provisions of the Oklahoma Public Competitive Bidding Act of 1974 as it now exists or is hereinafter amended. Exception to this requirement shall be as set forth from time to time in the Oklahoma Central Purchasing Act. 
The responsible staff will contact State of Oklahoma Central Purchasing Office to determine the state purchase price, if any, of the bid items. If the state purchase price is the lowest, the city may avail itself of the provisions of the Oklahoma Central Purchasing Office as its agent for the purchase or procurement of any item provided under the Oklahoma Central Purchasing Act in lieu of local competitive bidding. 
(2)  Equipment: Every contract for the purchase of equipment exceeding the amount(s) set forth in the then current Oklahoma Central Purchasing Act shall be purchased according to any of the following options: 
a.  Directly from the awarded solicitation list(s) for statewide contracts provided by and through the Oklahoma Central Purchasing Office without local competitive bidding if so approved by the city council; 
Or 
b.  On the basis of any U.S. Government Services Administration (GSA) Schedule Contracts without local competitive bidding if so approved by the city council; 
Or 
c.  From the lowest and best bidder after due notice inviting proposals as described in this Section. The price provided by the awarded solicitation list(s) for statewide contracts provided by and through the Oklahoma Central Purchasing Office, and the price provided by any GSA Schedule Contract, each may be considered a qualified bid for purposes of this subparagraph. 
(b)  Bid opening procedure. All bids shall be sealed and submitted to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids on the particular contract on the envelope. Bids shall be opened only at the time and place mentioned in the bid section. All bids shall be read aloud in the presence of the purchasing agent and made a matter of record. Such bid opening shall be open to the public and to all bidders. 
(c)  Rejection of bids. The city council shall have the authority to reject all bids, or parts of all bids, when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(d)  Factors considered in letting bids. Contracts for which bids are required shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to price, the city council shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
(9)  The availability of the bidder to provide maintenance, performance of warranties, guaranties, the proximity to the city of the bidder with reference to providing maintenance, warranty or services; 
(10)  Whether the bidder can perform the maintenance, warranty or service to the equipment, locally or otherwise; and 
(11)  Whether the bidder owns or operates a business within the corporate city limits of the City of Miami, Oklahoma. 
(e)  Tie bids. If all bids are received for the same amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, contracts shall be awarded to the local bidder. In all other cases where tie bids are received and a local vendor is not involved, the city council shall award the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
(f)  Performance bonds authorized. The city council shall have the authority to require performance bonds before entering into any contract for such amount as they shall find necessary to protect the best interest of the city. 
(g)  Subdividing to avoid bids. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this article. 
(h)  When bidding not required. Competitive bidding shall not be required in the following cases: 
(1)  Supplies, materials or equipment limited amounts which are set in the city purchasing manual. 
(2)  Supplies, materials or equipment purchased from another unit of government at a price determined below that obtainable for private dealers, including war surplus. 
(3)  Contractual services purchased from a public utility at a price or rate determined by proper governmental authority. 
(4)  Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering, architectural, legal, accounting, medical, laboratory testing or other such professional or skilled services. 
(i)  Emergency purchases. 
(1)  Should the city council find that an immediate emergency exists, which findings shall be entered in the minutes of the city council, by reason of which an immediate outlay of city funds, in an amount in excess of the limit set in section 2-118 hereof, is necessary in order to avoid loss of life, substantial damage to property or damage to the public peace or safety, then such contracts may be made and entered into without public notice or competitive bids. 
(2)  Should the city suffer a shortage of petroleum products due to no availability under the regularly bid contract, and the ability of the city to maintain services is threatened, the city manager or his designee is authorized and directed to contact suppliers of petroleum products directly and negotiate for a supply of fuel sufficient to maintain municipal services until the provisions of subsection (1) can be complied with. 
(3)  Should, in the case of a natural disaster, acts of terrorism, civil disturbances, uprisings or other disruption of public services involving public safety or welfare, the city require the immediate purchase of supplies, materials, and services in order to properly care for, provide for and recover from said disaster, the city manager is empowered to direct that any supplies, materials, or contract services whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent delay in the recovery from said disruption be procured on the open market with or without negotiation. If said emergency purchase is necessary, the requirements of subsection (1) above are waived until there is called a meeting of the council. The city manager shall report the reason for, necessity of and the amount of the purchases at the next meeting of the council. The city council shall meet as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 1(c), 8-3-09; Ord. No. 1610, § 1, 6-18-13; Ord. No. 1616, § 1, 11-8-13) 
State Law reference- General purchasing authority, 11 O.S. § 22-101. The Oklahoma Central Purchasing Act, 74 O.S. § 85.1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-334-2-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RECORDS 

Sec. 2-401. - Open records compliance. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to ensure and facilitate full and lawful compliance with the Charter and the Oklahoma Open Records Act, 51 O.S. § 24A.1 et seq., as it presently exists and as it may be amended in the future. 
(b)  51 O.S. § 24A.2 provides that public bodies do not need to follow any procedures for providing access to public records except those specifically required by the Oklahoma Open Records Act except as may be required by other statutes. However, as allowed by 51 O.S. § 24A.5(5), the mayor and city council hereby establish reasonable procedures which protect the integrity and organization of its records and to prevent excessive disruptions of its essential functions. 
(c)  As provided by 51 O.S. § 24A.5(6), the mayor and city council designate the city manager and city clerk as the person(s) responsible to compile public records for inspection, copying or mechanical reproduction. The city manager and city clerk shall make an initial determination as to whether the responsive materials are complete and whether they include records specifically required by law to be kept confidential. If the city manager and city clerk determine that responsive materials do not include content which may be specifically required by law to be kept confidential, then they shall promptly provide reasonable access to those public records. If the city manager or city clerk make a preliminary determination that the responsive materials include content which may be specifically required by law to be kept confidential, then and in such event the mayor and city council designate the city attorney as the person responsible to make a final determination as to whether the responsive materials include records specifically required by law to be kept confidential, and the city attorney shall then provide prompt legal advice to the city manager, city clerk and city council pertaining thereto. The city manager, city clerk and city attorney may delegate authority to subordinate employees or agents to assist in the performance of these duties. 
(d)  The fees provided by 51 O.S. § 24A.3, as presently enacted by Laws 2006, HB 3139, c. 16, § 34, emerg. eff. March 29, 2006, shall apply. In the event that the aforementioned statute is amended, then the city shall comply with the new statutory law. As required by law, the written schedule of the fees shall be posted conspicuously in the ground floor lobby of the Civic Center and with the Ottawa County Clerk. As of the effective date of this article, the city shall charge the fees as described below. 
(1)  $0.25 per page for records having the dimensions of eight and one-half (81/2) by fourteen (14) inches or smaller, or a maximum of $1.00 per copied page for a certified copy. 
(2)  The direct cost of copying items having the dimensions greater than eight and one-half (81/2) by fourteen (14) inches. 
(3)  The direct cost of copying copies of electronic data. 
(4)  If the request is solely for commercial purpose, then a reasonable fee shall be charged to recover the direct cost of record search and copying. 
The city manager and city clerk shall be responsible to determine fees based upon the concept of "direct cost" of copying records other than for pages having the dimensions proscribed in subparagraphs one, above. The city manager and city clerk shall be responsible to determine the reasonable fee(s) to recover the "direct cost" of record search if the request is solely for commercial purpose. A person who has made a written Oklahoma Open Records Act request may appeal the determination of "direct cost" of copying and/or record search directly to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the date on the notification of such costs. 
(e)  Further, in the event that the city manager, city clerk or city attorney shall make a preliminary determination that compliance with an Oklahoma Open Records Act request would clearly cause excessive disruption of the essential functions of the public body, then they shall request that the city council convene a meeting to address the matter. In such case, the city council shall make all appropriate determinations, including the following matters: 
(1)  Will the Oklahoma Open Records Act request clearly cause excessive disruption of the essential functions of the public body? 
(2)  Is the release of the records in the public interest, including, but not limited to, release to the news media, scholars, authors and taxpayers seeking to determine whether those entrusted with the affairs of the government are honestly, faithfully, and competently performing their duties as public servants? 
(3)  What fees, if any, should apply to the Oklahoma Open Records Act request? 
(4)  Are the fees being used for the purpose of discouraging requests for information or as obstacles to disclosure of requested information? 
(4)  Should the city require an advance deposit against the anticipated fees, and, if so, in what amount and under what terms? 
(f)  The city manager and city clerk may promulgate reasonable policies, regulations and staff instructions to promote compliance with the Oklahoma Open Records Act and this article. 
(Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 5-7-12) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12; transporting nonintoxicating beverages, § 13-119; transporting intoxicating beverages, § 13-120; public drunkenness, § 13-162; reckless driving, driving while intoxicated, etc., § 23-126 et seq. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, 37 O.S. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Occupation tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and assessed a $50.00 annual occupational tax on every business or occupation relating to alcoholic beverages licensed by the A.B.L.E. Commission of the State of Oklahoma and whose principal place of business is in Miami, Oklahoma. This occupational tax is levied and assessed on a fiscal year basis starting on July 1st and ending on the following June 30th. This occupational tax shall not be subject to pro rata allocation or refund 
(b)  Any Oklahoma A.B.L.E. Commission state licensee originally entering upon any licensed occupation within the City of Miami, Oklahoma, shall pay the occupational tax therefor at the office of the city clerk on or before the date upon which he enters such occupation. Such licensee shall provide a copy of his current state license before payment of an occupational tax will be accepted. Thereafter, the licensee shall pay the tax annually on or before the first day of July. 
(c)  Upon payment of the occupation tax, the city clerk shall issue a receipt to the state licensee, which shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises wherein he carries on his occupation. 
(d)  Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this section without paying the occupation tax imposed therefor in advance of such operation is guilty of an offense. 
(e)  The city clerk shall make an annual report to the A.B.L.E. Commission covering the fiscal year, showing the number and class of licensees subject to the occupation tax and the amount of money collected from such tax. 
(Code 1964, §§ 3-1-3-3; Ord. No. 1281, § 1, 6-19-89; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1609, § 1, 6-18-13) 
State Law reference- Occupation tax authorized, 37 O.S. § 554.1. 
Sec. 3-2. - Consumption in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any individual to consume intoxicating beverages or low-point beer in public places in the city without a special event permit as set forth in this section. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Intoxicating beverages and low-point beer are as defined in sections 3-4, 3-31, and 37 O.S. §§ 163.1 and 163.2. 
(2)  Public places shall mean any area in open view to the public which is in the city, excluding private residential property, and the premises of any individual, partnership, trust, association, or corporation, who is otherwise licensed as a private club, or licensed to sell low-point beer for consumption on premises in the city. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the premises occupied by any person or group who has obtained authority from the city manager or his or her designee authorizing a special event at a specific location (such as Riverview Park) for a designated time. 
(1)  Any person or group may apply for permission for a special event prior to the event by obtaining approval from the city manager or his or her designee. The city manager shall follow the guidelines established by the city council in determining whether or not to allow intoxicating beverages and/or low-point beer at a special event. 
(2)  Permission for distribution and consumption of alcoholic beverages (including low point beer) may contain conditions or restrictions including but not limited to supervision, security or types of beverages to be consumed. 
(3)  A special event permit issued under this section does not authorize the sale of intoxicating beverages or low-point beer. Any special event conducted shall be subject to all laws of the State of Oklahoma, which generally prohibit and criminalize the sale of intoxicating beverages and low-point beer without full compliance with state law. 
(4)  There shall be an administrative fee of $25.00 for each application. A separate application must be submitted for each special event. 
(Ord. No. 1366, § 1, 8-18-97; Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 4-6-98; Ord. No. 1587, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1366, § 1, Aug. 18, 1997, re-instated § 3-2. Prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 1366, Ord. No. 1364, § 1, adopted June 25, 1997, had repealed § 3-2, which had pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1964, §§ 3-39, 3-40. 
Sec. 3-3. - Possession of nonintoxicating beverages, beer by minors prohibited; penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to be in possession of any nonintoxicating beverages, or beer, while such person is upon any public street, road or highway, or in any public building or place. 
(Code 1964, § 3-26) 
State Law reference- Public possession of nonintoxicating beverages by persons under twenty-one with intent to consume same, 37 O.S. § 246(A). 
Sec. 3-4. - Application for certificate; investigations. 
(a)  Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the zoning, fire, health and safety codes of the city required by O.S. tit. 37 shall apply at the office of the city engineer by: 
(1)  Filing a written application on the forms prescribed by that office, and 
(2)  Paying a verification and certification fee in the amount of $50.00 at the time of filing. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance the city engineer shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the premises proposed for licensed operations complies with provisions of the zoning ordinance and any health, fire, building and other safety codes applicable to it. 
(c)  The city engineer shall act on all such applications within twenty (20) days of receipt thereof. 
(d)  Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, a certificate of zoning shall be issued to the ABLE commission. 
(e)  Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all applicable fire, safety and health codes, a certificate of compliance shall be issued to the ABLE commission. 
(f)  The above certificates of compliance shall be signed by the mayor or by the city engineer. 
(g)  The definitions in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act [37 O.S. § 502 et seq.] apply to this section. 
(Code 1964, §§ 3-4-3-6) 
State Law reference- Required local certificates, 37 O.S. § 523. 
Sec. 3-5. - False identification. 
    Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age who shall misrepresent his age or present false documentation of age for the purpose of inducing any person to sell or serve him alcoholic beverages or nonintoxicating beverages, or issue him a bottle club membership card, or who enters or attempts to enter a package store or a separate or enclosed bar area as designated by the ABLE Commission, or its successor, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1279, § 1, 6-5-89) 
Secs. 3-6-3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES 

Sec. 3-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nonintoxicating beverages shall mean and include beverages containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight. 
    Operator shall mean and include any individual, partnership, trust, association or corporation who sells or offers for sale nonintoxicating beverages within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 3-21) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Nonintoxicating beverages defined, 37 O.S. § 163.2. 
Sec. 3-32. - License to sell. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every operator of a tavern, beer parlor or any other place of business of any kind or character where nonintoxicating beverages are sold or offered for sale to procure and obtain an annual license from the city clerk acting by and under the direction of the mayor and board of commissioners. It shall be unlawful for any operator to offer for sale or sell any nonintoxicating beverage in the city, without having first obtained such license. 
(b)  Such license shall be issued over the signature of the city clerk on the form prescribed and the fee for such license for each year or part thereof shall be $20.00 for businesses selling nonintoxicating beverages for consumption on or off the premises and $10.00 for businesses selling such beverages in original packages and not for consumption on the premises. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the operator to exhibit such license in a conspicuous location in his tavern, beer parlor or other place of business. 
(d)  When, in the judgment of the mayor and board of commissioners, this article has been violated, the mayor and board of commissioners may direct the city clerk to revoke and cancel the license of the offending operator. After such revocation, the operator shall not be permitted to sell nonintoxicating beverages or offer the same for sale in the city unless and until another license is thereafter issued to him. 
(Code 1964, § 3-22) 
State Law reference- Municipal license fee on nonintoxicating beverage dealers authorized, 37 O.S. § 163.10. 
Sec. 3-33. - Duty of operators and prohibited conduct on sales premises. 
    It shall be the duty of every operator to refrain from and prohibit the following: 
(1)  The sale of nonintoxicating beverages to persons who are drunk, harboring any drunk person in his place of business or permitting any drunk person to remain on the premises. 
(2)  The use of profane, loud or disturbing language. 
(3)  Conduct of any person which in the natural course of events is disorderly, disturbs the public peace or health or which openly outrages public decency. 
(4)  The sale to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age of nonintoxicating beverages to be consumed in his place of business or upon his premises, or allowing any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age to be on the premises except as authorized in 37 O.S. § 246(B). 
(5)  Every operator and any and all of his employees shall refrain from being or becoming intoxicated in or around his place of business or upon his premises. 
(6)  To refrain from and prohibit the violation of the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city relating to alcoholic beverages or nonintoxicating beverages. 
(Code 1964, § 3-24) 
Sec. 3-34. - Hours of sale for on-premises consumption regulated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to sell beverages containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) of alcohol by weight to sell such beverages for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the following day, daily. 
(Code 1964, § 3-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 213. 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1527, § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2007, repealed Ch. 4, Art. I, §§ 4-1-4-11, Art. II, Divs. 1-3, §§ 4-41-4-43, 4-61-4-65, 4-81-4-83, Art. III, §§ 4-106-4-108 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1964, §§ 4-1, 4-2(a)-(e), 4-3-4-11; Ord. No. 1287, §§ 1, 2, 3(4-12), adopted Jan. 2, 1990; Ord. No. 1288, § 2, adopted Jan. 2, 1990; Ord. No. 1346, § 1, May 20, 1996. 
Cross reference- Nuisances, ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Animals generally, 4 O.S. § 31 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate animals, 11 O.S. § 22-115. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned animal shall mean any domesticated animal of which there has been a voluntary relinquishment with no intention to retain possession including, but not limited to, vacating a premises and leaving the animal in or at the premises, failing to feed and/or water an animal, allowing an animal to stray or wander onto public or private property with the intention of surrendering ownership or custody over said animal. 
    Animal shall mean any living vertebrate creature, except human beings, and include (without limiting the generality) mammals, birds, reptiles, fish and amphibians, except the word "animal" shall have a more limited meaning when referring specifically to the control of rabies and rabies-suspected animals and when referring to slaughtering and butchering of animals as set out in those specific ordinances. 
    Animal control officer shall mean any person, firm or agency appointed or designated by the Director of Public Works for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Provided, however, the term shall also include, without limitation, any police officer(s) or code enforcement officer(s) that is/are on the scene of any event addressed in this Chapter involving an animal control officer, when there is not present an animal control officer from the Public Works Department. 
    Animal shelter shall mean any facility operated by the City of Miami or its authorized agent, or any animal welfare society or organization working in conjunction with the City of Miami for the purpose of impounding animals under the authority of this chapter or state law for care, confinement, return to the owner, adoption or euthanasia. 
    At large or running at large refers to the condition of any dog or cat or other domesticated animal when it is off the property of the owner or persons responsible for the animal's care and maintenance and not under restraint of a competent person. 
    Cat shall mean and include any domestic cat which is situated within the city limits, and excludes every other wild animal of the feline species, such as ocelots, margays, tigers, lions, panthers, jaguars, leopards and cougars, bobcat, lynx, cheetah or serval. 
    Cattery shall mean any premises whether operated for pleasure or profit where there is being maintained or harbored a total of six (6) or more cats, of vaccination age, or a combination of six (6) or more dogs and cats of vaccination age, except any commercial animal establishment. 
    Commercial animal establishment shall mean any stable or boarding facility, grooming or bathing facility, veterinarian clinic or hospital, training facility, or sentry or guard dog service. A commercial animal establishment shall be exempt from the limitations on number of cats, dogs or a combination of cats and dogs, all of vaccination age that may be maintained or harbored at a single location. 
    Confined on the premises shall mean that condition in which a dog or cat or other domestic animal is securely and physically confined and retained on and within the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer by means of chains, walls or fences, floors or roofs as may be needed. 
    Dog shall mean and include any domestic dog which is situated within the city limits, and excludes every other wild animal of the canine species, such as wolves, foxes or coyotes. 
    Domestic Animal shall mean any dog, cat, horse, donkey, mule, burro, cattle, sheep, goat, swine, rabbit or fowl that is kept as a pet, raised for food or for breeding. 
    Exposed to rabies shall mean a bite or physical contact with the saliva or other potentially infectious tissues from an animal confirmed or suspected of being infected with rabies. 
    Feral animal shall mean any animal which has escaped domestication and has become wild. 
    Harboring shall mean any person who allows any animal to habitually remain or lodge or to be fed within its home, store, yard, enclosure, or place of business or any other premises in which such person resides or controls; such acts shall be considered as harboring such animal. 
    Hobbyist shall mean any person who owns and maintains, harbors or possesses enough dogs to exceed the number of dogs allowed without a kennel license but does not have the dogs for resale or breeding purposes. Hobbyist's dogs are for hunting, or obedience, confirmation or agility showmanship. Hobbyist must provide current documents satisfactory to the Director of Public works or designee, showing the dogs' participation in these activities in order to obtain a Certification of Exemption. 
    Kennel shall mean any premises whether operated for pleasure or profit where there is being maintained or harbored a total of six (6) or more dogs of vaccination age or a combination of six (6) or more dogs and cats of vaccination age, except any commercial animal establishment. 
    Neutered shall mean the process by which any male dog or cat which has been operated upon or has been banded, to render the animal sterile and unable to impregnate a female animal. 
    Nuisance animal shall mean an animal that: 
(1)  By continuous, frequent, habitual loud, or untimely barking, crowing, howling, whining yelping or other noise or action it unreasonably disturbs any person or neighborhood situated within the city limits; or 
(2)  Habitually trespasses on property owned by another; or which scratches or digs into any flower bed, garden, tilled soil, shrubbery, and in so doing injures the same, or which habitually urinates or defecates in or on yards, gardens, trees or shrubs, or prowls around or over any premises not the property of the animal owner, to the annoyance or detriment of the owner or occupant of such premises; or 
(3)  Inflicts any other damage on the property of others, either public or private; or is repeatedly at large; or 
(4)  Overturns any garbage can or vessel for waste products, and/or scatters the contents of same; or 
(5)  Chases or kills any domesticated fowl owned by another; or 
(6)  Is a female dog or cat in season running at large; or 
(7)  Chases, frightens or otherwise intimidates any passersby or passing vehicles. 
    Owner shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity, owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or having the care or custody of an animal, and shall include all persons having joint or collective care or custody of the animal, except a kennel or cattery proprietor or a commercial animal establishment as herein defined. 
    Pen shall mean any enclosure designed to contain domestic animals outside of a house or other structure. With regard to a place to hold a vicious animal, a pen shall be a securely enclosed and locked structure with at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of space for each animal kept therein which is over six (6) months of age, and which is suitable to prevent the entry of children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping, including escaping by climbing out or digging under the structure. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
    Pet shop shall mean any retail business which sells different kinds of live animals, other than fish, and other pet related products. Pet shops can sell live fish, in addition to the other live animals. 
    Restraint shall mean a dog is under restraint within the meaning of this Chapter if (a) it is controlled by a leash not more than eight (8) feet in length or (b) at 'heel' beside a competent person and obedient to that person's command or (c) confined on the premises of its owner, keeper or harborer or (d) confined in a secure carrier. A cat is under restraint when it is (a) leashed or (b) confined in a secure carrier or (c) confined on the premises of its owner, keeper or harborer or (d) on the premises of its owner, keeper or harborer. 
    Service animal shall mean any animal that is recognized as a service animal under titles II and III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for a person with a disability. 
    Severe injury shall mean any physical injury resulting in broken or fractured bones, lacerations requiring surgery or sutures, protracted and obvious disfigurement, protracted loss or impairment of the function of any body part, organ or mental faculty, or substantial risk of death. 
    Spayed shall mean the process by which any female dog or cat has had it ovaries surgically removed 
    Stray shall mean any animal which does not appear, upon reasonable inquiry, to have an owner. 
    Vaccination shall mean an injection of U.S. Department of Agriculture approved rabies vaccine administered by a veterinarian, other licensed individual, or individual approved by the Oklahoma Veterinarian Board. 
    Veterinarian shall mean a person who holds an active license to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Oklahoma. 
    Vicious animal , shall mean any domestic dog or other domestic animal that: 
(1)  Has inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property, or has a propensity, tendency, history or disposition to attack, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals, other than domestic fowl; or 
(2)  Approaches humans or other domestic animals, other than domestic fowl, in a vicious, threatening or terrorizing manner; or 
(3)  Has attacked a human being or a domesticated animal, other than domestic fowl, one (1) or more time without provocation; or 
(4)  Can be urged by its owner, harborer or possessor to attack, or whose owner, harborer or possessor threatens to provoke, or does provoke such animal to attack a postal employee, meter reader, law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer or animal control officer or other governmental employee that makes site visits while such person is engaged in the performance of official duties; or 
(5)  Has behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should reasonably know that the animal has tendencies to attack or bite human beings or other domesticated animals, other than domesticated fowl; or 
(6)  Threatens to attack, or terrorizes a person who is performing in a legal means within his rights as a person; or 
(7)  Any animal owned or harbored for the purpose of fighting, such as, but not limited to, a dog or fowl trained for fighting other animals for entertainment or gaming purposes. 
(8)  Subsections (1), (2) and (3) above are necessary controls on the unrestrained activities of dangerous animals which threaten the safety and tranquility of streets, parks, sidewalks, yards and all areas of the city; and the lack of knowledge of such a propensity, tendency, history or disposition is not a defense in violation thereof. 
(9)  This section shall not apply to police dogs on official duty. The term "police dog" shall mean any dog used by a law enforcement agency of the federal government or of this state or a political subdivision of this state which is specially trained for law enforcement work and is subject to the control of the dog handler. The term "dog handler" shall mean any police or peace officer who has successfully completed training in the handling of police dogs as established by policy or standards of the law enforcement agency employing such officer. 
(10)  This section shall not apply to an animal and it shall not be deemed a "vicious animal" as used herein that has only attacked or bit a person or another animal who or which was engaged in an act of burglary, trespass, theft or some other tort upon property the animal has the right to and is expected to protect or which attacked or bit a person or another animal engaged in physically attacking, striking, robbing or otherwise committing an act of violence against the owner of the animal, it's possessor or keeper or a member of the immediate family or household, the animal itself, or some other animal it has the right to and is expected to protect. 
    Wild or exotic animal shall mean an animal which is usually not a domestic animal and which can normally be found in the wild state, with or without being a dangerous animal or having mean or vicious propensities, including, but not limited to, ocelots, margays, tigers, lions, panthers, jaguars, leopards and cougars, bobcat, lynxes, cheetahs, servals, bears, wolves, foxes, coyotes, alligators, crocodiles, apes, feral hogs, elephants, rhinoceroses, and all forms of poisonous snakes, lynxes, monkeys and other like animals, and also including raccoons that are not tame or skunks that are not tame and de-scented. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
State Law reference- Definitions, 4 O.S. §§ 44, 85.1, 499.1. 
Sec. 4-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 2, 2018, repealed § 4-2, which pertained to obedience to officers and derived from Ord. No. 1527, § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2007. 
Sec. 4-3. - Impounding, redemption and disposition of animals running at large. 
(a)  In addition to any penalty for allowing an animal running at large (Sec. 4-4), any cat or dog or other domestic animal running at large in violation of this chapter may be impounded at the city animal shelter and subject to redeeming by its owner, upon satisfactory proof of ownership, and furnishing of a current vaccination certificate, if applicable, and by making provision for the payment of all appropriate fines and penalties (relating to any violation of municipal ordinances regarding Animal Running at Large), etc., and by payment of an impoundment fee of $35.00 and $10.00 per day, or any part of a day, for board and any medical expenses incurred for that animal by the animal shelter during its confinement. 
(b)  In addition to the provisions of the preceding subsection, the owner of any impounded domesticated animal which has not been vaccinated as required by this chapter, upon satisfactory proof of ownership, may redeem his/her animal by making a deposit in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) with the animal shelter and the animal shall be released back to the owner who shall be allowed three (3) business days to get such animal vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian. If such owner fails to procure a vaccination certificate and present same to the city animal shelter within such three (3) business days, the deposit shall be forfeited and the animal shall be impounded again. Upon the proper presentation of a certificate of vaccination issued pursuant to this section or proof that the animal has died within that timeframe, the deposit shall be refunded. 
(c)  If any dog or cat or other domesticated animal is not redeemed by its owner within three (3) working days after confinement at the city animal shelter, the animal may be adopted by any person with a valid address and phone where they may be reached. Prior to adoption, if practical, the animal shall be spayed or neutered, vaccinated for rabies, and any other vaccination as may be required or reasonable. The total cost of all anticipated medical expenses will be paid prior to the sterilization process being initiated. 
    Puppies and kittens, less than four (4) months old, may be adopted from the animal shelter with the adopting party signing an agreement to have the dog or cat spayed or neutered by six (6) months of age. A $50.00 deposit will be placed with the animal shelter. When the adopting party presents to the animal shelter a veterinarian's certificate showing the spay or neutering process was accomplished pursuant to this section, the adopting party will be refunded their $50.00 deposit. Failure to have the animal spayed or neutered by six (6) months of age will result in forfeiture of the $50.00 deposit and the animal shall revert back to the ownership of the animal shelter and shall be impounded again. 
(d)  All funds which have been forfeited by redeeming or adopting parties from the lack of timely proof of vaccinations or timely proof of the animal being spayed or neutered shall be accounted for separately , and the animal shelter shall allocate funds from said account to programs which directly promote, subsidize or otherwise reduce the cost of spaying or neutering animals of the animal shelter. The animal shelter shall maintain accurate records of the account which funds spay/neuter programs. 
(e)  If any animal is not adopted within a reasonable time (to be determined by the animal control officer, based on the animal's condition and adoptability) it may be humanely euthanized or delivered to any nonprofit animal organization or other shelter; provided that the animals at that nonprofit animal organization or other shelter shall not be used for experimental purposes and shall be the sole responsibility of such organization or shelter. 
(f)  Livestock including bovines, equines and hogs running at large in violation of this chapter may be confined at the city animal shelter or other location and may be redeemed upon satisfactory proof of ownership and upon payment of an impoundment fee of $50.00, plus $20.00 per day, or any part of a day, for board, or the equivalent of the actual cost of boarding, whichever is higher, if the animal was actually boarded at some other facility, together with any medical expenses incurred by the animal shelter during its confinement. Any unredeemed animal shall be subject to humane disposition by sale, euthanization or other reasonable disposition not earlier than seventy-two (72) hours following apprehension. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
State Law reference- Dog and Cat Sterilization Act, 4 O.S. § 499 et seq. 
Sec. 4-4. - Running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently allow any dog, cat or other domesticated animal owned, harbored or possessed by such person to run or be at large within the city limits, regardless of where the owner, harborer or possessor may reside or otherwise keep such animal. Apprehension of such animal shall not be a prerequisite to imposition of fine, punishment or charge for such offense. It shall be an affirmative defense to this subsection if the owner, harborer or possessor has taken reasonable, effective steps to keep the animal confined on the premises and the animal came to be at large by reason of the act of someone other than the owner, harborer or possessor or a member of the owner's, harborer's or possessor's immediate family or household, or their employee or visitor, or the animal came to be at large by an act of God, however the burden of proving same shall be on the owner, harborer or possessor. 
(b)  Any dog or cat or other domesticated animal at large shall upon apprehension be taken by the animal control officer to the city animal shelter and confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than three (3) working days (excluding holidays, Saturday and Sunday), unless earlier redeemed, and may thereafter be disposed of in a humane manner if not claimed by its owner or requested for adoption. 
(c)  Immediately upon impoundment of such animals the animal control officer shall make every reasonable and practicable effort to notify the owners of dogs or cats having identification, or wearing a registration or vaccination tag. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 4-5. - Nuisances prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor an animal at any location situated within the city limits which is determined to be a nuisance and to allow it to run at large. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
DIVISION 2. - CARE AND CONTROL 
Subdivision I. - Generally 

Sec. 4-6. - Pet shop, kennel and cattery regulations. 
    All kennels, pet shops and catteries within the city limits shall be licensed yearly. The annual license fee is $100.00 payable to the city, with expiration being June 30 of each year. Upon proof of proper zoning and payment to the city clerk, a license will be furnished and must be conspicuously posted within the facility at all times. Failure to obtain properly displaying the license will result in fine of not less than $100.00 and no more than $500.00 together with all applicable court cost. All licensed kennels, pet shops and catteries are subject to inspection by the animal control officer at any reasonable time. 
    All kennel, pet shop and cattery licensees must: 
(1)  Maintain and retain records for a two (2) year period on all dogs and cats maintained in such facility. Such records shall show the breed, color, markings, sex, and age; the date and source of each animal; the period for which each animal is maintained; the date and disposition of each animal, including name and address of new owner; all vaccinations, disease prevention and/or other veterinarian treatment while in the possession of the kennel, pet shop or cattery and by whom. 
(2)  Provide general environmental conditions to assure ample physical space for each animal, control of parasites, clean food and water, weather protection and clean and sanitary facilities. 
(3)  If cages and/or pens are used for confinement of animals they must be clean and sanitary at all times and must contain easily cleanable materials. They must be large enough for each animal to stand and turn around easily and each animal shall be provided with a space for daily exercise. The facilities must be in a clean and sanitary condition, odor free and not offensive or dangerous to neighbors or to the public health. 
(4)  (a)  A Certification of Exemption from the annual kennel, pet shop and cattery license and fee may be given to nonprofit animal rescue groups or individuals fostering dogs and/or cats taken from the city animal shelter or other non-profit animal rescue groups. The certification shall be issued by the Director of Public Works or designee, which may include one or more such non-profit animal rescue groups. These animals may not be fostered for more than ninety (90) days. Provided, the Director of Public Works may extend, in writing, the fostering time as he or she may deem appropriate, which writing shall include the reason for such extension. Provided, however, there shall be no more than twelve (12) animals of vaccination age (See Sec. 4-7.1(a)) at any single home or business situated within the city limits, subject to this exception. Such certification does not exempt the foster individual or group from all regulations against nuisances nor the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) above. 
(b)  A Certification of Exemption from the annual kennel license and fee may be given to a hobbyist. Provided, however, there shall be no more than twelve (12) animals of vaccination age (See Sec. 4-7.1(a)) at any single home or business situated within the city limits, subject to this exception. Such certification does not exempt the hobbyist from all regulations against nuisances nor the provisions of Subsections (2) and (3) above. 
(5)  Any violation of the provisions of this Section, shall, in the discretion of the Director of Public Works, result in the revocation of the kennel, pet shop and cattery license or any Certification of Exemption from the annual kennel, pet shop and cattery license. If such license is revoked, there shall be no refund or rebate of any portion of the license fee. In addition, depending upon the nature of the violation, the person or persons responsible for same may be held criminally liable for the violation, if there is an applicable criminal ordinance. Finally, when appropriate, any and/or all of the animals may be impounded when, in the discretion of the Director of Public Works, or designee, such action is necessary to protect the health, safety or wellbeing of such animal(s). 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Subdivision II. - Rabies Control 

Sec. 4-7. - Rabies control. 
(a)  Any warm-blooded animal capable of transmitting the rabies virus maintained or harbored at any time within the city limits, in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the Oklahoma State Department of Health shall be vaccinated against rabies with an approved vaccine administered by a veterinarian who shall maintain a record of such animal vaccination for a period of at least three (3) years and shall issue the owner a vaccination certificate and tag which shall be retained by said owner until it expires and is renewed. The failure to procure such certificate or tag when so requested by the animal control officer shall be prima facie evidence that such animal has not been so vaccinated. 
(b)  The identity and address of the owner of any animal that bites a person should be promptly furnished to the animal control officer and county health department. The animal control officer shall securely quarantine such animal for a period of ten (10) days and shall not release such quarantined animal until reasonable determination has been made that the animal is not infected with rabies. At the discretion of the animal control officer such quarantine may be at a veterinary hospital or clinic of the owner's choice and at the owner's expense. Such animals may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies and such owner of the animal shall then pay any related charges for confinement. In case of animals whose ownership is unknown, such quarantine shall be at the city animal shelter. 
(c)  When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid or is suspected of having rabies by a licensed veterinarian and dies while under such observation the animal control officer, veterinarian or other designated emissary shall immediately send the necessary part of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination and shall notify the proper public health officer of any reports of human contact. All expenses shall be paid by the owner or harborer. 
(d)  When a report gives a positive diagnosis of rabies and when the county health director feels that a rabies crisis may be imminent the health department may recommend to the city council a city-wide quarantine, and upon the invoking of such quarantine by the city council no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets, except for short periods of exercise under leash and control of a competent adult. During such quarantine no animal may be taken or removed from the city without written permission of the animal control officer. 
(e)  During such period of rabies quarantine, as herein provided, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be forthwith humanely euthanized, or at the owner's expense and option, shall be treated for rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian. The period of quarantine may be extended from time to time. 
(f)  No person shall remove from the city any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal which has bitten a human, except as herein provided. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall be surrendered to the animal control officer upon demand, and the animal control officer shall direct disposition of such animal. No person shall refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction when such demand is lawfully made by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
State Law reference- Rabies quarantine, 63 O.S. § 1-508. 
Sec. 4-7.1. - Vaccination required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog, cat, ferret or any other domesticated animal, male or female, over four (4) months of age which is situated within the city limits unless such dog, cat or other domesticated animal has been immunized by vaccination against rabies in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the Oklahoma State Department of Health. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to not abide by the city vaccination requirements after fifteen (15) days of a new residency within the city limits or fifteen (15) days after acquisition of a dog, cat, ferret or any other domesticated animal to which the ordinance applies. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Editor's note- Former § 4-81. 
Subdivision III. - Buildings for Animals 

Sec. 4-8. - Buildings for animals. 
(a)  Every stable, barn, kennel, cattery, pet shop, commercial animal establishment, domestic poultry coop or rabbit warren, pigeon coop or other building or enclosure for any horse or cow which is situated within the city limits shall be constructed of such material and such manner that it can be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, odor free and not offensive or dangerous to neighbors or to the public health. 
(b)  Except as provided in sub-paragraph (c), the animal fecal waste from such animals shall be frequently removed from such enclosures and the surrounding property and stored in waterproof and fly-tight receptacles until disposed of in city solid waste facility or buried at least twenty-four (24) inches deep. No droppings shall be allowed to accumulate on such premises except in such receptacles. 
(c)  As an alternative to the forgoing provisions of sub-paragraph (b), the owner of an agricultural operation, barn or a stable may apply to permit a composting facility for such animal fecal waste. The application shall include a plan which addresses the location, material used, and other specific information about the location, construction, operation and management of the composting facility. The plan must provide for odor control, prevention of leaching into the groundwater and runoff into ponds, streams, drainage ditches and other water systems. Any such compost system must be located no nearer than two hundred (200) feet from the nearest property line; no nearer than three hundred (300) feet of a public or private drinking water well; and may not be located within the 100-year floodplain, as determined by FEMA. If the Director of Public Works or designee approves the plan, the owner shall be issued a one-time Compost Permit for $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 4-9. - Location. 
    No stable, dog pen, domestic poultry coop or rabbit warren, pigeon coop, or other enclosure where animals are kept shall be maintained closer than thirty (30) feet to any tenement or apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, retail food store, building used for educational, religious or hospital purposes or residence other than that occupied by owner or occupant of premises on which such animal is kept. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 4-10. - Inspection. 
    The animal control officer, upon complaint of any person or upon his own initiative, may inspect the structure or premises in which any animal is situated within the city limits, including but not limited to, kennels, pet shops and catteries, whether duly licensed or not, any commercial animal establishment, or any business or private house. He may issue any such reasonable order that he feels is necessary to the owner of such animal to cause such animal to be kept as provided in this chapter or in such a manner as so not to cause a nuisance. He may make a complaint before the municipal court against any person for violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Subdivision IV. - Vicious Animals[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous dogs, 4 O.S. § 499. 

Sec. 4-11. - Harboring vicious animals. 
    Except as specifically provided otherwise in this ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor or to possess or have under one's control a vicious animal within the city limits. All vicious animals which are kept in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter are subject to being impounded by the animal control officer, any of his deputies or any city policeman, whether the animal is running at large or otherwise legally confined. If such an animal cannot safely be captured for impoundment without risk to the officer involved, or any other individual, as may be determined by the officer involved, such officer may kill the vicious animal wherever it may be located. Regardless of whether the animal is impounded or not, any animal may be declared to be a vicious animal. 
(a)  Procedure. The following procedure shall be followed for declaring an animal as vicious: 
(1)  The animal control officer shall be authorized initially to declare an animal as vicious. The animal control officer may find and declare an animal to be vicious if the officer has probable cause to believe that the animal falls within the definition set forth in Sec. 4-1 of this Code of Ordinances. The finding must be based upon: 
a.  The sworn written complaint of a citizen who is willing to testify that the animal has acted in a manner which causes it to fall within the definition of Sec. 4-1 of this Code of Ordinances; or 
b.  A law enforcement report establishing probable cause filed with the animal control officer or any law enforcement officer; or 
c.  Actions of the animal witnessed by the animal control officer or by any law enforcement officer. 
(2)  The declaring of an animal as vicious shall be in writing and shall be served on the owner, harborer or possessor by one (1) of the following methods: 
a.  Certified mail to the owner, harborer or possessor's last known address; or 
b.  By personal service. 
(b)  Appeal of determination. Any person who has received declaration that his or her animal has been deemed a vicious animal may appeal such decision to the Director of Public Works or designee. The appeal must be in writing and made within five (5) business days of the day the notice was provided in accordance with this section. 
(1)  The Director or designee shall schedule and hold a hearing, within five (5) business days after receiving the written appeal, to review the initial declaration. The Director's or designee's decision shall be considered the final, appealable decision of the city as to whether the animal is a vicious animal. 
(2)  If the initial declaration is not appealed or if the right to appeal is waived, the initial declaration shall be considered the final, appealable decision of the city as to whether the animal is a vicious animal. 
(3)  An appeal from the decision of the Director or designee may only be made to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Actions during appeal. During the entire appeal process, it shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or possessor appealing the declaration that the animal is vicious, if the animal remains in his or her possession, to deliberately or negligently allow or permit the animal to: 
(1)  Be unconfined on the premises of the owner, harborer or possessor; or 
(2)  Go outside the premises of the owner, harborer or possessor unless such animal shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain leash not exceeding four (4) feet in length, and the animal shall be under the direct control and supervision of an individual capable of restraining and controlling the vicious animal. 
(d)  Confinement during appeal. If the animal remains in the control of the owner, harborer or possessor, the animal control officer or Director of Public Works shall require temporary confinement of the animal by the owner, harborer or possessor as set out in the preceding sub-paragraph (c) hereof pending the appeal determination required in this section. If no criminal complaint is filed in an appropriate court, and the owner, harborer or possessor does not comply immediately with the temporary confinement requirements as set out in the preceding sub-paragraph (c), the animal shall be immediately impounded as provided in Sec. 4-3 of this Code of Ordinances and shall not be subject to redemption until the appeal of declaration as vicious is fully resolved. If a complaint has been filed in the municipal court against the owner, harborer or possessor of an impounded animal for violation of this Article, the court shall hold a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of impoundment, which may, but need not be held in conjunction with any associated criminal proceeding. Upon a finding that the animal is not a vicious animal as defined by this Article the court shall order the animal be released to the owner. Upon finding that the animal is vicious, the court may order it to be euthanized in a humane manner or the court may order that the animal may be redeemed to the owner and under which circumstance the court may also direct the owner to pay a fine, court costs and all associated impoundment fees. Surrender of an animal by the owner, harborer or possessor thereof to an animal control officer shall not render the owner exempt from the fines, court costs and impoundment fees of this article. 
(e)  Compliance. Upon a final determination that an animal is vicious, if the owner or any subsequent owner, harborer or possessor elects to continue to allow the vicious animal to remain within the city limits, the animal control officer shall issue an order of compliance requiring the owner to immediately confine, muzzle or restrain the animal sufficiently to protect all persons and domestic animals, and otherwise to comply completely with the terms of this article. The owner, harborer or possessor shall be allowed a reasonable time, but under no circumstances more than forty-five (45) business days from the date of issuance of the order of compliance to come into full compliance with this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor or possess or cause to be in the city any animal which has been declared to be a vicious animal, unless it is maintained at all times in full compliance with the order of compliance issued under this article. 
(f)  Order of compliance. The order of compliance shall, at a minimum, require that: 
(1)  When outside of the walls of the owner, harborer or possessor's home, the vicious animal shall be confined in a pen except when being transferred between the home and the pen or otherwise provided in this section. When moving between the owner, harborer or possessor's home and pen, the animal shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain leash not exceeding four (4) feet in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of an individual capable of restraining and controlling the vicious animal. 
(2)  The vicious animal shall not be outside of a dwelling or pen unless it is necessary for the owner, harborer or possessor thereof to obtain veterinary care for the vicious animal or to sell or give away the vicious animal or to comply with lawful commands or directions of the animal control officer with respect to the vicious animal. In such event, the vicious animal shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain leash not exceeding four (4) feet in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of an individual capable of restraining and controlling the vicious animal. 
(3)  The owner, harborer or possessor 's home and the animal's pen shall be posted at every entrance to the same with firmly attached and prominent and conspicuous signs warning all persons in lettering not less than two (2) inches in height, that the dog is vicious. 
(4)  The owner, harborer or possessor of a vicious animal shall acquire and maintain, and provide proof upon any request by an animal control officer or law enforcement officer, liability insurance in the amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) covering any harm to any person or property done by the vicious animal under any circumstance. 
(5)  The owner, harborer or possessor of a vicious animal shall provide proof upon request by an animal control officer or law enforcement officer that the animal has been properly vaccinated and spayed or neutered. 
(6)  The owner, harborer or possessor shall present the animal for photographing by the animal control officer sufficient to identify the animal for city records and have a microchip identification implanted by a licensed veterinarian. 
(7)  By continuing to be an owner, harborer or possessor of an animal within the city limits, which has been determined to be vicious, the owner, harborer or possessor shall be deemed to have given implied consent to reasonable inspections by the animal control officer of the animal, of the premises where it is kept, and of documents evidencing any required liability insurance or veterinary care or any other requirement of the order of compliance. 
(8)  By continuing to be an owner, harborer or possessor of an animal within the city limits, which has been determined to be vicious, the owner shall pay an annual special "vicious animal" license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). No such license shall be issued except upon proof of compliance with every provision of the order of compliance as required by this section and proof that there are no outstanding court fines, costs and/or other fees that the owner, harborer or possessor still owes in any case which resulted from a failure to fully comply with the provisions of this Article. Such a license shall not be renewed the next or any subsequent year if there are any outstanding court fines, costs and/or other fees that the owner, harborer or possessor still owes in any case which resulted from a failure to fully comply with the order of compliance. 
(g)  Violation. It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or possessor to violate any provision of the order of compliance and each day that there is a violation of the order shall be a separate violation of the law. Further, in addition to the criminal violation(s), if the owner, harborer or possessor fails to meet fully the Director of Public Works' requirements for temporary confinement and restraint, including any schedule of construction of pen or restraints, or fails to maintain full compliance with the order of compliance, the animal control officer shall seize and impound the vicious animal, and shall after five (5) business days have it humanely euthanized; provided, however, if the owner, harborer or possessor has demonstrated full compliance with the requirements for temporary confinement and/or the order of compliance within that five (5) business days, then the vicious animal may be redeemed by the owner, harborer or possessor after payment of all impoundment costs and fees and payment in full of all ordered court fines, costs and other fees resulting from such violation. 
(h)  Transfer of ownership. An owner, harborer or possessor of a vicious animal, who desires to transfer ownership and/or possession of the animal shall, at least three (3) days prior to the transfer, complete and return to the Director of Public Works a notarized transfer form provided by the Director. If the subsequent owner, harborer or possessor is going to harbor or possess the vicious animal within the city limits, all the provisions of the order of compliance and all of this section shall continue to fully apply to the animal and the subsequent owner, harborer or possessor. 
(i)  Acquisition of a vicious animal. Any person who becomes the owner, harborer or possessor of any animal that has been declared to be a vicious animal, as defined in this Article, in any other jurisdiction, shall within three (3) days of such acquisition notify the Director of Public Works in writing of such acquisition. This provision shall apply, regardless of the terminology or name used to describe the animal in that other jurisdiction. Regardless of what type of restrictions placed on such ownership and/possession by the other jurisdiction, or even in the absence of any such restrictions, the owner, harborer or possessor of such an animal within the city limits shall be required to, at a minimum, adhere to each and every requirement set out by the other jurisdiction, or by the requirements of this section, whichever is more restrictive and which better protects the safety and general welfare of the public. 
(j)  Termination of a declaration as vicious. A declaration that an animal is vicious shall stand until the Director of Public Works determines otherwise by written finding, which shall be delivered to the owner, harborer or possessor. 
(k)  Notice. Any notice required under this article shall be deemed delivered: 
(1)  Five (5) business days after being mailed, first class postage prepaid, to the residential or business address of the owner, harborer or possessor; 
(2)  Twenty-four (24) hours after being posted at the location where the animal is held, unless it is impounded by the city; or 
(3)  Upon hand delivery to the owner, harborer or possessor. 
(l)  Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that the animal: 
(1)  Is owned by a law enforcement agency and the incident at issue arose while it was being used for law enforcement purposes; or 
(2)  Directed its behavior at or attacked or bit a person or another animal who or which was engaged in an act of burglary, trespass, theft or some other tort upon property the animal has the right to and is expected to protect or which attacked or bit a person or another animal engaged in physically attacking, striking, robbing or otherwise committing an act of violence against the owner of the animal, it's possessor or keeper or a member of the immediate family or household, the animal itself, or some other animal it has the right to and is expected to protect; or 
(3)  At the time of its behavior was in custody of a veterinarian or an animal shelter. 
(m)  Punishment. Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this section shall upon conviction be punished as provided in Sec. 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances. The court may also require restitution including, but not limited to, payment of any and all medical bills of any victim, veterinary bills and the expenses for the impounding of the animal. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Secs. 4-12-4-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CRUELTY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, 21 O.S. § 1681 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-41. - Killing of wild birds. 
(a)  No person shall trap, hunt, shoot, kill destroy, capture or molest any wild bird, or rob or molest any such bird's nest within the city limits. 
(b)  Persons excepted from the above subsection are: 
(1)  Those persons hunting and killing game birds as defined and regulated by the laws, rules and regulations of the U.S. Government, the State of Oklahoma, the City of Miami, or their agencies or branches. 
(2)  City employees or individuals authorized by the police chief or animal control officer who eliminate starlings, pigeons or other wild birds within the city limits who increase in such great numbers or are found congregating to such an extent within the city so as may constitute or potentially constitute a health hazard or nuisance to city residents. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 4-42. - Administration of poison. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to unjustifiably administer any poison or noxious drug or substance to any animal, or unjustifiably expose any such drug or substance with intent that the same shall be taken by an animal, whether such animal be the property of himself or another. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Secs. 4-43-4-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned animals, 21 O.S. § 1686. 

Sec. 4-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 2, 2018, repealed § 4-61, which pertained to definition and derived from Ord. No. 1527, § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2007. The user's attention is directed to § 4-1. 
Sec. 4-62. - Abandoning domestic animals. 
    Any person who deposits any live dog, cat, or other domestic animal along any private or public roadway, or in any other private or public place within the city limits with the intention of abandoning the domestic animal upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1691. 
Sec. 4-63. - Unfit animals. 
    Any person owning, harboring or possessing or otherwise having charge or custody of a maimed, diseased, disabled, or infirm animal who abandons such animal or who allows such animal or a deceased animal that he or she owns, harbors or possesses or otherwise has charge or custody of to lie in a public street, road, or public place for one (1) hour or more after such person receives notice by a duly constituted authority that the animal is disabled or dead, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided is Sec. 1-5 of this Code of Ordinances. Any person owning, harboring or possessing or otherwise having charge or custody of a deceased animal in a private place situated within the city limits that allows the carcass to rot, decompose or putrefy to the point of becoming offensive or dangerous to neighbors or to the public health, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided is Sec. 1-5 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1686(A). 
Sec. 4-64. - Destruction of animal. 
    Any peace officer, animal control officer, or agent or officer of any organization for the prevention of cruelty to animals or of any humane society duly incorporated for the purpose of the prevention of cruelty to animals may humanely euthanize or cause to be destroyed any animal found abandoned and/or for which no proper care has been given. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1686(B). 
Sec. 4-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 2, 2018, repealed § 4-65, which pertained to confiscation of animals, vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 1527, § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2007. 
Secs. 4-66-4-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 4-81. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-82. - Confinement during season. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or possessor to fail at all times to confine any female dog or cat which is in season in a building or a secure enclosure, or a commercial animal establishment that is designed to keep the animal separate from all males of the species, except when on a leash and under the control of a competent person. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 4-83. - Limitation on number. 
    Except as provided in Sec. 4-6 of this Article, it shall be unlawful and an offense punishable as herein provided for any owner or harborer of any dog or cat, male or female, to keep or own more than three (3) cats or three (3) dogs or a total of more than five (5) of both of vaccination age (see Sec. 4-7.1(a)) at any one (1) location or address, whether business or residential, situated within the city limits, unless each such owner or harborer shall first possess a kennel or cattery license. Provided however, this provision shall not apply if the tract of land upon which such animals are being kept is ten (10) acres or larger in size and any pen in which such dogs and/or cats are kept is not within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries of such tract of land. Provided, further, this section shall not apply to a commercial animal establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 4-84. - Commercial animal establishment. 
a.  Any commercial animal establishment situated within the city limits are subject to inspection by the animal control officer at any reasonable time. All commercial animal establishments shall provide general environmental conditions to assure ample physical space for each animal, control of parasites, clean food and water, weather protection and clean and sanitary facilities. Being a commercial animal establishment does not exempt the owner or operator from all regulations against nuisances. 
b.  If cages and/or pens are used for confinement of animals they must be clean and sanitary at all times and must contain easily cleanable materials. They must be large enough for each animal to stand and turn around easily and each animal shall be provided daily exercise if kept at the establishment over twenty-four (24) hours, provided the animal is healthy enough for such exercise. The facilities must be in a clean and sanitary condition, odor free and not offensive or dangerous to neighbors or to the public health. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Secs. 4-85-4-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREATMENT AND CARE OF ANIMALS 

Sec. 4-100. - Treatment and care of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or possessor of any animal to fail at all times to provide basic care, food, water, shelter and medical attention to any animal, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Sufficient, wholesome food that is nutritious for the species; 
(2)  Fresh, potable drinking water at all times; 
(3)  Medical attention to relive such animals from suffering; 
(4)  Shelter to allow the animal to remain dry and protected from the elements. Such shelter shall be fully enclosed on at least three (3) sides, and roofed. The shelter shall be small enough to retain the animal's body heat and large enough to allow animal to stand and turn comfortably. It should contain straw or other clean appropriate bedding materials. The structure shall be structurally sound and in good repair; 
(5)  Any animal kept on a chain or rope shall be placed so that it cannot become entangled with the restraints of other animals or with any other objects. The chain or rope shall be of sufficient length and a minimum of ten (10) feet to allow the animal complete access to food, water and shelter at all times. The chain or rope shall be attached in a manner, to an acceptable and properly fitted collar such as a harness or buckle-type collar, so as not to cause injury or discomfort to the animal. No chain, coke chain, rope wire or bandanna shall be used as a collar. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or possessor of any dog, cat or other domesticated animals to confined said animal in a motor vehicle under conditions as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal, including, but not limited to, dangerous temperatures or a lack of food or water. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or possessor of any dog or other domesticated animal to keep or maintain the animal on a tie-out consisting of a rope, chain or other type of tether for a period of more than twelve (12) continuous hours without releasing the animal from the tether for a period of exercise and or play with the owner or family members before retethering. 
(d)  The animal control officer, or in the absence thereof, any police officer finding an animal maltreated or abused may remove the animal or give the owner or person causing the maltreatment not more than seventy-two (72) hours to remedy the violation, all in the discretion of the officer. Provided, however, if, in the opinion of the animal control officer or police officer, the life or welfare of the animal is in immediate danger, he shall take immediate possession of said animal and place the animal in the animal shelter or in the care of a veterinarian at the owner's expense. The animal shall be maintained there until such time as the problem can be rectified and all expenses for the animal's care are paid by the owner, harborer or possessor in full and arrangements are made for the payment of all fines and court cost that may be associated with any criminal charges that may be filed out of the incident. The decision as to whether the animal shall be released back to the person causing the maltreatment will be made by the presiding judge. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 4-101. - Right to kill animal in defense of self or another. 
    Any police officer, animal control officer, or any other person may kill any dog or other animal in self-defense or in defense of another when the dog or animal, without undue provocation, bites him or any other person or attacks or attempts to bite or attack him or any other person or any domesticated animal, other than domestic fowl, in such manner that an ordinarily prudent person would be led to believe that the person or animal toward whom the behavior of the dog or other animal are directed is about to be bitten or otherwise severely physically harmed. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 4-102. - Right to kill rabid animals. 
    Any person may kill any animal that the appearance or conduct of which is such as would cause an ordinarily prudent person to believe it to be afflicted with rabies or distemper. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 4-103. - Responsibility to remove excrement. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or possessor of any animal to not remove the animal's excrement, immediately upon its deposit, from any public or private place within the city, other than the property owned or occupied by the person owning or having control of the animal. This section shall not apply to agriculture animals, service animals or to police dogs. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 4-104. - Permanent location required to give or sell an animal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, except the Miami Animal Shelter, or its authorized agent, or any animal welfare society or organization working in conjunction with the Miami Animal Shelter, to sell, trade, offer as gift or give away any animal at any location situated within the city limits, except from a permanent physical location owned or rented by such person or entity. Any such activity from such a permanent location shall be subject to applicable zoning and licensing provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 4-105. - Slaughter and butchering of animals. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  For purposes of this section, Animal does not include fish. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, Slaughter means to kill any live animal for consumption. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, Butcher means to prepare animal carcasses for consumption; this definition shall not include the routine handling of meat from previously butchered animals, previously field-dressed animals or packaged meat. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following acts, or any combination thereof: 
(1)  To slaughter any live animal at any location situated within the city limits except in areas zoned for such purposes; 
(2)  To butcher any animal in a public place or where the conduct could reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public, except in areas zoned for such purposes. This prohibition shall not apply to butcher shops or grocery stores or similar commercial establishments. 
(c)  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor and is punishable as set forth in Sec. 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1538, §§ 1, 2, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Editor's note- Former § 4-12. 
Secs. 4-106-4-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - KEEPING OF WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 2, 2018, amended the title of Art. V to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article was entitled "Keeping of Wild, Exotic or Dangerous Animals." 

Sec. 4-201. - Wild or exotic animals. 
    It is unlawful to keep or harbor any wild or exotic animals within the city limits as a pet or for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This does not apply to such animals kept for temporary periods of time for exhibition purposes only, by circuses, zoos, and educational institutions provided that such exhibition complies with all aspects of federal laws and regulations and Oklahoma laws and regulations applicable to the exhibition of such animals which are wild by nature. The term "temporary periods of time" shall be defined as, and shall be limited to, a period of time not to exceed seven (7) days during any twelve-month period of time. This chapter shall apply to any animal obtained after December 3, 2007. 
    Any wild or exotic animals found in the City of Miami and not authorized by this subsection, shall be euthanized or donated to a zoo or a museum, except that, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works, certain wild or exotic animals which are native to Oklahoma and which in their natural habitats do not present a danger to human beings or to property may be released by an animal control officer to their natural habitats outside of the municipal limits. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 1-2-2018) 
Chapter 5 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Aircraft and airports, 3 O.S. § 61 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 5-1-5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT AUTHORITY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, etc., § 2-141 et seq. 

Sec. 5-26. - Created; function. 
    There is created an airport authority board to regulate and operate the Miami Regional Airport. 
(Code 1964, § 2-31; Ord. No. 1638, § 2, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 5-27. - Membership. 
    The airport authority board shall consist of seven (7) members, four (4) of whom shall be citizens of Miami and three (3) of whom shall reside in Ottawa County; and each of whom shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the confirmation of the board of commissioners, and also, the commissioner of streets and property of the city, who shall be an ex officio member of the board. One (1) of the appointed members shall serve for a term of one (1) year; four members shall serve for a term of two (2) years each and two (2) of the members shall serve a term of three (3) years each. 
(Code 1964, § 2-32; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 7-19-99; Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-16-00) 
Sec. 5-28. - Authority. 
    The airport authority board shall have the care and management of the municipal airport and may make all necessary rules and regulations for the proper care and management of the airport. 
(Code 1964, § 2-33) 
Secs. 5-29-5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; planning and development, ch. 18; subdivisions, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Airport Zoning Act, 3 O.S. § 100 et seq.; authority to adopt airport zoning regulations, 3 O.S. § 103. 

Sec. 5-51. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Airport Zoning Ordinance of the Miami Municipal Airport." 
(Code 1964, § 2A-11) 
Sec. 5-52. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Airport shall mean the Miami Regional Airport. 
    Airport hazard shall mean any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport, or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft. 
    Landing strip shall mean the area of the airport used for the landing or taking off of aircraft. 
    Nonconforming use shall mean any structure, tree or use of land which does not conform to a regulation prescribed in this article or an amendment thereto, as of the effective date of such regulations. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or body politic, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof. 
    Structure shall mean any object constructed or installed by man, including, without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission lines. 
    Tree shall mean any object of natural growth. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-12; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 4-7-97; Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 6-2-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 3 O.S. § 101. 
Sec. 5-53. - Establishing airport hazard area. 
    For purposes of this article, rules and regulations, certain areas of land and water within a radius of three (3) miles of a certain point hereinafter described and established are hereby declared to be the Miami Municipal Airport hazard area, and the whole of such area is made subject hereto. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-13) 
Sec. 5-54. - Location and elevation of airport reference point. 
    A point on the runway centerline and three hundred twenty-five (325) feet west and seven hundred thirty-six (736) feet north of Section 13, Township 28 North, Range 23 East, Ottawa County, Oklahoma, is hereby established as the airport reference point of the airport hazard area. The latitude is 36 degrees 54 minutes 33.34 seconds north (36-54-33.34N) and the longitude is 094 degrees 53 minutes 15.01 seconds West (094-53-15.01W). For purposes hereof, the elevation of such radius point is declared to be 806.06 M.S.L. This is based on NAD 83. (This information is contained in the recently completed airport master plan dated December 1993.) 
(Code 1964, § 2A-14; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 4-7-97) 
Sec. 5-55. - Division of airport hazard area into zones. 
    The airport hazard area is hereby divided into separate zones as follows: 
(1)  Airport property zone, 
(2)  Approach zone, 
(3)  Transitional zone. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-15) 
Sec. 5-56. - Airport property zone. 
    The airport property zone is hereby fixed and declared to be the Miami Municipal Airport real property situated in the county specifically described as follows: 
Beginning at a point, point being the southwest corner of the southeast quarter, Section 13, Township 28 North, Range 22 East, Ottawa County, Oklahoma, thence east 213.7 feet, thence north 7,357.19 feet, to the intersection of said line and the Indian Reservation line, thence in a northwesterly direction along said reservation line for a distance of 1,418 feet, thence south for a distance 1,380 feet thence west along the south PL of 32nd Avenue, northwest for a distance of 165.3 feet thence south along a line parallel to the north, south quarter section line for a distance of 5,933.15 feet to the intersection of the said line and the east-west section line, thence east for a distance of 540 feet thence south for a distance of 1,320 feet, thence east for a distance of 760 feet, thence north for a distance of 1,320 feet to east-west section line, thence 20+ feet east to point of beginning. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-16) 
Sec. 5-57. - Designation of landing areas. 
    For the purposes of fixing and determining the locations and restrictions on the several zones, certain landing areas are hereby designated and declared upon the airport property zone. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-17; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 4-7-97) 
Sec. 5-58. - Location of primary surface. 
    The landing area is hereby fixed and declared to be one (1) in number, being a rectangular strip of land, more specifically described as follows: 
    The primary surface of the airport consists of a rectangular area five hundred (500) feet wide and five thousand four hundred twelve (5,412) feet long, the centerline of which is located two hundred fifty (250) feet from each side of the centerline of the runway, all specifically described as follows: 
    Beginning at the corner of the southeast-southeast Section 13, Township 28 North, Range 22 East, Ottawa County, Oklahoma; thence south 89 degrees 42 minutes west for a distance of 1,664.41 feet; thence south 00 degrees 16.80 minutes west for a distance of 823 feet to a point which is the south end of the primary surface centerline and the south end of an existing 100-foot wide paved runway; thence south 00 degrees 16.80 minutes west for a distance of 4,067.15 feet to a point which is the north end of the primary surface centerline, said point being more particularly described as a point south 8.25 degrees 24 minutes west a distance of 1,433.02 feet and south 00 degrees 08.52 minutes east a distance of 408 feet from the northeast corner of the northwest-northeast. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-18; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 4-7-97) 
Sec. 5-59. - Height limitations. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein no structure shall be erected or altered and no tree shall be allowed to grow in a hazard area to a height in excess of the following: 
(1)  A maximum limitation of one hundred fifty (150) feet greater than the radius point. 
(2)  Further height limitations are imposed within areas designated: 
a.  Approach zones. An inclined plane, symmetrical with the runway centerline extended, beginning at each end of the primary surface at the centerline elevation of the runway end and extending for ten thousand (10,000) feet. The slope of the approach clearance surface is thirty-four (34) to one (1) along the runway centerline extended until it reaches an elevation of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation. It then continues horizontally at this elevation to a point ten thousand (10,000) feet from the point of beginning. The width of this surface at the runway end is the same as the primary surface, it flares uniformly, and the width at ten thousand (10,000) feet is three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet. 
b.  Transitional surface. These surfaces connect the primary surfaces, the first two hundred (200) feet of the clear zone surfaces to the inner horizontal surface, conical surface, outer horizontal or other transitional surfaces. The slope of the transitional surface is seven (7) to one (1) outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline. 
c.  Conical surface. A surface extending from the periphery of the horizontal surface outward and upward at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet to a height of four hundred (400) feet above the established airfield elevation. 
d.  Horizontal surface. A circular plane, one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, with a radius from the ends of the primary surface on the centerline extended ten thousand (10,000) feet. 
(3)  Such portions of transitional zones adjoining the primary surface and within the property zone are further restricted to prohibit any fixed structure above the ground surface within five hundred (500) feet of the landing strip centerline. 
(4)  In cases where there is overlapping of zones with any other zone, the lowest height limitation fixed for either of such zones shall be applied. 
(5)  Provided, however, that the height or other limitations and restrictions herein imposed shall not apply to such structures and uses as may be needful, appropriate or customarily employed for aeronautical purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-19; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 4-7-97) 
Sec. 5-60. - Drawing attached; purposes thereof. 
    Attached hereto and made a part hereof is the drawing, Airport Zoning Map, approved by the FAA. Its purpose and use is to provide aid in verifying the meaning and explaining the article, rules and regulations as to the general plan and principals involved in its administration. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-20; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 4-7-97) 
Editor's note- The airport zoning map referred to in section 5-60 is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the city clerk's office. It is also located with the airport zoning board for its use in determining noncompliance with its provisions. 
Sec. 5-61. - Use restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no use may be made of land within the hazard area in such manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and other lights, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-21) 
Sec. 5-62. - Nonconforming uses. 
    The regulations prescribed in sections 5-59 to 5-61 shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this article, and is diligently prosecuted and completed within two (2) years thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-22) 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses, 3 O.S. § 106. 
Sec. 5-63. - Variances. 
    Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply for a variance therefrom. Such variance shall be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-23) 
State Law reference- Variances, 3 O.S. § 107(2). 
Sec. 5-64. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. No material change shall be made in the use of the land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted, established by natural growth or otherwise, which exceeds the height limitations within the hazard areas unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each such application for a permit shall include the exact location, height above the ground and any other pertinent data needed to determine whether or not a permit shall be granted. 
(b)  Existing uses. Before any existing use, structure or tree may be replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher, or replanted, which exceeds the height limitations within the hazard area, a permit must be secured authorizing such replacement, change or repair. No such permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this article unless a variance has been granted as provided in section 5-63. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-24) 
State Law reference- Permits, 3 O.S. § 107(1). 
Sec. 5-65. - Hazard marking and lighting. 
    Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purposes of this article and reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree to permit the airport owner at its own expense to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-25) 
State Law reference- Hazard marking and lighting, 3 O.S. § 107(3). 
Sec. 5-66. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the administrative officer made in the administration of this article, if of the opinion that a decision of such officer is an improper application of this article, may appeal to the board of adjustment for which provision is made in section 5-68. 
(b)  All appeals taken under this section must be taken within ten (10) days, by filing with the administrative officer and with the board of adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative officer shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrative officer certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall be stayed otherwise than by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the administrative officer and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any interested party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative officer. 
(f)  The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, or affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 3 O.S. § 108. 
Sec. 5-67. - Administrative agency. 
    The joint airport zoning board is hereby designated the administrative agency charged with the duty of administrating and enforcing the regulations herein prescribed. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-27; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 4-7-97) 
State Law reference- Administrative agency required, 3 O.S. § 109. 
Sec. 5-68. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative officer in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such board may be required to pass by subsequent ordinances. 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances under section 5-63. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members, each to be appointed for a term of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Members shall be removable for cause by the joint airport zoning board upon written charges and after public hearing. In event of vacancy for any cause the joint airport zoning board shall fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. 
(c)  The board shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this article. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board shall be subject to the Open Meetings Act [25 O.S. § 301 et seq.]. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-28) 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, etc., § 2-141 et seq. 
State Law reference- Board of adjustment, 3 O.S. § 110. 
Sec. 5-69. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment may appeal to the county court as provided in 11 O.S. § 111. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-29; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 4-7-97) 
Sec. 5-70. - Enforcement and remedies. 
    Each violation of any of these regulations, orders or rulings promulgated or made pursuant thereto, shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year in the county jail, or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, the joint airport zoning board may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any such violation, and the court shall adjudge to the plaintiff such relief by way of injunction or otherwise, as may be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case, in order fully to effectuate the purposes of the regulations, orders and rulings made pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 3 O.S. § 111. 
Sec. 5-71. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where this article imposes a greater or more stringent restriction upon the use of land than is imposed or required by any other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 3 O.S. § 104(2). 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2018, amended Ch. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Section 3 of said ordinance repealed §§ 6-51-6-55, 6-76-6-79, 6-96-6-101, 6-121-6-129, 6-161-6-165, 6-181-6-186, 6-211-6-213, 6-231, 6-256, 6-257, 6-286-6-290, 6-311, 6-331, 6-332, 6-356, 6-357, 6-376-6-379, 6-396-6-398, 6-416, 6-431-6-436, 6-451-6-458, 6-476. The former Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1964, §§ 5-1, 5-5, 5-6, 7-1-7-9.1, 7-11-7-14, 7-16-7-19, 7-30-7-39, 16-1, 16-1.1, 16-3, 16-5, 16-7-16-12, 16-14, 16-15, 16-17, 16-18, 16-31, 16-113, 16-114, 16-131, 16-172, 16-209-16-214, 16-216-16-221, 16-233, 20A-1-20A-4, 20A-6-20A-8, 20A-10-20A-18; Ord. No. 1323, § 1, adopted April 4, 1994; Ord. No. 1331, § 1, adopted March 6, 1995; Ord. No. 1356, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 1997; Ord. No. 1423, § 1, adopted June 18, 2001; Ord. No. 1435, § 1, adopted Oct. 15, 2001; Ord. No. 1445, § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 2001; Ord. No. 1544, § 1, adopted April 20, 2009; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, adopted June 7, 2010; Ord. No. 1568, § 1, adopted Nov. 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1590, § 1, adopted Oct. 1, 2012; Ord. No. 1625, § 1, adopted July 1, 2014; Ord. No. 1637, § 1, adopted May 5, 2015; Ord. No. 1640, § 1, adopted July 7, 2015. 
Cross reference- Airport zoning ordinance, § 5-51 et seq.; fallout protection in public buildings, § 7-11; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; planning and development, ch. 18; subdivisions, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- General municipal authority to regulate buildings, 11 O.S. §§ 22-113, 43-102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter and in the various Codes adopted by this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Building official," "Code Official," "Department of Property Maintenance Inspection," or similar names or terminology shall mean the city's building inspector, or such other department, division, team or appointee(s) to whom the City Manager shall delegate such function. 
2.  "Municipality" or "City" shall mean the City of Miami, Oklahoma. The phrase "City of Miami, Oklahoma" shall be inserted whenever the prompt [Name of Jurisdiction], or similar language, may appear in any Code adopted by the City as set out in Section 6-2. 
3.  "State" shall mean the State of Oklahoma, including all of its duly authorized boards, trusts and commissions, as may be pertinent to the subject at hand. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-2. - Codes adopted. 
    Pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23(C) and other applicable state law, the City the adopts the version of: 
1.  the International Residential Code, 
2.  the International Building Code, 
3.  the International Existing Building Code, 
4.  the International Fire Code, 
5.  the International Fuel Gas Code, 
6.  the International Mechanical Code, 
7.  the International Plumbing Code, and 
8.  the National Electric Code, 
all as then currently adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission, together with all such modifications, amendments and other changes as the same shall be provided by current or future orders of said Commission. 
    Further, the most recent versions of: 
1.  the International Property Maintenance Code, 
as published by the International Code Council (ICC) which corresponds with the same year version of the International Residential Code adopted above is adopted by City of Miami, Oklahoma, and if subsequently adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission, all such modifications, amendments and other changes which shall be provided by orders of said Commission shall similarly be adopted. 
    Provided, further, the City reserves unto itself the right to modify such Codes by ordinance additions, insertions, deletions and changes in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107, 59 O.S. § 1000.23(C), 11 O.S. § 14-107(B). 
Sec. 6-3. - Application of Codes adopted. 
    Except as provided within the Codes adopted in this chapter and as hereinafter excepted, all work, including maintenance, on any structure, equipment and/or facilities within the city limits, including, but not limited to electrical, mechanical, plumbing or roofing shall require the application, permit, fees and inspection as set forth in this Chapter and by the Codes adopted herein and must be performed by a duly licensed individual where applicable. Except as provided within the Codes adopted in this chapter and as hereinafter excepted, all electrical or plumbing work, including maintenance, on any structure, equipment and/or facilities outside of the city limits, but which are connected to the City's electrical distribution, water distribution or sanitary sewer collection systems, shall require the application, permit, fees and inspection applicable to the connected system(s) as set forth in this Chapter and by the Codes adopted herein and must be performed by a duly licensed individual where applicable. The exception to the requirements of this section is that a person who is both the property owner and current resident of the property involved shall comply with the application, permit, fees and inspection requirements of this Chapter and the adopted Codes, but that owner may do the work for himself/herself whether or not licensed to do so. Provided, further, the finished work product must still meet all inspection and Code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-4. - Conflicts. 
    If any provision of the Codes adopted by reference in this article conflicts with this Code, this Code shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-5. - Building inspector. 
    The City Manager shall appoint a building inspector who shall also serve as the electrical inspector, the refrigeration-air conditioning-heating inspector, the plumbing inspector and the roofing inspector. The City Manager may also appoint deputies to the building inspector as he/she may from time to time deem necessary. The building inspector and his/her deputies shall have a thorough knowledge of the Codes herein adopted and the systems they monitor. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-6. - Same-Qualifications. 
    The building inspector shall have qualifications as required for each trade by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
State Law reference- Qualifications of electrical inspector, 59 O.S. §§ 1016, 1031 et seq., 1693. 
Sec. 6-7. - Same-Interference with. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the building inspector in the lawful discharge of his/her duties. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-8. - Inspections generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the building inspector to make inspections of all work for which permits have been issued under this Chapter, and it shall be the duty of the person making the installation to promptly notify the inspector when the work is ready for inspection. Failure to promptly notify the inspector shall result in an additional administrative fee of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-9. - Correction of or discontinuance of service to defective installations. 
(a)  If, upon any inspection, the building inspector finds any part of any work or apparatus or materials to be in a defective or dangerous condition, he/she shall notify, in writing, the contractor and the owner or occupant of the premises to have the defects corrected within such time as the inspector shall deem necessary. If the contractor, owner or occupant refuses or fails to comply with the requirements of the inspector or to correct all defects as directed within the specified time, it shall be the duty of the inspector to notify the utility furnishing the utility service of such dangerous defects. Upon receipt of such notice, the utility shall immediately disconnect the service as directed by the inspector, until notified in writing by the inspector that the defects have been corrected. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to make corrections of dangerous, defective or hazardous installations, after having been notified by the inspector, within a time designated by the inspector and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-10. - Approval of work to be concealed. 
    No work requiring inspection may be concealed or in any way covered until it has been inspected by the building inspector. Upon inspecting the roughing-in of any work governed by this Chapter that is to be concealed, the building inspector shall leave a notice, in a conspicuous place close to the work that is to be concealed, clearly stating whether the work is completed and approved or is to be kept open for correction or completion. In the event the notice indicates that the work is to be kept open for correction or completion, it shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner whatsoever, cover or conceal such work until it has been approved. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person not connected with the installation of the same, to in any manner disturb or interfere with any work governed by this Chapter which has not been so approved. If the work is in such a condition as to interfere with the completion of the building or the installation of other apparatus, the contractor or owner must be notified and given time to make the necessary changes. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-11. - Variances. 
    If, in the installation of any electrical, plumbing, mechanical or roofing job, the licensed contractor or owner installing the same shall find that, on account of some mechanical construction of the building, location of fixtures, or for any other reason, it would be impossible to abide by the letter of this Chapter or any Code adopted herein, he/she may apply to the building inspector for a variance, stating his/her reasons for any changes and setting forth the conditions, with a statement of his/her desires to a variance from the provisions of this Chapter or the Code for the particular job. If the inspector finds that the conditions warrant the same and that it would be impractical and unreasonable to require a strict conformance to this Chapter or the Code, he/she shall have the authority to make special rulings, for the safeguarding of life and property and the improvement of the installations. In all such cases, the contractor or owner who applied for the variance shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-12. - Approval of completed work. 
(a)  After all work authorized by a permit under this Chapter has been completed, it shall be inspected as provided in section 6-8, and, if found to be in accord with this Chapter and all other applicable ordinances, statues and rules, the building inspector shall issue an approval certificate or tag. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or use any equipment on the electrical or water to supply electric current over the same, until such approval certificate or tag is issued. It shall likewise be unlawful for any utility to connect, or cause to be connected, any service or building for the supply of electric current until it has been notified by the electrical inspector that the electric work has been inspected and approved and is ready for electric service. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-13. - Permits and fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit required by this Chapter shall make written application therefor to the building inspector, on blank forms furnished by him/her. Such application shall be in duplicate, indicating such facts as to the nature of the work to be performed and drawings setting out the plans as the inspector may require. 
(b)  The application and drawings shall be retained in the office of the inspector as per the City's document retention policy. 
(c)  If the proposed work specified in an application does not violate any provisions of this Chapter, any Code adopted herein, or any other ordinance of the City or applicable statute or rule of the state or federal government, the building inspector shall write the word "approved" on the face of the original application, together with his/her signature. 
(d)  No application for a permit required by this Chapter shall be accepted and no such permit shall be issued until the following fees and the reasonably anticipated inspection fees as determined necessary by the building inspector have been paid to the City in addition to any fee(s) which state law requires the City to collect: 
(1)  For a permit for a new residential building or structure the fee based on the estimated improvement is as follows: 
Up to first 1,000 square feet ..... $150.00 
Each additional 100 square feet ..... $5.00 
(2)  For a permit for additions/remodels or the alteration of an existing residential structure, the fee based on the estimated improvement is as follows: 
Up to first 500 square feet ..... $55.00 
Each additional 100 square feet ..... $5.00 
(3)  For a permit for a new commercial or industrial building or structure the fee based on the estimated improvement is as follows: 
Up to first 1,000 square feet ..... $200.00 
Each additional 100 square feet ..... $5.00 
(4)  For a permit for additions/remodels or the alteration of an existing commercial or industrial building or structure the fee based on the estimated improvement is as follows: 
Up to first 1,000 square feet ..... $150.00 
Each additional 100 square feet ..... $5.00 
(5)  For a permit for a new accessory building for storage only, whether residential, commercial or industrial, the fee based on the estimated improvement is as follows: 
Up to first 200 square feet ..... $55.00 
Each additional 100 square feet ..... $5.00 
(6)  For a permit for miscellaneous construction (i.e. roofs, storm shelters, carport, etc.), whether residential, commercial or industrial, the fee is as follows: 
$50.00, plus all applicable State fees. 
(7)  For a permit for the demolition or removal of a building or structure or part thereof, the fee shall be $50.00, plus all applicable State fees, provided that, if the demolition is a necessary part of an alteration for which a permit has been issued, no fee shall be required for such demolition. Provided further, however, that in the case of any permit which shall involve demolition or removal as described above, no permit shall be issue until the City Manager, or designee has reviewed the matter. The building inspector, or designee may make appropriate preconditions, conditions and requirements prior to authorizing issuance of a demolition permit, and in such case no demolition permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant has endorsed his or her agreement to the terms of the permit and has granted the City the right to enter upon the premises and inspect the progress of the demolition in the interests of the public safety, health and welfare. 
(8)  For a permit and inspection for the installation of signs, the fee is as follows: 
All electric signs ..... $55.00 
All non-electric signs ..... $45.00 
(e)  The payment of the fees provided for in this section shall, in no way, relieve the applicant of the obligation to pay any other fee specified by this Chapter, for inspection, certificates or approval of sewer connections, water taps, wiring, or other privileges. 
(f)  The following inspections are required and the following inspection fee(s) apply thereto. 
(1)  Residential: 
Initial inspection ..... $50.00 
Reinspection ..... $95.00 
Final ..... $75.00 
(2)  Commercial and Industrial: 
Initial inspection ..... $50.00 
Reinspection ..... 95.00 
Final ..... 125.00 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-14. - Contractor's registration. 
(a)  Except for work done by the person who is both the property owner and current resident of the property involved (as provided in Sec. 6-3), all persons desiring to engage in advertising or soliciting work for, or actually doing any work for installing, applying, designing, assembling, erecting, constructing, altering, servicing, repairing or maintaining the electrical system, or any part thereof, in or on any building or other structure within the City or which is connected to the City's electrical distribution systems must first secure an electrical contractor, journeyman or apprentice registration from the Community Development office. 
(b)  Except for work done by the person who is both the property owner and current resident of the property involved (as provided in Sec. 6-3), all persons desiring to engage in advertising or soliciting work for, or actually doing any work for installing, applying, designing, assembling, erecting, constructing, altering, servicing, repairing or maintaining refrigeration and/or air conditioning and/or heating and/or ventilating systems, or any part thereof, in or on any building or other structure within the City or which is connected to the City's electrical distribution system must first secure a mechanical contractor, journeyman or apprentice registration from the Community Development office. 
(c)  Except for work done by the person who is both the property owner and current resident of the property involved (as provided in Sec. 6-3), all persons desiring to engage in advertising or soliciting work for, or actually doing any work for installing, applying, designing, assembling, erecting, constructing, altering, servicing, repairing or maintaining plumbing, sewage or natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) systems, or any part thereof, in or on any building or other structure within the City or which is connected to the City's water distribution and/or sanitary sewer collection system(s) must first secure a plumber contractor, journeyman or apprentice registration from the Community Development office. Provided, however, this provision shall not apply to a building or other structure outside of the City limits which is using the City's water distribution or sanitary sewer collection system, if the work to be done only concerns the natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) systems. 
(d)  Except for work done by the person who is both the property owner and current resident of the property involved (as provided in Sec. 6-3), all persons desiring to engage in advertising or soliciting work for, or actually doing any work for in installing, applying, designing, assembling, erecting, constructing, altering, servicing, repairing or maintaining roofs, or any part thereof, on any building or other structure within the City must first secure a roofing contractor registration from the Community Development office. 
(e)  The fee for all contractor registrations provided for herein is $100.00 for the year or part thereof with such registration which shall expire as of the City's close of business on June thirtieth following. Timely renewals require appropriately completed applications with all necessary attachments received in the office of Community Development on or before June 30. There is no fee for a journeyman or apprentice registration. 
(f)  A City registration shall be issued upon application and compliance with state laws and the presentation of the current, valid state license. The applicant shall be entitled to do such work as is allowed by his/her license and is subject to all the limitations thereof. City registration will be provided to the applicant upon compliance with all of the requirements herein. Any registration provided for herein shall be nontransferable. 
(g)  Any person required to be a state license holder hereunder who is not in good standing with the licensing body or has otherwise had his/her license suspended or revoked is required to immediately disclose same to the office of Community Development. The office shall suspend the registration of such license holder and shall immediately suspend all work being done by said license holder pursuant to any outstanding issued permit(s) until the license issues are resolved and the license holder is again in good standing with the licensing body. 
(h)  If any person who has a disclosure requirement under the preceding subsection who does not immediately disclose the licensing problem to the office of Community Development, or who violates the provisions of Section 6-14, the office of Community Development shall cancel and recall the registration of such license holder and shall immediately suspend all work being done by said license holder pursuant to any outstanding issued permit(s). The license holder shall be subject to the penalties as set out for a violation of Section 6-14, and the person shall be ineligible for registration for a period of not to exceed twelve (12) months, as administratively determined appropriate by the office of Community Development, after all requirements of any sentence, or deferment of sentence, and/or probation have been met, including the payment of all fines, court costs, deferment fees and any restitution or completion of all required rehabilitative treatment. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
State Law reference- Electrical License Act, 59 O.S. §§ 1680 et seq., Registration of Electricians, 59 O.S. § 1696; Mechanical Licensing Act, 59 O.S. §§ 1860.1 et seq.; 59 O.S. § 1850.12, The Plumbing License Law of 1955, 59 O.S. §§ 1001 et seq.; Roofing Contractor Registration Act, 59 O.S. §§ 1151.1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-15. - Display. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person doing work that requires a license under the provisions of this Chapter in the City, or to a building or structure that is connected to the City's electrical and/or water distribution systems and/or its sanitary sewer collection system, to not show his certificate of registration, on demand, to any building inspector or police officer who shall ask to see the same. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-16. - Unlawful work. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person doing work that requires a license and registration under the provisions of this Chapter in the City, or to a building or structure that is connected to the City's electrical and/or water distribution systems and/or its sanitary sewer collection system, , without first obtaining the required license and registration prior to doing the work or prior to advertising and/or soliciting such work. It shall likewise be unlawful for any contractor to employ any person to do such work unless such employee is appropriately licensed under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-17. - Liability. 
    This Chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the City any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured or who suffers loss of life by any defects in, or during the operation of any electric, plumbing, natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), sanitary sewer and/or mechanical appliance and/or system(s), or by the installation thereof or any part thereof; nor shall the City, or any official or employee thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized hereunder or certificate of inspection issued by the building inspector; nor shall the City or any official or employee thereof be held as assuming any liability or responsibility for property damage, from any cause whatsoever, which may have been caused by any defects in, or during the operation of any electric, plumbing, natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), sanitary sewer and/or mechanical appliance and/or system(s), or by the installation thereof or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Secs. 6-18-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPEALS 

Sec. 6-26. - Appeals procedure. 
    Any person directly affected by a decision of the building inspector, or his/her designee(s), or a code official, or a notice or order issued hereunder shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Adjustment, provided that a written application for appeal is filed and received by the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the day the decision, notice or order was entered. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Chapter, any applicable ordinance, state statue or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by other means. Appeals of notice and orders (other than summary abatement of nuisances as provided in Sec. 15-9 of this Code) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard. The Board of Adjustment shall schedule the appeal for hearing not later than the next regularly scheduled meeting for which notice and agenda may be lawfully posted, or at an earlier special meeting to be called at the discretion of the Board of Adjustment Chairman. The appeal hearing shall be open to the public and held pursuant to a posted agenda item, although the Board of Adjustment may otherwise consult with the City Attorney and other authorized attendees in a lawfully scheduled and posted executive session. The manner of conducting the hearing shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. The Board of Adjustment shall modify or reverse the decision of the building inspector or code officer only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of seated Board of Adjustment members. The building inspector shall take prompt action in accordance with the decision of the Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 6-27. - Appeals from the Board of Adjustments. 
    Any person directly affected by a decision of the Board of Adjustment or an order issued hereunder shall have the right to appeal to District Court of Ottawa County, provided, however, such appeal must be in conformity with the provisions of 11 O.S. § 44-110, and as the same may be amended or renumbered from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Secs. 6-28-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE 

Secs. 6-51-6-55. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-56. - Demolition permit. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of the International Building Code (IBC) and other Codes adopted herein, every building or structure or portion or remnants thereof remaining after fire, prior or partial demolition, acts of nature, explosion or other destructive or nondestructive forces which is found to be in noncompliance with the site cleanup requirements specified in this Chapter and the Codes adopted herein, shall be brought into compliance with these requirements, as applicable, within the period of time provided by written notice from the building inspector. 
(b)  A permit for demolishing any structures and buildings shall be conditioned on the following terms and conditions, all of which are additional and supplemental to any other or further requirements of federal, state or local laws, ordinances and regulations, and the site plan which accompanies the application for a demolition permit. The application shall directly address the applicant's method of compliance with each of the requirements of this Chapter and the Codes adopted herein, all as set out in the permit application. 
(c)  In the case of any structure(s) or building(s) which, individually or in the aggregate, exceed(s) twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, the applicant shall, prior to issuance of the demolition permit, provide a surety bond issued by a good and sufficient surety authorized to do business within the State of Oklahoma, all in a form approved by the City Attorney, and which bond names the City of Miami as a named insured party, in an amount and under such terms and conditions sufficient to ensure full completion of the site plan for demolition, as well as abatement of potential impacts to public health and safety and long-term environmental impacts, and to ensure general cleanup of the demolition site. No such bond shall be released until all required work is completed and the final inspection has been approved. 
(d)  Demolition permits shall be valid for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days from date of issuance with extension(s) of up to sixty (60) days each allowed for extenuating circumstances as approved by the City Manager or his or her designee. No extension shall be granted unless the terms of any required bond shall also remain in effect for the time period of the extension. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Chapter 7 - CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Civil defense and disaster relief, 63 O.S. § 683 et seq. 

Sec. 7-1. - Title. 
    This chapter may be cited as the city civil defense and emergency management ordinance of 1990. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Civil defense forces shall mean the employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards, institutions and commissions; and, in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by or obtained from any other source. 
    Civil defense volunteer shall mean any person duly registered, identified, and appointed by the director and assigned to participate in civil defense activity. 
    Declared disaster shall mean any event, natural or technological, impending or actual, that cannot be handled by the city's resources. 
    Declared emergency shall mean any situation requiring substantial response by one (1) or more departments, requiring coordination and so declared by an elected official or the director of civil defense. 
    Director shall mean the director of civil defense as appointed by the board of commissioners or his designated assistant. 
    Emergency shall mean any concentrated effort by one (1) or more departments that requires some coordination to respond to a life or property threatening incident. 
    Miami Emergency Council Advisories (M.E.C.A.) shall mean the local committee appointed as provided in this chapter. 
    Regulations shall include plans, programs and other emergency procedures deemed essential to civil defense. 
    Volunteer shall mean contributing a service, equipment, or facilities to the civil defense organization without remuneration. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-3. - Findings and declarations. 
(a)  Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of natural or technological disasters and future discovery of presently unknown natural or technological potential for disaster of unprecedented destructiveness including but not limited to enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from fire, flood, tornado, hazardous material incidents or other causes, and in order to ensure that the city is adequately prepared to deal with such disasters to protect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, to prevent further loss of life and property, to maintain the objectives of the city and to provide for the recovery of such disasters, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary to: 
(1)  Create a civil defense department; provide for an appointment of a director of civil defense and the procedure thereof; 
(2)  Establish a method of funding for such department; 
(3)  Confer upon the mayor and board of commissioners and the director of civil defense emergency powers provided in this chapter; 
(4)  Provide for rendering mutual aid and the procuring of mutual aid as set forth; 
(5)  Provide sufficient organization to mitigate and meet emergencies in the general interest of the city. 
(b)  It is further declared that the purpose of this chapter and the intent of the city is that all civil defense functions be coordinated to the maximum extent with comparable functions of the state, other states and localities and private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective planning, resources and facilities be made to address potential or actual disasters threatening this city. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-4. - Liability. 
(a)  This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city nor agents and representatives of the city, or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as the result of such activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or as shelter during life threatening severe weather, shall not be civilly liable for the death or injury to any persons on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of or damage to the property of such person. 
(Ord. No 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-5. - Organization and appointments. 
    The mayor and board of commissioners hereby creates a department of emergency management, commonly referred to as Miami Civil Defense, with the intent that such department shall coordinate the city's mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery to emergencies, declared emergencies, declared disasters, or any other emergency action or impending emergency that confronts the city. Further, Miami Civil Defense shall be an executive department of the city government utilizing to the fullest extent all employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards, institutions and commissions to ensure efficient response to the citizens of the city during aforementioned phases of management and response to emergencies or disasters or the recovery from emergencies or disasters. The organization shall consist of the following: 
(1)  As the office of civil defense within the executive department of the city government and under the supervision of the mayor and board of commissioners there shall be an executive head of the office known as the director of the office of civil defense and such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization. The director shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of commissioners as is common practice for like administrators of other departments within the city. 
(2)  The employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards, institutions and commissions, will participate in the civil defense activity. Duties assigned to a city department shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of the department except as is necessary to preserve life or property or prevent the further loss of life or property. 
(3)  Volunteer persons and agencies offering service to and accepted by the city. 
(4)  The Miami Emergency Council Advisories (M.E.C.A.) shall be composed of the director who acts as chairman and appointed positions who represent the office of the city administrator, the city attorney's office; Baptist Regional Health Center; Northeastern Oklahoma A & M College; department of human services; Ottawa County Health Department; the city public school system and two (2) at-large appointees, all appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of commissioners, who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-6. - Funding. 
    All fiscal procedures, budgetary processes, purchasing requirements as mandated by city policy, state or federal law shall apply to the office of civil defense with exceptions: 
(1)  The city authorizes the director of civil defense to accept services, equipment, supplies, materials, funds or any other thing of value by way of gift, grant or loan, for purchases of civil defense from any state or federal government or its political subdivisions. 
(2)  The city authorizes the director of civil defense to accept services, equipment, supplies, materials, funds or any other thing of value by way of gift, grant or loan, for purposes of civil defense from any person, firm, or corporation with the consent of the mayor and board of commissioners and subject to the terms of the offer. 
(3)  The city is authorized to exercise the powers vested under 63 O.S. § 683.11(b) as pertains to an emergency, declared emergency or declared disaster as defined by ordinance, in the light of exigencies of the extreme emergency situation without regard to time consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law (excepting constitutional requirements) pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and materials, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds as is provided for under the emergency powers set out in this chapter. 
(4)  The director of civil defense is hereby authorized to enter into mutual aid agreements, matching fund programs, grants or any other funding avenues with regard to all laws and contingent on the approval of the mayor and board of commissioners. 
(5)  The director of civil defense is authorized to participate in fund raising projects sponsored by the civil defense volunteer organization, providing permission is obtained prior to the project from the mayor or the city administrator. The city further acknowledges that such funds are property of the volunteer organization and are not subject to the city's fiscal procedures or other requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-7. - Duties of the civil defense director. 
    The director of the office of civil defense shall be responsible to the mayor and board of commissioners in regard to all phases of the civil defense activity. Under the supervision of the mayor and board of commissioners, he shall be responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of the civil defense activity in the city. Under the supervision of the mayor and board of commissioners, he shall maintain liaison with the state and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby political subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective operation of the civil defense plan. His duties shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Coordination of the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for civil defense purposes; 
(2)  Development and coordination of plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and property; protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and welfare; 
(3)  Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or other property for civil defense purposes and designating suitable buildings as public shelters; 
(4)  Through public informational programs, educating the civilian population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of their persons and property in case of enemy attack or disaster, either impending or present; 
(5)  Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation of the civil defense forces and to familiarize residents with civil defense regulations, procedures and operations; 
(6)  Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any civil defense activity; 
(7)  Negotiating mutual aid agreements with other municipal corporations or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the mayor and board of commissioners; 
(8)  Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the mayor and board of commissioners may direct to promote and execute the civil defense plan. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-8. - Powers and duties of Miami Emergency Council Advisories (M.E.C.A.). 
(a)  The Miami Emergency Council Advisories (M.E.C.A.) will assume the responsibility for the preparation of the civil defense and disaster basic plan, subject to the direction of the director. The council is responsible for ensuring that comprehensive planning is undertaken, that all available resources are considered, that there is a public understanding of the plan, that the plan is continually reviewed and amendments suggested to the director. 
(b)  In time of emergency, the council may serve as an operations group, under the direction of the director. Members will serve as liaison personnel with their official groups and as liaison with agencies and groups in the community and in the community at large, as directed by the director. 
(c)  The council shall serve as a policy advisory committee to the director. It shall provide a forum for citizen participation in matters relating to emergency planning, and shall provide continuing liaison with official and nonofficial departments and agencies in the community which have the capability of being useful in meeting needs caused by disaster. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-9. - Contents of civil defense and disaster basic plan. 
(a)  A comprehensive civil defense and disaster basic plan shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the board of commissioners upon the recommendation of the director. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The basic plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law whenever an emergency, declared emergency, or declared disaster has been proclaimed. 
(b)  The director shall prescribe in the basic plan those positions within the disaster organization, in addition to his own, for which lines of succession are necessary. Additionally, all department heads for the city shall create a list of succession, and in each instance the responsible person will keep on file with the director a current list of a minimum of three (3) persons as successors to his position. The list will be in order of succession and will, as nearly as possible, designate persons best capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions. 
(c)  The mayor of the city shall designate a line of succession from his position through all elected city officials, subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. The list will be kept current and approvals made at the first opportune time, except when situations exist that require immediate action, then the appointment will become effective immediately and until such time as normal procedure can be implemented. 
(d)  Each department head assigned responsibility in the basic plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned city employees and volunteers. Each department head shall formulate the operational plan for his service to ensure that the plan shall conform to and augment the overall plan, and when approved by the director and having been approved by the board of commissioners as provided in this chapter, shall become an annex to and a part of the basic plan. 
(e)  Each department head will maintain a current resource list of any and all materials possessed by his department and a current copy will be furnished to the director. Additionally, all department heads shall furnish to the director a list of agencies, persons, materials or any other item they may find pertinent to the emergency management of the city both present or conceived as beneficial for a possible future response by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-10. - Amendments to civil defense and disaster basic plan. 
    Proposed amendments to the basic plan shall be submitted to the director. The director will submit the proposed amendments to the board of commissioners with his recommendation for its approval. Upon approval by the board of commissioners by resolution, such amendments shall take effect thirty (30) days from the date of approval, unless an emergency is declared separately with the approval of the amendment. If an amendment is pending at the time that a declared emergency or declared disaster is proclaimed under provisions of this chapter, the amendment will be considered approved immediately and will remain effective unless specifically revoked by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-11. - Fallout protection in public buildings, structures. 
(a)  Every officer, board, department or commission of the city charged with the duty of preparing specifications, or awarding or entering into contracts for the design, erection, or construction of buildings or other structures, including additions to existing structures, for the city shall consider or cause to be incorporated in such buildings or other structures, fallout protection for at least its normal anticipated population which shall meet or exceed the minimum space and fallout protection criteria recommended by the Office of Civil Defense, United States Department of Defense. 
(b)  It shall be the policy of the city that fallout shelters be considered in all public buildings of the city to the fullest extent practicable, in order to provide protection against radiation for the greatest number of people in the event of nuclear attack. 
(Code 1964, § 5-6.1) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations generally, ch. 6. 
Sec. 7-12. - Emergency powers. 
(a)  When in the judgment of the director it is necessary to invoke the emergency powers pursuant to this chapter, he shall immediately seek the concurrence of the mayor and board of commissioners by whatever means are necessary or available to him. If the nature of the emergency prevents his consultation with the mayor and board of commissioners, or in the event the mayor and the board of commissioners are not available to act, then the judgment of the director, with consultation of the city administrator, or if the city administrator is not available, the judgment of the director alone shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke the powers provided in this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers or restrictions of the mayor and board of commissioners as defined in the Charter of the city, and the mayor and board of commissioners may convene to review the invocation of emergency powers at any time and perform their legislative and administrative powers, and shall receive reports relative to civil defense activities. 
(b)  During any period when an emergency, declared emergency or declared disaster exists or is threatened, within the definition of this chapter, the director may promulgate such regulations as he deems necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations shall remain in effect until declared unnecessary by the mayor and board of commissioners or the director if the mayor and board of commissioners are not available and may include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of civil defense forces, or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical areas within or without the city; 
(2)  Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons in or around areas deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster; 
(3)  Regulations restricting the movement of persons upon the streets, public property or within the city at particular times of day or night and in particular areas; 
(4)  Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety. 
Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published and uttered by newspaper, radio or civil defense forces or recognized volunteers. These regulations will have the force of ordinance when duly filed with the city administrator or his office and violations will be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter. 
(c)  The director shall order civil defense forces to the aid of other communities when required in accordance with the statutes of the state, and he may request the state or a political subdivision of the state to send aid to the city in case of an emergency, declared emergency or declared disaster. 
(d)  The director may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and property of the people, and bind the city for the fair value thereof. The director will make a concentrated effort to consult with the city manager, where time permits. Regardless, such action taken through this chapter shall be reported by the city manager to the mayor and city council for review at the first opportune time. 
(e)  The director may require emergency services of any city officer or employee. If regular city forces are determined inadequate, the director may require the services of such other personnel as he can obtain including citizen volunteers within and without the city. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided by state law, the City Charter and ordinances for regular city employees and other registered and identified civil defense and disaster workers and upon demand, may receive appropriate compensation for their emergency employment. 
(f)  The director will cause to be prepared the basic plan and its amendments referred to in this chapter and to exercise his ordinary powers as director, all of the special powers conferred upon him by the City Charter and this Code, all powers conferred upon him by any statute or any other lawful authority. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90; Ord. No. 1585, § 1(C.), 7-16-12) 
Sec. 7-13. - Assistance from persons outside city government. 
    When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the city government, the director is authorized to seek assistance from persons outside of government. Any and all license requirements may be waived if the persons so assigned have a like license in another jurisdiction within and without the city or state. The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during, and after the occurrence of a disaster. Such service from persons outside of government may be accepted by the city on a volunteer basis. Such citizens shall be enrolled as civil defense volunteers in cooperation with the heads of the city departments affected. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-14. - Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations. 
    At all time when a declared emergency or declared disaster exists pursuant to this chapter the provisions of this chapter together with any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall supersede all other existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations of the city insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-15. - Violation of chapter-Declared unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense organization. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Sec. 7-16. - Same-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-5. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 3-19-90) 
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Elections, 26 O.S. § 1-101 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - Wards established, designated, boundaries prescribed. 
    There are hereby established within the corporate limits of the city four (4) wards to be designated, numbered, described and bounded as follows: 
(1)  Ward No. 1 : All that portion of the city lying east of Main St. and north of E BJ Tunnell Blvd. to railroad tracks and Tar Creek; that portion north and east from Tar Creek to Quail Creek to Quail Creek Dr., east and north of Quail Creek Dr. to E BJ Tunnell being projected north and east to a point equal in distance to the extension of the city limits in those directions. 
(2)  Ward No. 2 : All that portion of the city lying west of Main Str. being projected north to a point in distance to the extension of the city limits in that direction and north of a line projected west along 4 th Ave. NW to G Str. NW and projected North to 8 th Ave. NW, being projected north and east to a point equal in distance to the extension of the city limits in that direction. 
(3)  Ward No. 3 : All that portion of the city lying south of a line projected west along 4 th Ave. NW to G St. NW and projected north to 8 th Ave. NW, projected equal in distance to the extension of the city limits in that direction and west of Main Street and south and west of the Neosho River from a point where the extension of South Main intersects railroad and extends to the Neosho River to a point extended Southeasterly along the boundaries of the Neosho River to where the same intersects with the extension of the city limits. 
(4)  Ward No. 4 : All that portion of the city lying south of E BJ Tunnell Blvd. to railroad tracks and extending north and east to Tar Creek and South and East to Quail Creek, extending north and east to end of Quail Creek Dr., extending south to E BJ Tunnell and being projected South and East to extension of the city limits in those directions and east of Main St. and north and east of the Neosho River, from the point where Main St. South intersects railroad tracks and extends to the Neosho River to a point Southeasterly along the boundaries of the Neosho River to where the same intersects with the city limits. 
(Code 1964, § 2-7; Ord. No. 1303, § 1, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 1-7-02; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 12-19-11) 
Charter reference- Designation, description, etc., of wards by ordinance, Art. IX, § 25. 
Sec. 8-2. - Absentee ballots. 
    Absentee ballots are hereby authorized for use in all city elections as allowed by 26 O.S. § 14-101. 
(Code 1964, § 2-8) 
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Municipal fire prevention and protection, 11 O.S. §§ 22-113, 29-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1-9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 9-26-9-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MITIGATION RATES FOR FIRE DEPARTMENT CALLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 3, 2017, amended the title of Div. 2 to read as herein set out. Formerly, said division was entitled "Fire Calls Outside City Limits." 
State Law reference- Fire calls outside city, 11 O.S. § 29-106 et seq. 

Sec. 9-41. - Mitigation rates established. 
(a)  The Miami Fire Department shall initiate mitigation rates for the delivery of emergency and/or non-emergency services by the fire department for personnel, supplies and equipment to the scene of emergency and non-emergency incidents as listed in "EXHIBIT A." The mitigation rates shall be based on actual costs of the services and that which is usual, customary and reasonable (UCR) as shown in "EXHIBIT A," which may include any services, personnel, supplies and equipment and with baselines established by addendum to this document. 
(b)  The mitigation rates shall not apply to any residential, commercial, general or industrial customer of the Miami Special Utility Services Authority (MSUA), to any individual or business who's place of residence or business is located within the municipal limits of the City of Miami; or to any individual whose place of residence or business is otherwise located in the Miami Fire District and for which particular piece of property the subscription fee has been paid. Collectively, such individuals are hereinafter called "customers" for purposes of this Ordinance. This same exception shall also apply to all legal dependents of a customer that reside in the customer's exempted residence. None of these exceptions shall be considered responsible party(s) for purposes of this Ordinance. 
(c)  A claim shall be filed by the Miami Fire Department to the responsible party(s) through their insurance carrier, if applicable. Otherwise, the responsible party(s) may be billed directly. For purposes of this Ordinance, the responsible party is: i) the owner and/or occupant of any parcel of real property who is not exempted under sub-paragraph (b) hereof, to which the Miami Fire Department delivers any emergency and/or non-emergency service(s), regardless of fault; or ii) the person, who is not exempted under sub-paragraph (b) hereof, who causes or contributes to the cause, whether by negligence, deliberate or criminal act or otherwise, of an emergency and/or non-emergency incidents to which the Miami Fire Department delivers any emergency and/or non-emergency service(s). 
(d)  The City Manager may make rules or regulations and from time to time may amend, revoke, or add rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Section and subject to limitations as may now or hereafter be imposed by ordinance, the City Charter or by Oklahoma law, as he/she may deem necessary or expedient in respect to billing for these mitigation rates or the collection thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 8-19; Ord. No. 1379, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1(A.), 1-3-2017) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, referenced above, is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the city offices. 
Sec. 9-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1(B.), adopted Jan. 3, 2017, repealed § 9-42, which pertained to effect of request. 
Sec. 9-43. - Disposition of monies collected. 
    All monies collected by the city under this division shall be paid over to the city treasury in the Fire Runs Account, a line item of the general fund. Expenditure of monies by the Fire Department in the Fire Runs Account shall be subject to all policies, rules, regulations and ordinances applicable to the expenditure of funds by the Miami Fire Department for the 2003 Ottawa County Fire Department One-Tenth Sales Tax, as same may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1964, § 8-20; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1(C.), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 9-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1(D.), adopted Jan. 3, 2017, repealed § 9-44, which pertained to dispatching equipment outside city generally and derived from Code 1964, § 8-21. 
Sec. 9-45. - Aid to fire departments of other cities. 
    Nothing herein shall prohibit the fire chief, or his assistant on duty, from dispatching fire or other emergency equipment outside the corporate limits of the city to aid fire departments of other cities, when called upon by such departments to do so. 
(Code 1964, § 8-22) 
Sec. 9-46. - Establishment of an annual subscription fee. 
    Owners and/or occupants of real property outside the municipal boundaries of the City of Miami, but within the Miami Fire Protection District (as defined by the Ottawa County Board of Commissioners) and which are not residential, commercial, general or industrial customers of the Miami Special Utility Services Authority (MSUA), may contract with the Miami Fire Department, on an annual basis, for emergency and/or non-emergency service(s) by the Miami Fire Department for the property described in the contract. The contract shall provide for a fixed annual payment (subscription fee) of sixty-five ($65.00) dollars to be paid annually on the date of the making of such contract. With the entry of such subscription fee contract and full payment of the non-refundable fee, the property shall be considered as belonging to a residential, commercial, general or industrial customer(s) of the Miami Special Utility Services Authority (MSUA) for purposes of Sec. 9-41 (b), and in the event of the delivery of emergency and/or non-emergency services by the Miami Fire Department to that property or to an emergency and/or non-emergency incident to which the Miami Fire Department delivers any emergency and/or non-emergency service(s) within that contract year, the property or incident shall be exempt from the mitigation rate provided for in Sec. 9-41. Such funds so generated by such subscription fee contracts shall be paid over to the city treasury in the Fire Runs Account, a line item of the general fund, and shall be expended as provided in Sec. 9-43. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1(E.), 1-3-2017) 
Secs. 9-47-9-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 9-61. - Adopted fire codes. 
    Pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23(C), 11 O.S. § 14-107(B), and other applicable state law, the city adopts the version(s) of the International Fire Code, with modifications presently adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission and as the same shall be provided by future order of said commission. 
(Code 1964, § 8-13; Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.16), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1351, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 1434, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1590, § 1, 10-1-12) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107. 
Sec. 9-62. - Definition. 
    Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the codes adopted by this article, it shall be held to mean the City of Miami, Oklahoma. 
(Code 1964, § 8-14) 
Sec. 9-63. - Enforcement. 
    The codes adopted by this article shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1964, § 8-15) 
Sec. 9-64. - Modifications. 
    The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the codes adopted by this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the codes, provided that the spirit of the codes shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 1964, § 8-16) 
Sec. 9-65. - Appeals from decisions made under code. 
    Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for under the provisions of the codes adopted by this article, or when it is claimed that the provisions of such codes do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the codes have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the board of commissioners within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision. 
(Code 1964, § 8-17) 
Sec. 9-66. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the codes adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the board of commissioners or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the specified time, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-5 of this Code. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1964, § 8-18) 
Sec. 9-67. - Open burning. 
(a)  No person shall cause or allow open burning within the city limits except as provided for under the currently applicable fire prevention standards as adopted by the city council. Open burning shall be defined as the burning, for the purposes of removing, clearing, or otherwise disposing therewith, any flammable waste material. 
(b)  Members of the public seeking to conduct an open burn shall contact the city fire chief to determine applicable regulations and fire codes. This section shall not prevent the public from operating any type of charcoal cooker or other type of grilling equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1439, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Note- Open Burning Code found in International Fire Code 2000 Section 307. 
Sec. 9-68. - Fireworks. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess, discharge or display fireworks within the City of Miami absent compliance with this section and compliance with all other applicable State and Federal law. 
B.  This ordinance distinguishes between 1.4G Consumer Fireworks (or "permissible fireworks") and 1.3G Display Fireworks. The specifications which distinguish 1.4G Consumer Fireworks from 1.3G Display Fireworks are found at 49 CFR 173.56, 27 CFR 55, 16 CFR 1507 American Pyrotechnics Association (APA) Standard 87-1, all of which are adopted herein by reference. 
C.  Private possession and use of 1.4G Consumer Fireworks. 
1.  Private persons may possess and discharge permissible fireworks, but only as provided by this ordinance. Possession and/or discharge of permissible fireworks contrary to this ordinance shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $100.00 per occurrence, together with restitution for any and all damages caused by the violation. Any permissible fireworks possessed or discharged in violation hereof shall be deemed contraband and may be seized by the Miami Police Department and/or the Miami Fire Department. 
2.  For purposes of this ordinance "permissible fireworks" shall mean 1.4G Consumer Fireworks. The term "fireworks" shall not include toy cap pistols and caps, blank cartridges, black-powder signal cannon or similar items used at the Red Robertson Stadium on the NEO A&M College, railroad flares or model rockets. 
3.  Permissible fireworks must be discharged on a non-combustible surface of sufficient size to contain the entire ground portion of the display and not closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any permanent structure. 
4.  Private persons may possess and safely discharge permissible fireworks from July 1 through July 5, and from December 30 until January 2, according to the following authorized schedule: 
a.  From 11:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. during July 1 through July 3; July 5 and January 1 and 2. 
b.  From 10:00 a.m. through midnight on July 4th. 
c.  From 11:00 a.m. on December 31st through 12:30 a.m. on January 1st. 
5.  Private persons may not use or discharge permissible fireworks on any paved street in excess of twenty-six (26) feet wide, such as an arterial street. 
6.  The possession and/or use of permissible fireworks by any minor child under twelve (12) years of age is prohibited unless said minor child is immediately and directly supervised by a responsible adult. 
7.  Possession or discharge of permissible fireworks by a person under the influence of, or impaired by, any intoxicating substance is prohibited and is punishable as provided herein. 
8.  Persons who discharge permissible fireworks have an affirmative duty to safely and promptly remove fireworks debris and properly dispose of the same. Failure to do so is prohibited and punishable as provided herein. 
D.  An adult person twenty-one (21) years of age or older may apply for a permit for a supervised public display utilizing 1.3G fireworks (Display Fireworks), which supervised public display(s) may occur any time of the year. No permit shall issue unless the Chief of the Miami Fire Department approves the application and no permit shall take effect unless the same shall bear the signature of the City Clerk. Application and Permit requirements shall include the following in addition to any administrative requirements imposed by the City Manager and/or the Miami Fire Department. Applications must be submitted in writing no less than five (5) days prior to the date of the proposed display to the City Clerk. 
1.  The permit holder shall conform to all requirements of NFPA 1123. Future amendments to NFPA 1123 which are not inconsistent with the explicit terms of this ordinance are hereby adopted by reference. 
2.  The permit holder shall furnish a bond for a minimum of $1,000,000.00 for the payment of all potential damage caused either to the person or property due to the permitted display. 
3.  The permit holder shall furnish a diagram of the site for the display; the diagram shall show the location of the firing site, spectator seating, and spectator parking area and shall meet the requirements of NFPA 1123. 
4.  No spectators or spectator parking shall be located within the minimum secured area determined by NFPA 1123. 
5.  The fireworks company or operator shall furnish an inventory list of the proposed fireworks to be fired at the site. 
6.  The permit holder shall obtain a site inspection from the Chief of the Miami Fire Department, or his designee, prior to the operation of the display. If the Chief, or his designee, determines that the site is unsatisfactory then the permit may be cancelled immediately and without further notice or hearing. 
7.  Every supervised public display applicant shall obtain any and all commercial and/or display fireworks permit(s) required under State or Federal law, and attach a copy thereof to their application. This shall include, but not be limited to, any applicable BATFE permit(s). 
8.  The display area shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times by the Miami Fire Department. Should the representative of the Miami Fire Department determine that the site location is out of compliance with the terms of the permit, or for any other good cause, then said representative may issue a suspension or revocation of the permit immediately and without further notice or hearing. 
E.  Retail sale. Adult person(s) may apply for an annual (good for twelve (12) calendar months from the date of issuance) permit to possess, display for sale, and offer Class 1.4G Consumer Fireworks for retail sale. The Miami Fire Department shall provide the administrative requirements for such permit(s). Miami Fire Department requirements must comply with this ordinance and applicable state and federal law, but otherwise are discretionary except that they shall include the following: 
1.  Consumer Fireworks may be sold by licensed retailers from June 15 through July 6 and from December 15 through January 2. 
2.  The application fee shall be $250, which may NOT be waived, for governmental entities, not-for-profit organizations, charitable foundations and student fund-raising groups hosted by Miami Public Schools, NEO A&M College, or a private primary or secondary education school physically located within the City of Miami. Such entities must be the recipient of all of the retail profits of the operation. The application fee shall be $750 for all other applicants and may NOT be waived. 
3.  The applicant(s) must be the actual vendor(s) who will manage and operate the stand and conduct the sales. 
4.  The sale permit shall be site-based and shall be located on commercially zoned property. Display for sale, and sale, at any other location shall be prohibited and shall operate as a forfeiture of the sale permit at the discretion of the Miami Fire Department. The site location must have direct access on an arterial street and adequate on-site parking so that the operation of the stand can be conducted without unreasonable interference with travel on the paved surface of the artery. 
5.  The applicant shall provide the City a copy of a valid Oklahoma state sales tax permit at the time the annual license application is submitted, if applicable. 
6.  The applicant shall provide the City a copy of the state license required by 68 O.S. § 1625, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
7.  The permit holder shall maintain liability insurance on each location in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 and in such form as may be required by the Miami Fire Department. 
8.  A list of the specified times fireworks may be legally discharged in the City limits and a copy of the original application and the permit must be openly and conspicuously displayed for public viewing at the permitted stand. 
9.  Possession, sale or discharge of fireworks by a person under the influence of, or impaired by, any intoxicating substance is prohibited. 
10.  The permitted stand shall be subject to inspection at times the stand is open to the public and at any other reasonable time by the Miami Fire Department. Should the representative of the Miami Fire Department determine that the site location is out of compliance with the terms of the permit, or for any other good cause, then said representative may issue a suspension or revocation of the permit immediately and without further notice or hearing. 
F.  Any violation of this ordinance pertaining to the possession and public exhibition of 1.3G Display Fireworks, or to the retail sale of 1.4G Consumer Fireworks, shall be a public offense punishable as set forth in Section 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances. 
G.  Fireworks possessed in violation of this ordinance are declared to be contraband, and the possession thereof is declared to be a public nuisance. Said fireworks are subject to immediate confiscation without compensation. 
H.  In the event that the Governor of the State of Oklahoma calls a red flag fire alert or burn ban for the area encompassing the City of Miami, or if the Fire Chief of the City of Miami, Oklahoma, shall otherwise request the same, then the City Manager may cancel and/or suspend the discharge of consumer fireworks and/or display fireworks permits issued under this ordinance for any reasonable time set in his or her sole discretion. 
I.  In the event that a permit is suspended or revoked there shall be no refund of permit fees. 
J.  No permit granted hereunder is transferrable or assignable. 
(Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 11-5-01; Ord. No. 1623, § 1, 6-3-2014; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Note- Fireworks Code found in International Fire Code 2000 Section 3301. 
Chapter 10 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Airport zoning ordinance, § 5-51 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; planning and development, ch. 18; subdivisions, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Accessory structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Examples of accessory structures include but are not limited to garages and storage sheds. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within the City of Miami subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation means the elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base flood or one percent (1%) chance flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    BFE means base flood elevation. 
    CFR means Code of Federal Regulations. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Development permit means a permit issued by the City of Miami Floodplain Administrator which authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in accordance with this Ordinance. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built, in the case of a building in Zones AE, A, and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones AE, A, and X, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 4, 1972. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    FIRM means Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters, or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map means an official map of the City of Miami on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the City of Miami. 
    Flood insurance study is the official report provided by FEMA for City of Miami which contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocity. 
    Floodplain administrator means a person accredited by the OWRB and designated by the City Council of the City of Miami to administer and implement laws, ordinances and regulations relating to the management of floodplains. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flood). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose regulations and ordinances (such as floodplain, grading and erosion control regulations and ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within City of Miami subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. A floodway is located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 10-6. A floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of Title 44 CFR. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the City of Miami's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Miami City Council and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the City of Miami Floodplain Board. 
    OWRB means the Oklahoma Water Resources Board. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Public Law 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance is a grant of relief by the city board of adjustment to a person from the terms of this Ordinance when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of Title 44 CFR.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this City of Miami Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-2; Ord. No. 1564, § 1(A.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Sec. 10-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Miami are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-1(b); Ord. No. 1564, § 1(B.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Sec. 10-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood-blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-1(c)) 
Sec. 10-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-1(d)) 
Sec. 10-5. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city, except as otherwise provided in sections 10-63 and 10-66 which apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-3(a)) 
Sec. 10-6. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Ottawa County, Oklahoma and Incorporated Areas" dated August 5, 2010, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-3(b); Ord. No. 1564, § 1(F.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Sec. 10-7. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-3(d); Ord. No. 1564, § 1(H.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Sec. 10-8. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-3(e)) 
Sec. 10-9. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the board of commissioners; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-3(f)) 
Sec. 10-10. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-3(g)) 
Sec. 10-11. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate or other certifications required in this Ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitution a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council of the City of Miami or its city attorney from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1(K.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1564, § 1(K.), adopted July 6, 2010, effective August 5, 2010, repealed § 10-11, and enacted a new § 10-11 as set out herein. The former § 10-11 pertained to criminal liability and derived from Code 1964, § 8A-6(a). 
Sec. 10-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1564, § 1(K.), adopted July 6, 2010, effective August 5, 2010, repealed § 10-12, which pertained to civil actions and derived from Code 1964, § 8A-6(b). 
Secs. 10-13-10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-36. - Floodplain administrator. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint the floodplain administrator, who shall be a person accredited by the OWRB. The city manager may designate municipal employee(s) or contractual agent(s) to discharge the duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator as he or she may deem appropriate in the sole discretion of the city manager. The floodplain administrator shall administer and implement the provisions of this Ordinance and other appropriate sections of National Flood Insurance Program regulations in Title 44 CFR pertaining to floodplain management. 
(b)  The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with Title 82 O.S. §§ 1601-1618, as amended. 
(2)  Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by this Ordinance. 
(4)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval are required. 
(5)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the FEMA. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  Require the developer/applicant to provide the base flood elevation, the lowest adjacent grade, the highest adjacent grade and other relevant information on the standard FEMA Elevation Certificate form prior to construction and after construction in order to administer the variance procedures of this chapter. 
(9)  When a floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE as delineated on the Ottawa County FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City of Miami. 
(10)  After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in the City of Miami, determine if the residential and non-residential structures and manufactured homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce the substantial improvement requirement. 
(11)  Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal. 
(12)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-4(a), (b); Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 1564, § 1(L.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Sec. 10-37. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  An application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and 
(2)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(b)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(c)  The floodplain administrator or board of adjustment, as applicable, may approve certain development in Zones A or AE delineated on the Ottawa County FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot, provided that the applicant for the development permit in that case first complies with 44 CFR Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 1564, § 1(N.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1564, § 1(M.), adopted July 6, 2010, effective August 5, 2010, repealed § 10-37. Section 1(N.) of said ordinance enacted a new § 10-37 as set out herein. The former § 10-37 pertained to development permit and derived from Code 1964, §§ 8A-3(c), 8A-4(c). 
Sec. 10-38. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  The Board of Adjustment of the City of Miami may grant variances for uses which do not satisfy the requirements of the Oklahoma Floodplain Management Act or this chapter, if the applicant for the variance presents adequate proof that (i) compliance with this chapter will result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property without sufficient benefit or advantage to the people and (ii) satisfies the pertinent provisions of this section. Provided, however, no variance shall be granted where the effect of the variance will be to permit the continuance of a condition which unreasonably creates flooding hazards. 
(2)  Any variance so granted shall not be construed as to relieve any person who receives it from any liability imposed by the Oklahoma Floodplain Management Act or by other laws of the state. 
(3)  In no case shall variances be effective for a period longer than twenty (20) years. 
(4)  Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the board of adjustment accompanied by a filing fee of $25.00. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 10-37(b) and provisions of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(6)  Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the base flood elevation will be issued a notice signed by the chairman of the board of adjustment which states that (i) the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built lower than the base flood elevation, and (ii) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
(7)  At such time as the board of adjustment deems the petition ready for notification to the public, the board of adjustment shall schedule a hearing and direct the applicant to publish notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in Ottawa County at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. 
(8)  The board of adjustment shall conduct the hearing and make determinations in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. The board of adjustment shall exercise wide discretion in weighing the equities involved and the advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to the public at large when determining whether the variance shall be granted. 
(9)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances; and 
d.  A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors stated in this section and the intent of this Ordinance, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives stated in section 10-3 of this Ordinance. 
(11)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance; and a copy of any variance shall be sent by the floodplain administrator to the OWRB and FEMA within fifteen (15) days after issuance of the variance. 
(b)  Special provisions. 
(1)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(2)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(3)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria of section 10-38(a)(5); section 10-38(a)(9); section 10-38(b)(2) and section 10-38(b)(3) are met, and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-4(d); Ord. No. 1564, § 1(O.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Sec. 10-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1493, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2005, repealed § 10-39, which pertained to EPA waiver required and derived from Code 1964, § 8A-4(e). 
Secs. 10-40-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 10-61. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-5(a); Ord. No. 1564, § 1(P.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Sec. 10-62. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards as set forth in Article III the following provisions are required: 
(a)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. 
(b)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. 
(c)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(d)  Manufactured homes. Require that all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones A and AE on the Ottawa County FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage, have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. The home shall be installed by a licensed installer according to Oklahoma State Law and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the floodplain administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home. 
(e)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A and AE on the Ottawa County FIRM either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
(3)  Meet the permit requirements of Article II, Section C, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (d) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(f)  Accessory structure. Accessory structures to be placed on sites within Zones A and AE on the Ottawa County FIRM shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The structure shall be unfinished on the interior; 
(2)  The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage; 
(3)  The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited activities or uses include but are not limited to working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom use; 
(4)  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be elevated to or above the BFE; 
(5)  The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
(6)  The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential and constructed with flood resistance materials; 
(7)  The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
(8)  Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the structure; 
(9)  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below the BFE; and 
(10)  The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent and nearby structures. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-5(b); Ord. No. 1564, § 1(Q.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Sec. 10-63. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located in Zones A and AE which is fifty-one (51) or more lots or greater than five (5) acres shall generate the base flood elevation data for that subdivision. 
(b)  All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(c)  All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-5(c); Ord. No. 1564, § 1(R.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Sec. 10-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1564, § 1(S.), adopted July 6, 2010, effective August 5, 2010, repealed § 10-64, which pertained to standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones) and derived from Code 1964, § 8A-5(d). 
Sec. 10-65. - Floodways. 
    The following provisions shall apply to floodways: 
(1)  Encroachments, including but not limited to fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development are prohibited within the adopted floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the City of Miami during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If section 10-65(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(3)  The City of Miami may permit encroachments within the adopted floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the applicant for the development permit complies with all of 44 CFR Section 65.12. 
(Code 1964, § 8A-5(e); Ord. No. 1564, § 1(T.), 7-6-10, eff. 8-5-10) 
Sec. 10-66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1564, § 1(U.), adopted July 6, 2010, effective August 5, 2010, repealed § 10-66, which pertained to standards for nonresidential development and derived from Code 1964, § 8A-5(f). 
Secs. 10-67-10-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOOD MITIGATION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 10-71. - Creation of the Miami Flood Mitigation Advisory Board. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Miami Flood Mitigation Advisory Board. 
(b)  The Miami Flood Mitigation Advisory Board shall have the authority to inquire into all flood-related issues which may affect the City of Miami, Oklahoma, and to make recommendations to the city council pertaining thereto. The Miami Flood Mitigation Advisory Board shall have no authority to establish municipal policy. The board may make policy recommendations to the city council and propose written resolutions and ordinances to the city council. 
(c)  The Miami Flood Mitigation Advisory Board shall consist of the following members: 
(1)  The mayor, who shall serve ex officio as chairman of the board. 
(2)  A member of the city council who shall serve ex officio as a full member of the board. 
(3)  Four (4) community representatives to be nominated by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council. Said representatives shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(4)  One (1) community representative nominated by the Inter-Tribal Council, Inc., subject to confirmation by the city council. Said representatives shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(d)  The city manager, city attorney and city clerk are charged with the duty to provide reasonable assistance and cooperation with the Miami Flood Mitigation Advisory Board> to assist them in the discharge of their responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Chapter 11 - HUMAN RIGHTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Human rights, 25 O.S. § 1101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1-11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to prohibit discrimination, 25 O.S. § 1702; housing discrimination, 25 O.S. § 1451 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-26. - Purposes; construction. 
    The general purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To secure for all people equal access to housing in all neighborhoods; and 
(2)  To preserve the public safety, health and welfare. 
(Code 1964, § 10-11) 
Sec. 11-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Discriminatory housing practice shall mean an act that is prohibited pursuant to this article. 
    Elderly person shall mean any natural person fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
    Handicapped person shall mean a natural person having a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of a major life activity of such person and includes a record of such an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment. 
    Housing shall mean any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, designed, or intended for occupancy as a residence by one (1) or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Person shall mean and include one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries, the state, and all political subdivisions and agencies thereof. 
    Restrictive covenants shall mean any specification limiting the transfer, rental, or lease of any dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or handicap. 
    Unlawful discriminatory practice because of age shall mean an act prohibited pursuant to this article against a person at least eighteen (18) years of age or older solely on that basis. 
(Code 1964, §§ 10-11-10-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 25 O.S. § 1451 et seq. 
Sec. 11-28. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or handicap, for any person, or any agent or employee of such person: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of any housing, or otherwise make unavailable or deny any housing. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of housing, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with any housing. 
(3)  To make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of housing that indicates any preference, limitation, discrimination, or intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person, for reasons of discrimination, that any housing is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such housing is in fact so available. 
(5)  To deny any person access, membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate broker's organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting housing, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation. 
(6)  To include in any transfer, sale, rental or lease of housing any restrictive covenant that discriminates, or for any person to honor or exercise, or attempt to honor or exercise, any discriminatory covenant pertaining to housing. 
(7)  To refuse to consider the income of both applicants when both applicants seek to buy or lease housing. 
(8)  To refuse to consider as a valid source of income any public assistance, alimony or child support, awarded by a court, when that source can be verified as to its amount, length of time received, regularity, or receipt. 
(9)  To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges relating to the obtaining or use of financial assistance for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing. 
(10)  To discharge, demote or discriminate in matters of compensation or working conditions against any employee or agent because of the obedience of such employee or agent to the provisions of this section. 
(11)  To solicit or attempt to solicit the listing of housing for sale or lease, by door to door solicitation, in person, or by telephone, or by distribution of circulars, if one (1) of the purposes is to change the racial composition of the neighborhood. 
(12)  To knowingly induce or attempt to induce another person to transfer an interest in real property, or to discourage another person from purchasing real property, by representations regarding the existing or potential proximity of real property owned, used or occupied by persons of any particular race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or handicap, or to represent that such existing or potential proximity shall or may result in: 
a.  The lowering of property values, 
b.  A change in the racial, religious, or ethnic character of the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is located, 
c.  An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area, or 
d.  A decline in quality of the schools serving the area. 
(13)  To refuse to rent or lease housing to a blind, deaf or handicapped person on the basis of the person's use or possession of a bona fide, properly trained guide, signal or service dog. 
(14)  To demand the payment of an additional nonrefundable fee or an unreasonable deposit for rent from a blind, deaf or handicapped person for such dog. Such blind, deaf or handicapped person may be liable for any damage done to the dwelling by such dog. 
(b)  No other categories or classes of persons are protected under this article. The fair housing board shall have no authority or jurisdiction to act on complaints based on any kind of discrimination other than those kinds prohibited herein. 
(Code 1964, §§ 10-11, 10-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 25 O.S. § 1452. 
Sec. 11-29. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article do not: 
(1)  Prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of housing which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preferences to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin. 
(2)  Apply to a private membership club which is a bona fide club and which is exempt from taxation pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
(3)  Prohibit any person from refusing to sell, rent or advertise any housing which is planned exclusively for, or occupied exclusively by elderly persons. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, a person may sell, rent or advertise housing to elderly persons only if the housing is planned exclusively for or occupied exclusively by a group of elderly persons. 
(4)  Apply to the rental of rooms within housing in which the owner maintains his principal residence, or to the rental of any apartment, in housing containing not more than four (4) units and in which the owner maintains his principal residence. 
(5)  Prevent or restrict the sale, lease, rental, transfer or development of housing designed or intended for the use of the handicapped. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the transfer of property by will, intestate succession or by gift. 
(Code 1964, § 10-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 25 O.S. § 1453. 
Secs. 11-30-11-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 11-46. - Fair housing board created. 
    There is hereby created a fair housing board of the city composed of five (5) members, to be appointed by the board of commissioners for terms of three (3) years. 
(Code 1964, § 10-14) 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, etc., § 2-141 et seq. 
Sec. 11-47. - Duties of board. 
    It shall be the duty of the fair housing board to: 
(1)  Initiate, receive and investigate complaints charging unlawful housing practices. 
(2)  Seek conciliation of such complaints, hold hearings, make findings of fact and publish its findings of fact. 
(3)  Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary within the limits of this article, and carry out the purpose and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 10-15) 
Sec. 11-48. - Procedure. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any discriminatory practice prohibited by this article may file with the fair housing board a complaint in writing, under oath. Such complaint shall be signed by the person claiming to be aggrieved and shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have violated the provisions of this article, and shall further set forth the particulars of such violation and may include such other information as may be required by the board. Complaints filed under this section must be filed within thirty (30) days after the alleged violation, and failure to file within such time shall be considered a waiver of the application of this article. The board may issue a complaint on its own initiative at any time it is within the knowledge of the board that a person has violated any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The fair housing board shall investigate each complaint filed with the board and shall attempt an adjustment of such complaint by means of conference and conciliation. Sixty (60) days shall be allowed for the purpose of investigation, conference and conciliation. Upon determination that a complaint is not well-founded, the board shall dismiss such complaint and notify the complainant and respondent in writing of such dismissal. If it appears that the complaint might have merit, the complainants shall be advised of their right under existing state and federal laws. 
(c)  If conference or conciliation does not result in compliance with this article, the fair housing board shall cause to be issued and serve in the name of the city a written notice, together with a copy of such complaint, requiring the person named in such complaint, hereinafter referred to as respondent, to answer charges of such complaint at a hearing before the board at a time and place to be specified in the notice. 
(d)  At the hearing, provided for in subparagraph (c) above, the complaint shall be heard by the fair housing board. At the hearing, the complainant or person aggrieved may appear in person and/or by counsel and the respondent may file a written answer to the complaint and may appear in person or by legal counsel. The board, when conducting any hearing, pursuant to this section, may permit amendments to any complaint or answer, and the testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath and shall be transcribed at the request of either party or at the direction of the board, the party requesting the transcription to be responsible for the costs thereof. If the board finds at such hearing that the respondent has engaged in any discriminatory practice, prohibited by this article, it shall state its findings of fact and shall so certify the matter to the city attorney for appropriate action. No prosecution shall be brought under this article except upon such certification. 
(e)  If the fair housing board, upon hearing, finds that the respondent has not engaged in any discriminatory practice, it shall state its findings of fact, and shall issue and file an order dismissing the complaint. The board shall establish rules and regulations to govern and expedite and effectuate the foregoing procedure, and shall maintain the files provided for herein. 
(Code 1964, § 10-16) 
Sec. 11-49. - Notices. 
    Any and all notices required under the provisions of this article to be served upon any person may be served personally on such person, or by mailing a copy thereof by certified or registered mail, with return receipt requested, to the most current business or residence address of such person. 
(Code 1964, § 10-17) 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; fair housing, § 11-26 et seq.; peddlers, solicitors and itinerant vendors, ch. 17; vehicles for hire, ch. 25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Food handler's permit. 
(a)  In this section the term "food handler" means any person who engages in the preparation, serving or other related aspects of serving food to the public. 
(b)  All food handlers shall be required to obtain, from the county health department, a food handler's permit, the issuance of which shall be subject to the requirements provided by the county health department. 
(c)  Such permits shall be obtained within thirty (30) days from the first day of the month it expires. Permits acquired hereunder shall be effective for two (2) years from the date of issuance. Applicants shall pay to the county health department such fees as they may, from time to time, establish for such permits. 
(Code 1964, §§ 9-14, 9-15) 
Sec. 12-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1611, § 1, adopted August 6, 2013, repealed § 12-2, which pertained to license for miscellaneous trades, exhibitions, amusements and derived from Code 1964, § 12-13; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, adopted June 7, 2010. The users' attention is directed to Ch. 12 et seq., Licenses, Taxation and Miscellaneous Regulations for similar provisions. 
Sec. 12-3. - Display of goods, signs on streets restricted; central business district. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Buildings shall mean and include all buildings in which business establishments are located within the central business district. 
(2)  Business establishment shall mean any merchant engaged in the retail or wholesale of merchandise and shall include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations or any other legal entity engaged in such business. 
(3)  Central business district shall mean and include all those areas adjacent to the east of A Street East thence west to those areas adjacent to the west of "A" Street West from Fifth Avenue South, north to Ninth Avenue North of the city. 
(4)  Merchandise shall mean any article of goods, wares or merchandise offered to the public by any business establishment, either through sale, gift or otherwise. 
(5)  Sidewalk shall mean any walkway from the building line to the curbline designed for the use of pedestrians. 
(6)  Sign shall mean any piece of equipment which rests on the ground, either fixed or movable, used by any business establishment in the advertisement of their products or services. 
(7)  Streets shall mean those thoroughfares between curblines designed for the movement of traffic, both mechanical and pedestrian. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any business establishment in the city to display its goods, wares or merchandise upon the sidewalks or streets of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any business establishment to place upon the sidewalks or within the traffic lane of any street any sign advertising the merchandise or service offered by such business establishment. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any sign, awning or canopy attached to any building in the central business district to extend beyond a point of four (4) feet inside the curb line or extend less than ten (10) feet above the ground level or more than ten (10) feet above the roof line of such building. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct any sign on the face of a building in the central business district without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer. 
(f)  Nothing in this section contained shall preclude the City Council from authorizing in special cases the display of merchandise by business establishments where the same is on a city-wide basis and considered to be in the public interest. This section specifically excludes newspaper vending machines which are normally located on the sidewalks for the benefit and convenience of the public. 
(Code 1964, § 12-40.3(a)-(c), (f); Ord. No. 1654, § 1, 12-8-2015) 
Secs. 12-4-12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal utility taxes, 68 O.S. § 2601 et seq. 

Sec. 12-26. - Natural gas tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax upon every person engaged in commercial sales of natural gas for residential and commercial purposes with the city, in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross revenue received by such person from the sale of natural gas for residential or commercial purposes in the city. Such tax shall be payable quarterly and placed in the general revenue fund of the city. 
(b)  During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this section by any person engaged in the sale of natural gas in the city for commercial or residential purposes, the charge levied hereby shall be and continue to be in lieu of all franchise, license, occupation or excise taxes levied by the city, except ad valorem taxes. 
(Code 1964, § 24-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy above tax, 68 O.S. § 2601; payment of tax, 68 O.S. § 2603. 
Sec. 12-27. - Telephone tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each and every person operating a telephone exchange in the city, in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross revenues for each current year for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the city, to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident to the exercise of the police regulation and police control of the construction of lines and equipment of such telephone company in the city. Such tax shall be due and payable on or before the first day of May of each year, and shall be paid into and appropriated and expended from the general revenue fund of the city. 
(b)  During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this section by the owner of any telephone exchange, the tax levied hereby shall be and continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license, privilege and permit fees or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes; provided, however, that it is not intended to extinguish or abrogate any existing arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit, duct space or pole contacts of such company for the fire alarm and police call systems of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 24-2) 
Secs. 12-28-12-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY SALES TAX 

Sec. 12-46. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "City of Miami Sales Tax Ordinance-1985." 
(Code 1964, § 6-1) 
Sec. 12-47. - Definitions. 
(a)  The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in 68 O.S. § 1352 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(b)  The term "tax collector" as used in this article means the department of the city government or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax herein levied. 
(Code 1964, §§ 6-2, 6-3) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-48. - Classification of taxpayers. 
    For the purpose of this article the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code [68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.]. 
(Code 1964, § 6-4) 
State Law reference- Classification of vendors, 68 O.S. § 1363. 
Sec. 12-49. - Subsisting state permits. 
    All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code [68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.] are, for the purpose of this article hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Code 1964, § 6-5) 
State Law reference- State permits, 68 O.S. § 1364. 
Sec. 12-50. - Purpose of revenues. 
    It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the City. It hereby is declared to be the purpose of the revenues provided by the additional sixty-five hundredths of one percent (0.65%) excise tax levied by this Ordinance to provide revenues for street and road improvements and by paying the principal of and interest on indebtedness incurred on behalf of said city for said purposes. Upon retirement of the aforementioned indebtedness, or call and refinancing of the same, this additional sixty-five hundredths of one percent (0.65%) excise tax levied by this article shall continue and shall provide revenues for the additional purpose of the improvement and construction of a community event center and stadium complex to be located at the Northeastern Oklahoma A&M College campus in Miami, Oklahoma, and to retire indebtedness thereupon incurred by the city or by a public trust of which the city is a beneficiary in a principal amount not to exceed eight million and eight hundred thousand dollars and interest thereupon. This sales tax shall not be repealed until such time as such indebtedness is retired. This sales tax shall no longer be levied or collected upon the retirement of the indebtedness incurred for these purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 6-7; Ord. No. 1558, § 1, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 1591, § 1, 11-5-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 12-51. - Tax levied. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an excise tax of three and sixty-five hundredths of one percent (3.65%) upon the gross proceeds or gross proceeds derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code [68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.]. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article such tax does apply to gross receipts or proceeds derived from the sale of natural or artificial gas and electricity. 
(Code 1964, § 6-8; Ord. No. 1558, § 2, 3-15-10) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy sales tax, 68 O.S. § 2701 et seq.; sales subject to state tax, 68 O.S. § 1354. 
Sec. 12-52. - Exceptions. 
    The tax levied by the provisions of this article does not apply to those transactions, sales or transfers exempt from tax under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code [68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.]. 
(Code 1964, §§ 6-9, 6-10) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, 68 0.8. §§ 1355-1360. 
Sec. 12-53. - Due date for tax. 
    The tax levied under this article shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the state sales tax law. 
(Code 1964, § 6-11) 
State Law reference- Due date of state tax, 68 O.S. § 1365. 
Sec. 12-54. - Payment of tax; bracket system of collection. 
(a)  The tax levied by this article shall be paid to the tax collector at the time in form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax under the state sales tax law. 
(b)  The bracket system for the collection of the three-percent city sales tax by the tax collector, shall be as the same is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the city, and the tax collector, in the collection of both the three-percent city sales tax and the appropriate state sales tax. 
(Code 1964, § 6-12) 
State Law reference- Payment of state tax, 68 O.S. § 1362. 
Sec. 12-55. - Priority of tax, penalty and interest; collection by suit. 
    The taxes, penalty, and interest due under this article shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Code 1964, § 6-13) 
Sec. 12-56. - Vendor's duty to collect tax; penalty for violation. 
(a)  The tax levied under this article shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor and it shall be the duty of each and every vendor in the city to collect from the consumer or user, the full amount of the tax levied by this article, or in an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent thereof. 
(b)  Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(c)  A vendor who willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this article, or willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner, whatsoever, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1964, § 6-14) 
Sec. 12-57. - Returns and remittances; discounts. 
    Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code [68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.]. Remittances of tax collected under this article shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by such code for collection of state sales taxes. 
(Code 1964, § 6-15) 
State Law reference- Returns and remittances, 68 O.S. § 1365. 
Sec. 12-58. - Levy and collection of interest and penalties; forfeit of discount and penalties; forfeit of discount. 
    The provisions of 68 O.S. § 217, are hereby adopted and made a part of this article, and interest and penalties at the rate and in the amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this article. The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this article shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this article. 
(Code 1964, § 6-16) 
Sec. 12-59. - Waiver and remission of interest and penalties. 
    The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax levied by this article may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for such waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220; and to accomplish the purposes of this section the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 6-17) 
Sec. 12-60. - Refund of erroneous payments. 
    Refund of any erroneous payment of the city sales tax levied by this article may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 6-18) 
Sec. 12-61. - False and fraudulent reports; failure to make reports and remittances. 
    In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this article shall be an offense. 
(Code 1964, § 6-19) 
Sec. 12-62. - Records and files declared confidential. 
    The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. §§ 205 through 205.2 inclusive and each subsection thereof is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as if hereto set forth in full. 
(Code 1964, § 6-20) 
Sec. 12-63. - Amendments and additions to provisions. 
    The people of the city by their approval of this article at the election hereinabove provided, hereby authorize the board of commissioners by ordinances duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this article as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(Code 1964, § 6-21) 
Sec. 12-64. - Provisions cumulative. 
    The provisions of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Code 1964, § 6-22) 
Secs. 12-65-12-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POOL HALLS AND DOMINO PARLORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- State regulation of pool halls, 21 O.S. § 1101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-81. - Obstruction of view. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a pool or billiard hall or domino parlor in any room having a partition between the front and rear entrance or to so screen the windows of such hall or parlor as to obstruct the view in any manner from the outside. 
(Code 1964, § 19-1) 
Sec. 12-82. - Minors prohibited; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any pool or billiard hall or domino parlor in the city to permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter the same or play pool, billiards or dominoes therein, unless accompanied by his parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter any such establishment or play pool, billiards or dominoes therein, unless accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(Code 1964, § 19-2) 
Secs. 12-83-12-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-96. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool or billiard hall or domino parlor in the city, without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 19-13) 
Sec. 12-97. - Application. 
    Every person desiring a license required by this division shall make written application therefor and file the same with the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 19-14) 
Sec. 12-98. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for a license required by this division shall be $50.00; provided, however, the fee for a license issued after January first of any year shall be $25.00. 
(Code 1964, § 19-15) 
Sec. 12-99. - Issuance. 
    A license required by this division shall be issued by the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 19-16) 
Sec. 12-100. - Expiration. 
    Every license issued under the provisions of this division shall expire on the thirtieth day of June of each year. 
(Code 1964, § 19-17) 
Sec. 12-101. - Revocation. 
    Any license issued under the terms of this division shall be revokable at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1964, § 19-18) 
Secs. 12-102-12-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FAMILY RECREATION CENTERS 

Sec. 12-126. - Defined. 
    A family recreation center is hereby defined as a room or place where two (2) or more pool or billiard tables are maintained or where one (1) or more foosball or one (1) or more air hockey or pinball tables are maintained, or where there is a combination of any of these tables abovenamed and said tables are operated for a profit for use by all persons of all ages and either sex and designed to furnish recreation for families. 
(Code 1964, § 19-29) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-127. - Establishment and operation authorized. 
    The establishment and operation of family recreation centers in the city is hereby authorized and permitted with the passage of this article, subject to the regulations herein contained. 
(Code 1964, § 19-30) 
Sec. 12-128. - Exceptions. 
    Bowling alleys and skating rinks shall be exempt from the provisions regarding family recreation centers under this article. 
(Code 1964, § 19-36.1) 
Sec. 12-129. - Alcoholic beverages, gambling prohibited on premises; amusement machines; opening, closing hours. 
(a)  Family recreation centers may operate pool and billiard tables for a profit and for the use of all persons of all ages and either sex. 
(b)  No beer or other forms of intoxicating liquors or nonintoxicating alcoholic beverages may be sold or consumed or permitted on the premises. 
(c)  No gambling or wagering of any kind shall be permitted on the premises. Provided, that amusement machines may be installed and operated in family recreation centers, but the cost of playing such machines shall not exceed $0.50 per game, and such machine shall not give as a bonus more than five (5) free games and no cash refund for free games shall be made; each amusement machine must bear a state license showing that the state license fee has been paid. 
(d)  All such places of business shall not open before 8:00 a.m. nor remain open later than 12:00 midnight, except that on Sunday of each week such place of business shall not open until 12:00 noon. 
(Code 1964, § 19-31) 
Sec. 12-130. - License required; amount, proration of fee. 
    The owner of each family recreation center upon approval by the chief of police shall purchase a license from the city clerk for each location by payment of an annual fee of $50.00 provided that if less than six (6) months remain in the fiscal year in which the license is issued, the fee charged will be $25.00 for the remainder of that fiscal year. 
(Code 1964, § 19-36) 
Sec. 12-131. - Examination, approval of owner, manager, employees prerequisite to issuance of license. 
    Each owner, manager and employee of any family recreation center must be examined and approved by the chief of police of the city before any license shall issue. 
(Code 1964, § 19-34) 
Sec. 12-132. - Supervision and control of centers; suspension of operation; notice and hearing; revocation of license; appeal. 
    Family recreation centers shall be under the direct supervision and control of the chief of police and officers of the police department, and upon learning of any violation of this article, the chief of police shall suspend the operation of such family recreation center and give notice to the licensee of a hearing to be held before the chief of police not more than five (5) days thereafter, and the license of such licensee may be revoked upon such hearing. If revoked, the licensee shall have the right of appeal and hearing before the board of commissioners by giving notice of his intention to appeal, and such hearing shall be held at the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1964, § 19-33) 
Sec. 12-133. - Frequenting of centers by minors during school hours. 
    No owner, manager or employee of a family recreation center shall permit any youth sixteen (16) years of age or less to be in or about such establishment during school hours when public schools are in session. 
(Code 1964, § 19-35) 
Secs. 12-134-12-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTRONIC AND VIDEO GAMES 

Sec. 12-156. - Exceptions. 
    Any establishment or business holding a license as otherwise set forth in this chapter shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 19-41) 
Sec. 12-157. - License required; application. 
    Any establishment or business which has on its premises two (2) or more electronic or video game machines shall be required to have a license as set forth herein. Every establishment or business desiring a license required by this article shall make written application therefore and file the same with the city clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 19-37) 
Sec. 12-158. - License fee; issuance, expiration of license. 
    The annual fee for a license required by this article shall be $50.00; provided, however, the fee for a license issued after January first of any year shall be $25.00. A license required by this article shall be issued by the city clerk. Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on the thirteenth day of June of each year. 
(Code 1964, § 19-38) 
Sec. 12-159. - Supervision and control; suspension of operations; notice of hearing; revocation of license; appeal. 
    Any establishment or business required to procure a license as set forth herein shall be under the direct supervision and control of the chief of police and officers of the police department, and upon learning of any violation of this article or this Code in general, the chief of police shall suspend the operation of such electronic or video game machines and give notice to the licensee of a hearing to be held before the chief of police not more than five (5) days thereafter, and the license of such licensee may be revoked upon such hearing. If revoked, the licensee shall have right of appeal and hearing before the board of commissioners by giving notice of his intent to appeal, and such hearing shall be held at the next regular scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1964, § 19-39) 
Sec. 12-160. - Examination, approval of owner, manager, employees prerequisite to issuance of license. 
    Each owner, manager and employee of any establishment or business desiring to acquire a license under this article, must be examined and approved by the chief of police before any license shall issue. 
(Code 1964, § 19-40) 
Secs. 12-161-12-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 12-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garage sales shall mean and include all sales entitled garage sales, lawn sales, attic sales, rummage sales, flea market sales or any other similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of such sale. Advertisement shall include any and all written or oral notification that might be received by three (3) or more persons at any one (1) time, and shall include display of merchandise to the public. 
    Goods shall mean and include any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder. 
(Code 1964, § 12-12(a)) 
Sec. 12-182. - Penalty. 
    Any person conducting any sale coming under this article without first being properly licensed therefor or who shall violate any of the other terms and regulations of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 12-12(f)) 
Sec. 12-183. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Any person selling or advertising for sale items of personal property which are specifically named or designated in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five (5) in number. 
(Code 1964, § 12-12(e)) 
Sec. 12-184. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the city without first filing with the city clerk the information hereinafter specified, and obtaining from such clerk a license to do so, to be known as a garage sale license. There shall be a fee of $5.00 for the license required herein. 
(b)  Such license shall be issued to any one (1) person or household at any one (1) address only four (4) times within a twelve-month period and no such license shall be issued for more than four (4) consecutive calendar days. 
(c)  Each license issued under this article must be prominently displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the licensed sale. 
(d)  The information to be filed with the city clerk, pursuant to this section, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Name of person conducting such sale. 
(2)  Name of owner of the property on which such sale is to be conducted, and consent of owner if applicant is other than the owner. 
(3)  Location at which sale is to be conducted. 
(4)  Number of days of sale. 
(5)  Date, nature of any past sale. 
(6)  Relationship or connection applicant may have had with any other person conducting such sale and the date, or dates, of such sale. 
(7)  Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's license by any local, state or federal agency. 
(8)  Sworn statement of affirmation by the person signing that the information given is full and true and known to him to be so. 
(Code 1964, § 12-12(b), (c), (d); Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-7-10) 
Secs. 12-185-12-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HOTEL TAX 

Sec. 12-200. - Citation and codification. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the City of Miami Hotel Tax Ordinance of 1998, and is hereinafter referred to as "article." 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-201. - Subsisting state permits. 
    All valid and subsisting permits to do business by the Oklahoma Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the purposes of this article, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-202. - Effective date and termination. 
    This article shall become and be effective on or after September 1, 1998, subject to approval of a majority of the registered voters of the city, voting on the same in the manner prescribed by law; provided that upon approval of the voters as required above, this article shall remain in effect and not be repealed unless repealed by a majority of the registered voters of the city, voting to repeal same in the manner as required by its approval. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-203. - Definitions. 
    Advisory Board shall mean Miami Recreation, Tourism, Convention and Visitors Bureau. 
    City financial officer (CFO) shall mean the person(s), employee(s) or agent(s) designated by the city manager to perform this role or function for purposes of this article. 
    Hotel or motel shall mean any building or buildings, structure, trailer, or other facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in which three (3) or more rooms are used for the accommodation of transient guests whether such rooms are in one (1) or several structures. The term shall include hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, bed and breakfast inns, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, apartments and sleeping rooms not occupied by "permanent residents," and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping accommodations or space are furnished for a consideration. The term shall not include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, university dormitories or other educational or charitable institutions. 
    Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings, or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or rooms. 
    Occupant shall mean a person who for a consideration uses, possesses, or has the right to use of [or] possess any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement. 
    Permanent resident shall mean any occupant who, during the current term of occupancy, occupies or has the right of occupancy of any room or rooms in a hotel for thirty (30) or more consecutive days. 
    Rent shall mean the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Return shall mean any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
    Room shall mean any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel which is available for or let out for use or possessed for any purpose other than a place of assembly. As used herein, "place of assembly" means a room or space which is not capable of being occupied for lodging purposes and which is used for educational, recreational, or amusement purposes and shall include: dance halls; cabarets; night clubs; restaurants; any room or space for public or private banquets, feasts, socials, card parties, or weddings; lodge and meeting halls or rooms; skating rinks; gymnasiums; swimming pools; billiards; bowling, and table tennis rooms; halls or rooms used for public or private catering purposes; funeral parlors; markets; recreational rooms; concert halls; broadcasting studios; and all other places of similar type of occupancy. 
    Tax shall mean the tax levied pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 1548, § 1(A.), 10-5-09; Ord. No. 1585, § 1(B.), 7-16-12; Ord. No. 1659, § 1(A.), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 12-204. - Use of funds. 
    All taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall, except as otherwise provided for therein, be set aside and used exclusively to benefit the community by creating, organizing and administering projects designed to increase the convention, tourism and visitor expenditures in the city. The city manager may, in his sole and exclusive discretion, prospectively establish and/or disestablish a "Convention and Visitor's Bureau", or as otherwise designated, as an administrative branch, bureau, department, or assignment area of the city under his authority. 
(Ord. No. 1548, § 1(B.), 10-5-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1548, § 1(B.), adopted Oct. 5, 2009, repealed § 12-204, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 12-204 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 12-205. - Miami Recreation, Tourism, Convention and Visitors Advisory Board. 
(a)  Renaming and Expanding. The Miami Convention and Tourism Advisory Board also known as Miami Convention and Visitors Bureau and also known as the Miami Convention, Tourism and Visitors Advisory Board is hereby renamed and its governing board is hereby expanded by two (2) members, as provided herein, to become the Miami Recreation, Tourism, Convention and Visitors Advisory Board, (hereafter "Advisory Board") which shall be composed of nine (9) voting members. 
(b)  Membership. All voting members of the Advisory Board shall be residents of Miami or residents of Ottawa County with the location of their place of employment in Miami. If any member moves their primary residence or place of employment outside the specified geographical location, then such relocation shall operate as a resignation of their membership. 
(c)  Compensation. All voting members shall serve without compensation. 
(d)  Constitution of the Advisory Board: The Mayor shall nominate, subject to confirmation by the City Council, a Council Member to serve ex officio as a voting member of the Advisory Board and to serve as its Chairperson. The City Council shall appoint eight (8) additional voting members of the Advisory Board from nominations made by the Mayor. One City Councilperson may serve ex officio as one of the eight additional voting members of the Advisory Board appointed by the City Council. If so selected, this second Councilperson shall serve as the Advisory Board's Vice-Chairperson. If a second Councilperson is not selected to serve on the Advisory Board, said Board shall select the Vice-Chairperson from among its own members. 
(e)  Term of office. The term(s) of office for each Advisory Board member position shall be reset as of the effective date of this ordinance. The City Council shall appoint a Council Member to serve ex officio in the first member position and may appoint a second Councilmember to serve ex officio in any one of the remaining member positions. Otherwise the terms of the member positions are as follows. The second and third member positions shall serve for an initial term of four (4) years. The fourth and fifth member positions shall serve for an initial term of three (3) years. The sixth and seventh member positions shall serve for an initial term of two (2) years. The eighth member position shall serve for an initial term of one (1) year. Following the end of each initial term, each such Advisory Board member position not filled by a Council Member shall be appointed for a two (2) year term. 
(f)  Removal. The mayor and city council may, with or without cause, remove any of the board members described in this section. 
(g)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The meetings of the Advisory Board shall be called by the Chairman or upon the written request of two (2) board members. 
(2)  Five (5) members shall constitute a quorum and all resolutions may be transacted by a simple majority of a quorum. 
(3)  All meetings and transactions of the Advisory Board shall comply with applicable provisions of the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act and Oklahoma Open Records Act , in addition to all other relevant and applicable law(s). 
(4)  The Advisory Board shall have no authority to engage employees, agents or paid consultants, appropriate funds, establish a budget, or to enter into contractual agreements. 
(5)  The Advisory Board shall have the authority to make recommendations to the Mayor, City Council and City Manager with regard to the Hotel Tax revenue(s); to meet with representatives of the City; to confer with persons with knowledge of the hotel industry, tourism and attractions, and marketing; and to liaison with local, regional, state and national organizations for the development of promotion and marketing strategies. 
(6)  The Advisory Board shall have the authority to make recommendations to the Mayor, City Council and City Manager with regard to the establishment, provision, maintenance, construction, and conduct of municipally owned parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, athletic fields or grounds, swimming pools, social and community centers, and recreation programs. 
(Ord. No. 1548, § 1(B.), 10-5-09; Ord. No. 1619, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1648, § 1, 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 1659, § 1(B.), 8-16-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1548, § 1(B.), adopted Oct. 5, 2009, repealed § 12-205, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 12-205 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 12-206. - Tax levied. 
    There is hereby levied an excise tax of five percent (5%) of the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel or motel in this city. This excise tax shall be in addition to any existing sales taxes imposed by the city or the state. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 1602, § 1, 3-5-13) 
Sec. 12-207. - Exemptions. 
    The following guests shall be exempt from the tax levied in this article: 
(1)  Permanent residents as defined in this article; 
(2)  Reserved. 
Every operator shall document the basis for which the exemptions are made pursuant to this section on a form provided by the CFO or, if no form is provided, in sufficient detail as to be verified by audit by the CFO. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 1389, § 1, 1-18-99) 
Sec. 12-208. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1389, § 1, adopted Jan. 18, 1999, repealed § 12-208 which pertained to proof of exemption. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 12-209. - Tax to be designated. 
    The operator shall separately designate, charge, and show all taxes on all bills, statements, receipts, or any other evidence of charges or payment of rent for occupancy issued or delivered by the operator. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-210. - Operator responsibility for collection. 
    The operator shall be responsible for the collection of the tax from the occupant and shall be liable to the city for the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-211. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every operator required to make a return and pay any tax under this article to keep and preserve suitable records of the gross daily rentals together with other pertinent records and documents which may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due hereunder and such other records as will substantiate and prove the accuracy of such returns. All records shall remain in the city and be preserved for a period of three (3) years, unless the CFO, in writing, has authorized their destruction or disposal at an earlier date, and shall be open to examination at any time by the CFO or by any of his duly authorized agents. The burden of proving that a sale was not a taxable sale shall be upon the operator who makes the sale. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-212. - Returns. 
(a)  The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable to the CFO on the first day of each month, except as herein provided, by any person liable for the payment of any tax due under this article. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of the tax payable under this article, it shall be the duty of all operators, on or before the 15th day of each month, to deliver to the CFO, upon forms prescribed and furnished by him, returns, under oath, showing the gross receipts or gross proceeds arising from rents received from occupancy of hotel rooms during the preceding calendar month. Such returns shall show such further information as the CFO may require to correctly compute and collect the tax herein levied. In addition to the information required on returns, the CFO may request and the operator shall furnish any information deemed necessary for a correct computation of the tax levied herein. Such operator shall compute and remit to the CFO the required tax due for the preceding calendar month. The remittance or remittances of the tax shall accompany the returns herein required. If not paid on or before the 15th of such month, the tax shall be delinquent after such date; provided, that no interest or penalty shall be charged on such return filed on or before the 20th day of such month. 
(b)  The CFO may permit or require returns to be made by shorter or longer periods and upon such dates as he may specify. The form of return shall be prescribed by the CFO and shall contain such information as he may deem necessary for the proper administration of this article. The CFO may require amended returns to be filed within twenty (20) days after notice, which amended return shall contain the information specified in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-213. - Payment of tax. 
    At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall pay to the CFO the taxes imposed by this article upon the rents included in such return, as well as all other monies collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this Article. All the taxes for the period for which a return is required to be filed shall be due from the operator and payable to the CFO on or before the date fixed for the filing of the return of such period without regard to whether a return is filed or whether the return which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents and the taxes due thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-214. - Bond required. 
    Where the CFO believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave the state, or remove or dissipate assets, or for any other similar reason he deems it necessary in order to protect revenues under this article, the CFO may require such operator to file with the city a bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state in such amount as the CFO may fix to secure the payment of any tax or penalties and interest due, or which may become due from such operator. In the event that the CFO determines that an operator is to file such bond, the CFO shall give notice to such operator specifying the amount of bond required. The operator shall file such bond within five (5) days after the delivery or mailing of such notice unless within such five (5) days the operator shall request in writing a hearing before the city commission or its designee, at which time the propriety and amount of the bond shall be determined by the city commission or its designee. Such determination shall be final and shall be complied with within fifteen (15) days thereafter. In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the CFO, or cash in such amount as the CFO may prescribe, may be deposited with the CFO. The CFO may at any time after five (5) days notice to the operator, apply the bond, cash or other security to any tax and/or any penalties due and for that purpose the securities may be sold at private or public sale. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-215. - Assessment and determination of tax. 
    If a return required by this article is not filed, or if a return when filed is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the CFO from such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such as number of rooms, location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types of accommodations and services, number of employees, or other factors. Written notice of such assessments shall be given to the person liable for the collection and payment of the tax. Such assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine the tax unless the person against whom it is assessed, within two (2) years after the giving of notice of such assessment, shall apply in writing to the city council for a hearing or unless the CFO upon his own initiative shall reassess the same. After such hearing the city shall give written notice of its determination to the person against whom the tax is assessed and such determination shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-216. - Refunds. 
(a)  Procedure. The CFO shall refund or credit any tax erroneously, illegally, or unconstitutionally collected if written application to the CFO for such refund shall be made within two (2) years from the date of payment thereof. For like causes and in the same period, a refund may be made upon the initiative and the order of the CFO. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing. Such application may be made by the person upon whom such tax was imposed and who has actually paid the tax. Such application may also be made by the person who has collected and paid such tax to the CFO provided that the application is made within two (2) years of the payment by the occupant to the operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator until he has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund is made. The CFO, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow credit therefor on payments due from the applicant. 
(b)  Determination and hearing. Upon application for a refund the CFO may receive evidence with respect thereto, and make such investigation as he deems necessary. After making a determination as to the refund, the CFO shall give notice thereof to the applicant. Such determination shall be final unless the applicant, within ninety (90) days after such notice, shall apply in writing to the city for a hearing. After such hearing, the city shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. 
(c)  Person not entitled to refund. A person shall not be entitled to revision, refund or credit of a tax under this section if he has had a hearing or an opportunity for a hearing as provided in this chapter and has failed to avail himself of the remedies therein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-217. - Notices. 
    Any notice provided for under this article shall be deemed to have been given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or deposited in the United States mail addressed to the last-known address of the operator. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-218. - Remedies exclusive. 
    The remedies provided in this article shall be exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability imposed by the article. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-219. - Powers of city financial officer. 
    In addition to all other powers granted to the CFO, he is hereby authorized and empowered: 
(1)  To make, adopt, and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the collection of taxes pursuant to this article; 
(2)  To extend for cause shown the time for filing any return for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days; and, for cause shown, to waive, remit, or reduce penalties or interest; 
(3)  To delegate his functions hereunder to an assistant or other employee or employees of the city; 
(4)  To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-220. - Proceedings to recover tax; civil remedies. 
(a)  Whenever any operator, occupant or other person shall fail to collect and/or pay over any tax, or to owe any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article as herein provided, the CFO shall file notice of liens on behalf of the city against the real estate upon which the hotel is located and/or against all franchises, property, and rights to property, whether real or personal, then belonging to or thereafter acquired by the person owing the tax pursuant to 68 O.S. § 2701 et seq. 
(b)  The lien shall, upon proper filing, attached to the real estate and/or personal property then owned or thereafter acquired by the debtor, whether such property is used by the debtor in the operation of business or is under the authority of an assignee, trustee or receiver for the benefit of creditors, from the date such taxes are due and payable as allowed by 68 O.S. § 2704. 
(c)  The CFO shall notify the person owing the tax by personal service or by certified mail that the city will file such liens if any delinquent lodging taxes, interest and/or penalties are not paid within fifteen (15) days of receiving such notice. The CFO may confer with the city attorney to institute an action in personam and in rem to enforce payment and collect any delinquent lodging taxes, penalties and/or interest. 
(d)  Criminal penalties. In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the willful failure or refusal of any operator, occupant or other persons who make reports and/or remittances as herein required or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this article shall be in offense and upon the conviction thereof the offending operator, occupant or other person shall be punished subject to section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-221. - Administration of oaths and compelling testimony. 
    The CFO shall have the power to administer oaths, subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers and documents, and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of the powers and duties of the CFO or city commission under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-222. - Registration certificates; certificates of authority. 
    Every operator shall file with the CFO a registration certificate in a form prescribed by said CFO within ten (10) days after the effective date of this article (September 1, 1998) or, in the case of operators commencing business or opening new hotels after such effective date, within three (3) days after such commencement or opening. The CFO shall, within five (5) days after the filing of such certificate, issue without charge to each operator a certificate of authority empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant and duplicates thereof for each additional hotel. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificates shall be non-assignable and non-transferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the CFO upon the cessation of business at the hotel, or upon its sale or transfer. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-223. - Administration. 
    One percent (1%) of the gross receipts derived from taxes collected pursuant to this article shall be retained by the city, for the purpose of administering and collecting the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-224. - Discounts. 
    In order to remunerate an operator for keeping tax records, filing reports and remitting taxes when due, a three percent (3%) discount shall be allowed on the total taxes paid prior to the time the tax becomes delinquent. This discount shall not apply to delinquent taxes or interest payments. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-225. - Interest and penalties. 
(a)  If any tax levied or assessed by this article becomes delinquent, the person or entity responsible and liable for such tax shall pay a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the unpaid tax and interest on such unpaid tax and penalty shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month on the unpaid balance from the date of delinquency. 
(b)  The city may bring a civil suit to enforce payment of any past due tax levied or assessed pursuant to this article in addition to conviction hereunder and in said civil suit shall be entitled to recover all reasonable cost and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-226. - Records confidential. 
    The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the tax is legislatively recognized and declared; and to protect the same, the provision of 68 O.S. (1998) § 205 of the State Sales Tax Code, and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of this article as if herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-227. - Fraudulent returns. 
    The willful failure or refusal of any operator to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false or fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or a portion thereof rightfully due under this article shall be an offense against the city. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-228. - Amendments. 
    The people of the city, by their approval of this article at the election herein provided, hereby authorize the city commission, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administering and enforcing this article as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the qualified voters of the city as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-229. - Provisions cumulative. 
    The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-230. - Provisions severable. 
    The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this article is for any reason held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence, or clause hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 12-231. - Payment of legal fees. 
    In the event a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction is caused to be filed, either on behalf of or against the city, and said cause is the direct result of the conditions, stipulations, or requirements hereinbefore set forth, an amount necessary to pay all legal fees incurred by the city, as well as fines or penalties imposed against it, shall be set aside from the monies authorized to be collected hereby in payment thereof, regardless of whether said cause was for the purpose of enforcing or defending the provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § I, 6-15-98) 
Chapter 13 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Railroad trains-Speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated within the city any railroad train, motor car, engine or other railroad equipment at a greater speed than twenty-five (25) miles per hour, except that on the main line track railroad equipment may be operated at a speed not greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(Code 1964, § 12-22) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate the speed of trains, Art. III, § 14. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate speed of trains, 11 O.S. § 22-119. 
Sec. 13-2. - Same-Whistle, bell. 
    Any railroad engine shall sound a whistle or bell in accordance with all state and federal requirements. 
(Code 1964, § 12-23) 
State Law reference- Sounding of whistle or bell required, 21 O.S. § 1253. 
Secs. 13-3-13-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes against the person, 21 O.S. § 641 et seq. 

Sec. 13-26. - Assaults. 
(a)  In this section assault means any willful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence to do a corporal hurt to another. 
(b)  Assault is a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12-2) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prevent assaults, Art. III, § 15. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 641. 
Sec. 13-27. - Battery. 
(a)  In this section battery means any willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another. 
(b)  Battery is a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 642. 
Secs. 13-28-13-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY RIGHTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes involving property rights, 21 O.S. § 1401 et seq. 

Sec. 13-46. - Larceny. 
(a)  Larceny is the taking of personal property accomplished by fraud or stealth, and with intent to deprive another thereof. 
(b)  One who finds lost property under circumstances which gives him knowledge or means of inquiry as to the true owner, and who appropriates such property to his own use, or to the use of another person who is not entitled thereto, without having first made such effort to find the owner and restore the property to him as the circumstances render reasonable and just, is guilty of larceny. 
(c)  Larceny is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1964, § 12-17; Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1, 12-5-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. §§ 1701, 1702. 
Sec. 13-47. - Obtaining property by trick or deception, false statements or pretenses, confidence games, false or bogus checks, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain or attempt to obtain from any person, firm or corporation any money, property or valuable thing, of a value of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) by means or by use of any trick or deception, or false or fraudulent misrepresentation or statement or pretense, or by any other means or instrument or device commonly called a "confidence game", or by means or use of any false or bogus checks, or by any other written or printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin. The same shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Every person who shall lease or rent, for any period of time whatsoever, any motor vehicle and, with intent to cheat and defraud, who pays the fees for such lease or rental by means of a false, bogus or worthless check written for the sum of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor 
(c)  The term "false or bogus check or checks" shall include checks or orders, including those converted to electronic fund transfer, which are not honored on account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay same or because the check or order was drawn on a closed account or on a nonexistent account when such checks or orders are given: 
1.  In exchange for money or property; 
2.  In exchange for any benefit or thing of value; 
3.  As a down payment for the purchase of any item of which the purchaser is taking immediate possession, as against the maker or drawer thereof; or 
4.  As payment made to a landlord under a lease or rental agreement. 
(d)  The making, drawing, uttering, or delivering of a check, draft, or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in, or credit with, such bank or other depository; provided, such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with the protest fees, within five (5) days from the date the same is presented for payment; and provided, further, that the check or order is presented for payment within thirty (30) days after same is delivered and accepted. 
(e)  A check offered for the purchase of goods or livestock that is refused by a drawee shall not be considered to be an extension of credit by the seller of goods or livestock to the maker or drawer of the check. 
(f)  A check or order offered to a merchant in payment on an open account of the maker with the merchant shall mean "a check or order given in exchange for a benefit or thing of value", notwithstanding that the merchant may debit the account of the maker or impose other charges pursuant to applicable law in the event the check or order is not honored. 
(g)  Any person who is convicted of any offense herein contained shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1964, § 12-17.1; Ord. No. 2017-12, § 1, 12-5-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. §§ 1541.1, 1541.4, 1541.5. 
Sec. 13-47.1. - Defrauding hotels, inns, restaurants, etc. 
    Any person who shall obtain food, lodging, services or other accommodations at any hotel, inn, restaurant, boarding house, rooming house, motel or auto camp, with intent to defraud the owner or keeper thereof, if the value of such food, lodging, services or other accommodations is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any person who shall obtain shelter, lodging, or any other services at any apartment house, apartment, rental unit, rental house, or trailer camp, with intent to defraud the owner or keeper thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00. Proof that such lodging, food, services or other accommodations were obtained by false pretense or by false or fictitious show or pretense of any baggage or other property, or that he gave a check on which payment was refused, or that he left the hotel, inn, restaurant, boarding house, rooming house, motel, apartment house, apartment, rental unit or rental house, trailer camp or auto camp, without payment or offering to pay for such food, lodging, services or other accommodation, or that he surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove his baggage, or that he registered under a fictitious name, shall be prima facie proof of the intent to defraud mentioned in this section; but this section shall not apply where there has been an agreement in writing for delay in payment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, § 1, 12-5-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1503. 
Sec. 13-48. - Shoplifting. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  Merchant shall mean any corporation, partnership, association, or person who is engaged in the business of selling goods, wares and merchandise in a mercantile establishment. 
(2)  Mercantile establishment shall mean any mercantile place of business in, at or from which goods, wares and merchandise are sold, offered for sale or delivered from and sold at retail or wholesale. 
(3)  Merchandise shall mean all goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale or displayed by a merchant. 
(4)  Wrongful taking shall mean and include stealing of merchandise or money and any other wrongful appropriation of merchandise or money. 
(b)  Authority of peace officers to arrest without warrant. Any peace officer may arrest without warrant any person he has probable cause for believing has committed larceny of merchandise held for sale in a retail or wholesale establishment, when such arrest is made in a reasonable manner. 
(c)  Detention of suspect; purposes. Any merchant, his agent or employee, who has reasonable grounds or probable cause to believe that a person has committed or is committing a wrongful taking of merchandise or money from a mercantile establishment, may detain such person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes: 
(1)  Conducting an investigation, including reasonable interrogation of the detained person, as to whether there has been a wrongful taking of such merchandise or money. 
(2)  Informing the police or other law enforcement officials of the facts relevant to such detention. 
(3)  Performing a reasonable search of the detained person and his belongings when it appears that the merchandise or money may otherwise be lost. 
(4)  Recovering the merchandise or money believed to have been taken wrongfully. Any such reasonable detention shall not constitute an unlawful arrest or detention, nor shall it render the merchant, his agent or employee criminally or civilly liable to the person so detained. 
(d)  Concealing unpurchased merchandise; presumption. Any person concealing unpurchased merchandise of any mercantile establishment, either on the premises or outside the premises of such establishment, shall be presumed to have so concealed such merchandise with the intention of committing a wrongful taking of such merchandise within the meaning of subsection (a) of this section, and such concealment or the finding of such unpurchased merchandise concealed upon the person or among the belongings of such person shall be conclusive evidence of reasonable grounds and probable cause for the detention in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time, of such person by a merchant, his agent or employee, and any such reasonable detention shall not be deemed to be unlawful, nor render such merchant, his agent or employee criminally or civilly liable. 
(e)  Penalty. Every person who is convicted of violating this section where the value of the merchandise which has been taken is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1964, § 12-40.1; Ord. No. 2017-14, § 1, 12-5-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 22 O.S. §§ 1341-1344 and 21 O.S. § 1731. 
Sec. 13-48.1. - Gasoline pump thievery. 
    Any person who pumps gasoline into the gasoline tank of a vehicle or other container of any sort and leaves the premises where the gasoline was pumped without making payment for the gasoline shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 12-5-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1740. 
Sec. 13-49. - Trespass upon premises or property of another prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall willfully enter or remain upon or in any land, structure, vehicle, aircraft or watercraft with knowledge that he is not authorized or privileged to enter or remain upon or in such land, structure, vehicle, aircraft or watercraft, if: 
(1)  He enters upon or in the land, structure, vehicle, aircraft or watercraft, after such entry upon or in has been forbidden by a personal communication of the owner or person authorized by the owner to make such communication, or he remains upon or in the land, structure, vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after he has been ordered to leave by the owner or person authorized by the owner to do so order; or 
(2)  The land, structure, vehicle, aircraft or watercraft is posted in a reasonable manner which would ordinarily come to the attention of intruders; or 
(3)  The premises or property is used for residential purposes. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to cases involving landlord and tenants. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 12-38) 
State Law reference- Trespass, 21 O.S. § 1835 et seq. 
Sec. 13-50. - Trespass upon places of public amusement prohibited. 
    Any person who shall go upon the enclosed grounds or into any enclosed public place of amusement while any performance is being given, when an admission fee is charged, against the will and without a ticket, pass, or written or oral permission or invitation from the manager or party having charge or control of such public place of amusement shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon the conviction thereof shall be punished under section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 12-38.1) 
Sec. 13-51. - Malicious injury. 
    Every person who maliciously injures, defaces or destroys any real or personal property not his own, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1760. 
Sec. 13-52. - Tampering with, operating, etc., vehicle without owner's permission. 
    No person shall drive, operate, use or tamper with a motor vehicle in the city, without the permission of the owner thereof. No person shall, without the permission of the owner or person in charge thereof, climb upon or into, or swing upon any motor vehicle or trailer, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the horn or other sound-producing devices thereon, or attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting device, brakes or machinery thereof, or set the machinery in motion. 
(Code 1964, § 26-9) 
Sec. 13-53. - Utility poles, marking, painting, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to mark, write, print, paint upon or otherwise make any signs or marks, by identification or otherwise, or by posting signs or posters, upon any telephone, telegraph, electric light or power pole, either wood, concrete, steel or of any other substance, within the corporate limits of the city. The word "pole" shall be construed to mean any pole supporting telephone, light, trolley or power wires or braces, and any device used to support or brace such a pole. This section shall not apply to the owners of such poles who may make such marks or signs thereon as may be needed for the purpose of protecting the public from danger by reason of such poles, and who may make such marks or identification as are necessary in the proper accounting of their properties. 
(Code 1964, § 12-26) 
Sec. 13-54. - Receiving stolen property. 
    Every person who buys or receives, in any manner, upon any consideration, any personal property of any value whatsoever that has been stolen, embezzled, obtained by false pretense or robbery, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the same to have been stolen, embezzled, obtained by false pretense, or robbery, or who conceals, withholds, or aids in concealing or withholding such property from the owner where the value of the property received is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1964, § 12-24; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 1, 12-5-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1713. 
Sec. 13-55. - Control of advertising matter. 
    No person shall pass, circulate, distribute, post or otherwise publish any bill, poster or other advertising matter in such a manner that such advertising matter does or might blow about the streets, alleys and public places of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 12-1) 
Secs. 13-56-13-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes against public health and safety, 21 O.S. § 1191 et seq. 

Sec. 13-76. - Riot. 
(a)  Any use of force or violence, or any threat to use force or violence if accompanied by immediate power of execution, by three (3) or more persons acting together and without authority of law, is riot. 
(b)  Riot is a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1311. 
Sec. 13-77. - Unlawful assembly. 
(a)  Wherever three (3) or more persons assemble with intent or with means and preparations to do an unlawful act which would be riot if actually committed, but do not act toward the commission thereof, or whenever such persons assemble without authority of law, and in such a manner as is adapted to disturb the public peace, or excite public alarm, such assembly is an unlawful assembly. 
(b)  Unlawful assembly is a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1314. 
Sec. 13-78. - Violence against person or property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do any unlawful act with force or violence against the person or property of another, with or without a common cause or quarrel, or to do a lawful act in a violent, tumultuous or threatening manner, within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 12-28) 
Sec. 13-79. - Carrying and transporting weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry upon or about his or her person, or in a purse or other container belonging to the person, any dagger, bowie knife, dirk knife, switchblade knife, spring-type knife, sword cane, knife having a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle of the knife, blackjack, loaded cane, billy, hand chain, metal knuckles, or any other offensive weapon other than a firearm, whether such weapon be concealed or unconcealed, except this section shall not prohibit: 
(1)  The proper use of knives for hunting, fishing, educational or recreational purposes; 
(2)  The carrying or use of weapons in a manner otherwise permitted by statute or authorized by the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act; 
(3)  The carrying, possession and use of any weapon by a peace officer or other person authorized by law to carry a weapon in the performance of official duties and in compliance with the rules of the employing agency; 
(4)  The carrying and use of weapons provided in this subsection when used for the purpose of living history reenactment. For purposes of this paragraph, "living history reenactment" means depiction of historical characters, scenes, historical life or events for entertainment, education, or historical documentation through the wearing or use of period, historical, antique or vintage clothing, accessories, weapons, and other implements of the historical period. 
    Any person convicted of violating this section 13-79(a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon a first conviction, be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor and the party offending shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment. On the second and every subsequent violation, the party offending shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Pursuant to 21 O.S. § 1289.24(A)(2)(b) and § 1289.13A, any person stopped pursuant to a moving traffic violation who is transporting a loaded pistol in the motor vehicle without a valid handgun license authorized by the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act or valid license from another state, whether the loaded firearm is concealed or unconcealed in the vehicle, shall be issued a traffic citation in the amount of seventy dollars ($70.00), plus court costs for transporting a firearm improperly. In addition to the traffic citation provided in this section, the person may also be arrested for any other violation of law. When the arresting officer determines that a valid handgun license exists, pursuant to the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act or any provision of law from another state, for any person in the stopped vehicle, any firearms permitted to be carried pursuant to that license shall not be confiscated, unless: 
(1)  The person is arrested for violating another provision of law other than a violation of this subsection 13-79(b); provided, however, if the person is never charged with an offense pursuant to this paragraph or if the charges are dismissed or the person is acquitted, the weapon shall be returned to the person; or 
(2)  The officer has probable cause to believe the weapon is: 
a.  Contraband, or 
b.  A firearm used in the commission of a crime other than a violation of subsection 13-79(a) of this section. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed to require confiscation of any firearm. 
(c)  This section 13-79 shall not apply in any way to firearms, firearms components, firearms ammunition, or firearms supplies except to the extent allowed by state law because the Oklahoma State Legislature has enacted 21 O.S. § 1289.24, by which the State Legislature occupied and preempted the entire field of legislation in this state touching in any way firearms, components, ammunition, and supplies to the complete exclusion of any order, ordinance, or regulation by a municipality or other political subdivision of this state. 
(Code 1964, § 12-29; Ord. No. 1593, § 1, 11-5-12) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prohibit the carrying of weapons, Art. III, § 25. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1272. 
Secs. 13-80-13-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses against public peace, 21 O.S. § 1261 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-116. - Noise control. 
    If any person shall wilfully or maliciously disturb, either by day or night, the peace and quiet of the city, neighborhood, family or person by loud or unusual noise, or by abusive, violent, obscene or profane language, whether addressed to the party so disturbed or some other person, or by threatening to kill, do bodily harm or injury, destroy property, fight, or by quarreling or challenging to fight, or fighting, or shooting off any firearms, or brandishing the same, or by running any horse at unusual speed along any street, alley, highway or public road, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12-3) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prohibit breaches of the peace and disturbances, Art. III, § 15. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1362. 
Sec. 13-116.5 - Gatherings on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons to gather together or congregate on or in any public parking lot, park or other outdoor public property belonging to the city or any of its agencies or affiliates, whether the individuals are inside motor vehicles or not, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except for the purpose of conducting official business of the city. Any person found to be in violation of the above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and penalized as provided by section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 5-7-90) 
Sec. 13-117. - Fighting. 
    If two (2) or more persons shall voluntarily or by agreement fight within the limits of the city to the terror of any person in the city, every person found to be in violation of the above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12-8) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prevent fighting, Art. III, § 15. 
Sec. 13-118. - Profane, abusive, etc., language. 
(a)  No person shall make use of any profane, vulgar, violent, abusive or insulting language toward or about another person in his presence or hearing, which language, in its common acceptance, is calculated to arouse to anger the person about or to whom it is spoken or addressed, or to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to use or permit the use of obscene, profane or lascivious language in any public place within the city or in any play or performance given in any theater or other public place or used for public amusement. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city, whether manager, operator or owner of any theater, or other public place of amusement, to allow or to permit any person to use any obscene, profane, or lascivious language, in any play or performance given in any such theater, or other public place of amusement. 
(Code 1964, § 12-18) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prevent the use of profane, insulting, etc., language, Art. III, § 15. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1363. 
Sec. 13-119. - Transporting nonintoxicating beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any vehicle upon a public street or alley, in the city, any nonintoxicating beverage containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight except in the original container which shall not have been opened and from which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed, unless the opened container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment which shall include the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion. 
(Code 1964, § 12-39) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; traffic, ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1220. 
Sec. 13-120. - Transporting alcoholic beverages. 
    No person shall knowingly transport in any vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley any alcoholic beverage except in the original container which shall not have been opened and the seal upon which shall not have been broken and from which the original cap or cork shall not have been removed, unless the opened container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a vehicle commonly known as a station wagon and panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in said vehicle while it is in motion. 
(Code 1964, § 12-56) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; traffic, ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537(A)(7). 
Sec. 13-121. - Improper use of laser pointers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to focus, point or shine a laser beam directly or indirectly on another person or animal in such a manner as to harass, annoy, or frighten said person or animal, or persons around or about said person or animal. 
(Ord. No. 1398, § 1, 7-6-99) 
Sec. 13-122. - Curfew relating to the presence and conduct of minors on streets and in public places. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  Minor is any person under the age of eighteen (18); 
(2)  Parent for purposes of this section, shall mean: 
a.  A natural or adoptive parent; 
b.  A legal guardian; or 
c.  A person granted legal custody by order of a court. 
(3)  Custodian is any person over the age of twenty-one (21) years who is in loco parentis to a minor; and 
(4)  Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any of the above. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any minor to be in any public place within the city, either on foot, riding a bicycle or skateboard, or to be in a vehicle moving or not between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Friday through Saturday unless: 
(1)  The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having custody or control of such minor; 
(2)  The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed or permitted by their parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; or 
(3)  Where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation. 
(4)  When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area. 
(5)  When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides, or on the sidewalk of either next-door-neighbor where said neighbor does not object to the presence of such minor on such sidewalk. 
(6)  When returning home, by a direct route from and within thirty (30) minutes of the termination of a school activity, or an activity of a religious or voluntary association, provided the minor has a written consent in the minor's possession, countersigned by the parent indicating the home address and telephone number, the purpose of the event, when, where and in what manner said minor will be on the streets or public place at night. 
(c)  Any minor violating the provisions of this section may be fined not more than $20.00 plus court costs, or by community service, or by both fine and community service. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having custody or control of any minor to suffer or permit or by inefficient control to allow such person to be on any public place within the city between the hours of curfew designated in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  In the case of a first violation by the minor, the chief of police shall cause to be delivered by hand or by certified mail, to a parent, a written notice of said violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of this section, including enforcement of all applicable penalties. 
(f)  If, after the warning notice pursuant to subsection (e) of this section of a first violation by a minor, a minor further violates subsection (b) of this section, such offense shall constitute an offense by the minor's parent or parents. The penalty upon a plea of guilty, nolo contendere or finding of guilt shall be a fine not to exceed $100.00 plus court costs, or by community service, or by both fine and community service. 
(Ord. No. 1449, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 13-123. - Discharging firearms, air rifles, and BB guns. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, including pistols, in the city except when lawfully doing so in defense of oneself, of another person, or of property, or when authorized by law or ordinance. 
(b)  It is unlawful to discharge an air rifle, BB gun or miscellaneous projectile devices in the city; provided that the provisions herein contained shall not apply on properties within the corporate limits of the city which are within a duly established RA-Agricultural zoned district. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 1, 11-19-07) 
Sec. 13-124. - Nuisance party. 
(a)  No person, owner, occupant, tenant or other person in possession, control or having responsibility for, individually or jointly with others, of any premises shall sponsor, conduct, host, allow or permit a social gathering or party on the premises which is or becomes a public nuisance. 
(b)  A social gathering shall be deemed to constitute a public nuisance when, by reason of the conduct of persons in attendance, it results in any combination of the following violations of the Code of the City of Miami, Oklahoma, and which violations occur at the site of the social gathering or on neighboring public or private property: 
Ordinance # Offense 1. 3-2 Consumption in Public Place 2. 3-3 Possession Beer by Minors 3. 9-67 Open Burning 4. 13-26 Assaults 5. 13-27 Battery 6. 13-49 Trespass 7. 13-51 Malicious Injury 8. 13-76 Riot 9. 13-77 Unlawful Assembly 10. 13-78 Violence against person or property 11. 13-79 Carrying weapons 12. 13-116 Noise Control 13. 13-116.5 Gatherings on public property 14. 13-117 Fighting 15. 13-118 Profane, abusive language 16. 13-119 Transporting nonintoxicating beverages 17. 13-120 Transporting alcoholic beverages 18. 13-122 Curfew 19. 13-123 Discharge of firearms, etc. 20. 13-162 Public Drunkenness 21. 13-201 Marijuana 22. 13-202 Drug paraphernalia 23. 13-203 Prevention of youth access to tobacco 24. 13-222 Assault and/or battery upon police officer 25. 13-223 Interference with city officers 26. 15-62 Littering 27. 15-2 Nuisance 28. 23-270 Parking prohibited in certain areas  
(Ord. No. 1524, § 1, 11-19-07) 
Sec. 13-125. - No person shall attend or contribute to a nuisance party. 
    Upon a declaration of a police officer that a social gathering or party on the premises is declared to be a nuisance, no person shall remain at the site of the social gathering or party without proof of domicile at that residence. Failure to disperse from the public nuisance shall be a violation. 
(Ord. No. 1525, § 1, 11-19-07) 
Secs. 13-126-13-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS 

Sec. 13-141. - Definition. 
    A drive-in restaurant, within the meaning of this article, shall be deemed to be any restaurant where meals, sandwiches, ice cream or other food, is served directly to or is permitted to be consumed by patrons in automobiles, motorcycles or other vehicles parked on the premises. 
(Code 1964, § 12-41) 
Sec. 13-142. - Racing motors, blowing horns, other loud noises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person while on or adjacent to the premises of a drive-in restaurant to race the motor of any car, to suddenly start or stop any car, or to make or cause to be made, any other loud or unseemly noise. It shall also be unlawful for any other person parked on the premises of such restaurant, to blow or cause to be blown any automobile horn or motorcycle horn at any time while so parked. 
(Code 1964, § 12-42) 
Sec. 13-143. - Leaving motor vehicle unoccupied. 
    It shall also be unlawful for any person to leave any unoccupied motor vehicle on any drive-in restaurant parking lot and to leave the premises thereof except with the knowledge and consent of the operator of the restaurant. 
(Code 1964, § 12-44) 
Sec. 13-144. - Sign to be posted on premises. 
    It shall be the duty of the restaurant operator to post on the premises in a conspicuous location one (1) or more signs bearing the following legend: 
"CRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING AND LINGERING OUTSIDE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE, IS UNLAWFUL. NO UNOCCUPIED VEHICLE MAY BE LEFT ON THESE PREMISES WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE RESTAURANT OPERATOR." 
(Code 1964, § 12-45) 
Secs. 13-145-13-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY AND MORALITY[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses against public decency and morality, 21 O.S. § 851 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-161. - Prostitution. 
(a)  The term "prostitution" as used in this section shall be construed to include the giving or receiving of the body for sexual intercourse for hire, and shall also be construed to include the giving or receiving of the body for indiscriminate sexual intercourse without hire. That the term "lewdness" shall be construed to include the making of any appointment or engagement for prostitution or lewdness or any act in furtherance of such appointment or engagement. 
(b)  It shall further be unlawful: 
(1)  To engage in prostitution, lewdness, or assignation. 
(2)  To solicit, induce, entice, or procure another to commit an act of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, with himself. 
(3)  To reside in, enter, or remain in any house, place, building or other structure, or to enter or remain in any vehicle, trailer or other conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
(4)  To aid, abet, or participate in the doing of any of the acts herein prohibited. 
(Code 1964, § 12-19) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prohibit and punish keepers and inmates of bawdy houses and houses of assignation, Art. III, § 4. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. §§ 1029, 1030. 
Sec. 13-162. - Public intoxication. 
    Any person who shall, in any public place, or in or upon any vehicle commonly used for transportation of passengers, drink or otherwise consume any intoxicating liquor unless authorized by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, be under the influence of any intoxicating substance, or intoxicating compound of any kind, or inhale glue, paint, gasoline or other petroleum product or other intoxicating substance, or if any person shall be drunk or intoxicated in any public or private road or parking area, or in any passenger coach, vehicle, or any public place or building, or at any public gathering, from drinking or consuming such intoxicating liquor, intoxicating paint, gasoline or other petroleum product or other intoxicating substance, or if any person shall be drunk or intoxicated from any cause in a public place and shall disturb the peace of any other person, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12-21; Ord. No. 1337, § 1, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 1, 4-18-2017) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to suppress and prohibit gambling and gambling houses, Art. III, § 7. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3. 
Secs. 13-163-13-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GAMBLING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Gambling and related offenses, 21 O.S. § 941 et seq.; authority to suppress gambling, 11 O.S. § 22-108. 

Sec. 13-181. - Tables and devices prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to set up, keep, exhibit or maintain within the city any gaming table or gambling device, commonly called A.B.C.D.E.O., roulette, rouge et noir, or any faro bank, or any gaming table or gambling device, whether the same is named herein or not, which is adapted, devised or designed for the purpose of playing any game of chance, or at which any money or property may be won or lost. 
(Code 1964, § 12-9) 
State Law reference- Disposition of gambling paraphernalia, 21 O.S. § 943. 
Sec. 13-182. - Betting on or playing prohibited game. 
    Any person who bets or plays at any prohibited game, or who shall bet or play at any games whatsoever, for money, property, checks, credits or other representatives of value with cards, dice or any other device which may be adapted to or used in playing any game of chance or in which chance is a material element, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 942. 
Sec. 13-183. - Use of real estate or buildings for gambling purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any real estate, building, structure or room to use, rent, lease or permit, knowingly, the same to be used for the purpose of violating 21 O.S. § 945. 
(Code 1964, § 12-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 945. 
Secs. 13-184-13-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRUGS AND RELATED OFFENSES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq. 

Sec. 13-201. - Possession of controlled dangerous substances. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess a controlled dangerous substance, as defined by 63 O.S. § 2-101, unless such substance was obtained directly, or pursuant to a valid prescription or order from a medical practitioner, while acting in the course of his or her professional practice. 
B.  Provided, however, it shall not be a crime for any person: 
(1)  who holds a validly issued Oklahoma medical marijuana license or a temporary medical marijuana license to: 
a.  Consume marijuana; 
b.  Possess up to three (3) ounces of marijuana on their person; 
c.  Possess up to six (6) mature marijuana plants; 
d.  Possess up to six (6) seedling plants; 
e.  Possess up to one (1) ounce of concentrated marijuana; 
f.  Possess up to seventy-two (72) ounces of edible marijuana; and 
g.  Possess up to eight (8) ounces of additional marijuana in their residence. 
(2)  who holds a validly issued Oklahoma caregiver medical marijuana license to: 
a.  Assist medical marijuana license holder who is homebound to consume marijuana; 
b.  Legally possess up to three (3) ounces of marijuana on their person; 
c.  Legally possess up to six (6) mature marijuana plants; 
d.  Legally possess up to six (6) seedling plants; 
e.  Legally possess up to one (1) ounce of concentrated marijuana; 
f.  Legally possess up to seventy-two (72) ounces of edible marijuana; and 
g.  Legally possess up to eight (8) ounces of marijuana in their residence. 
(3)  who holds a validly issued Oklahoma medical marijuana dispensary license to have in his or her possession marijuana products for retail sale to medical marijuana license holders or their caregivers. This exemption also applies to the employees of the dispensary license holder at the licensed site. 
(4)  who holds a validly issued Oklahoma medical marijuana commercial grower license to have in his or her possession marijuana products for sale only to a licensed dispensary or dispensaries. This exemption also applies to the employees of the commercial grower license holder at the licensed site. 
(5)  who holds a validly issued Oklahoma medical marijuana processing license to have in his or her possession marijuana products for sale only to a licensed dispensary or dispensaries or to any other licensed processor. This exemption also applies to the employees of the processing license holder at the licensed site. 
(6)  who holds a validly issued Oklahoma medical marijuana transportation license to transport marijuana from an Oklahoma licensed medical marijuana retailer, licensed growing facility, or licensed processor facility to an Oklahoma licensed medical marijuana retailer, licensed growing facility, or licensed processing facility. 
(7)  who holds a validly issued Oklahoma medical marijuana special research license to do research on marijuana. 
C.  Any person who violates this section is guilty of a crime punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Provided, however, possession of up to one and one-half (1.5) ounces of marijuana by persons who states he or she has a medical condition, but is not in possession of a state issued medical marijuana license, shall constitute a misdemeanor offense with a fine not to exceed Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00). 
(Code 1964, § 12-40.2; Ord. No. 2017-17, § 1, 12-5-2017; Ord. No. 2018-17, § 1, 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 13-202. - Drug paraphernalia. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection D, no person shall deliver, possess or manufacture drug paraphernalia as defined in 63 O.S. § 2-101(36) knowing it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled dangerous substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act [63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.]. 
B.  Drug paraphernalia, for the purposes of this section, shall mean all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled dangerous substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act [63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.]. It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled dangerous substance or from which a controlled dangerous substance can be derived. 
(2)  Kits used or intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled dangerous substances. 
(3)  Isomerization devices used or intended for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled dangerous substance. 
(4)  Testing equipment used or intended for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled dangerous substances. 
(5)  Scales and balances used or intended for use in weighing or measuring controlled dangerous substances. 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used or intended for use in cutting controlled dangerous substances. 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used or intended for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana. 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used or intended for use in compounding controlled dangerous substances. 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used or intended for use in packaging small quantities of controlled dangerous substances. 
(10)  Containers and other objects used or intended for use in parenterally injecting controlled dangerous substances into the human body. 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended for use in parenterally injecting controlled dangerous substances into the human body. 
(12)  Objects used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls. 
b.  Water pipes. 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
e.  Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials. 
g.  Chamber pipes. 
h.  Carburetor pipes. 
i.  Electric pipes. 
j.  Air-driven pipes. 
k.  Chillums. 
l.  Bongs. 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
Provided, however, drug paraphernalia shall not include separation gins intended for use in preparing tea or spice, clamps used for constructing electrical equipment, water pipes designed for ornamentation or pipes designed for smoking tobacco. 
C.  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
(2)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act [63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.]. 
(3)  The proximity of the object to controlled dangerous substances. 
(4)  The existence of any residue of controlled dangerous substances on the object. 
(5)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons who intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act [63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.]; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this section shall not prevent a finding that the object is drug paraphernalia. 
(6)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object which either state directly or imply that the object is to be used for the consumption of controlled substances. 
(7)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use as an object for the consumption of controlled substances. 
(8)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
(9)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
(10)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
(11)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
(12)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
D.  Provided, however, it shall not be illegal to sell, manufacture, distribute, or possess any device used for the consumption of medical marijuana. 
(Code 1964, § 12-40.4; Ord. No. 2018-17, § 2, 12-4-2018) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. §§ 2-405(C), 2-101.1. 
Sec. 13-203. - Definitions. 
    Words and phrases, whenever used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings defined in 63 O.S. §§ 1-229.12 and 1-1522, and 68 O.S. §§ 327 and 401, as currently enacted and as may hereinafter be amended or renumbered, and as set out below, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Indoor area means any enclosed area used or visited by employees or the public, regardless of whether work is being performed. Indoor area includes work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and any other spaces used or visited by employees or the public, as well as all space between a floor and ceiling that is predominantly or totally enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed windows, stairways, or the like. 
    Municipal property means all buildings, other facilities, indoor areas, and outdoor areas, including but not limited to recreational areas, and other property, or portions thereof, owned, leased or otherwise operated by the City of Miami or any of its Boards, Trusts and Authorities, and personal property, including but not limited to, vehicles and equipment owned by the municipality or any of its Boards, Trusts and Authorities. 
    Outdoor area means any area that is not an indoor area and includes outdoor recreational areas. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 1479, § 1, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 2018-12, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1355, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 1996, set out provisions intended for use as § 13-205. To preserve the continuity of this Code and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been renumbered as § 13-203. 
Sec. 13-204. - Prevention of youth access to tobacco. 
(a)  Unlawful to sell or furnish tobacco or vapor products to person under 18 years of age. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, distribute or furnish in any manner any tobacco or vapor product to another person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, in violation of 63 O.S. §§ 1-229.13, 1-229.18, 1-229.19, 1-229.21 or 1-229.26, as currently enacted and as may hereinafter be amended or renumbered. 
(2)  When a person violates subsection (1) above as to 63 O.S. §§ 1-229.13 or 1-229.18, the city may assess such person a minimum fine of $100.00 for the first offense, $200.00 for the second offense within a two-year period following the first offense, and $300.00 for a third or subsequent offense within a two-year period following the first offense. 
(3)  When a person violates subsection (1) above as to 63 O.S. §§ 1-229.19 or 1-229.21, the city may assess such person a minimum fine of $200.00. 
(4)  When a person violates subsection (1) above as to 63 O.S. § 1-229.26, the city may assess such person a minimum fine of $100.00. 
(b)  Purchase of possession of tobacco or vapor product by minors-Falsification of proof of age. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to violate 10A O.S. § 2-8-224, as currently enacted and as may hereinafter be amended or renumbered. 
(2)  When a person violates subsection (1) above, the city may assess such person a minimum fine of $100.00 for the first offense, $200.00 for the second offense within a one-year period following the first offense. 
(c)  Enforcement of this section. 
(1)  The city is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this section. The city shall enforce these provisions in a manner that can be reasonably be expected to reduce the extent to which tobacco or vapor products are sold or distributed to persons under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  Persons under eighteen (18) years of age may be enlisted by the city to assist in enforcement. Provided, however, that any such persons under 18 years of age may be used to test compliance only if written parental consent has been provided and the testing is conducted under the direct supervision of the city or conducted by another law enforcement agency if such agency has given written notice to the city in the manner prescribed by the city. Provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to the use of persons under eighteen (18) years of age to test compliance if the compliance test is being conducted by or on behalf of a retailer of cigarettes, as defined in 68 O.S. § 301, at any location the retailer of cigarettes is authorized to sell cigarettes. Any other use of persons under eighteen (18) years of age to test compliance shall be unlawful and punishable by the city by a fine of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12, § 2, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 13-205. - Restrictions on tobacco products and vapor products on city property. 
(a)  Prohibited use of tobacco and vapor products. Use of any tobacco or vapor products within the city limits is prohibited in all places in which such use of tobacco or vapor products is otherwise prohibited by law. 
(b)  Prohibited use of tobacco and vapor products on municipal property. Using any tobacco or vapor products is prohibited on all municipal property, indoor and outdoor, including parks, arenas and other recreational areas and including personal property such as a vehicle, even if it is outside of the municipal boundaries. 
(c)  Owner may prohibit use of tobacco and vapor products on property. Nothing in this section prohibits any person or entity from prohibiting the use of tobacco or vapor products on their property, even if the use of tobacco or vapor products is not otherwise prohibited by law in that area. 
(d)  Owner may not allow prohibited use of tobacco and vapor products on property. No person or entity shall knowingly permit the use of tobacco or vapor products in an area that is under the control of that person or entity and in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by law. 
(e)  Prohibition of ash receptacles where smoking is prohibited. No person or entity shall permit the placement of ash receptacles, such as ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the control of that person or entity and in which smoking is prohibited by law. However, the presence of ash receptacles shall not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco or vapor products in violation of any provision of this Section. 
(f)  Prohibition against littering tobacco or vapor product waste. No person shall dispose of tobacco or vapor product waste by dropping it to the ground within an area in which the use of tobacco or vapor products is prohibited. 
(g)  Intimidation and threatening prohibited. No person or entity shall intimidate, threaten, or otherwise retaliate against another person or entity that seeks to attain compliance with this Section. 
(h)  Required signs. 
(1)  The person or entity that has legal or de facto control of an area in which the use of tobacco or vapor products is prohibited by this Section shall post a clear, conspicuous, and unambiguous sign at each point of entry to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous point within the area. 
(2)  For restrictions on the use of tobacco or vapor products in indoor areas, the sign or decal shall be at least 4 inches by 2 inches in size and shall clearly state that smoking, or tobacco or vapor use is prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is provided. For restrictions on the use of tobacco or vapor products in outdoor areas, signs shall be weather-resistant, at least 15 inches by 15 inches in size, with lettering of at least 1 inch, and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco or vapor use is prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is provided. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, the City Manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for the posting of signs on municipal property, both indoor and outdoor. 
(4)  Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco or vapor products in violation of any other provision of this Section. 
(i)  Penalties and enforcement. 
(1)  Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of any peace officer, provided, however, a code enforcement official may enforce the provisions of subsection (h) on required signs. 
(2)  Any person who knowingly violates this Section shall be punished by fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(3)  The use of a tobacco or vapor product in violation of this Section is a nuisance. 
(4)  The remedies provided by this Section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(5)  Each instance of tobacco or vapor product use in violation of this Section shall constitute a separate violation. 
(6)  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this Section regarding tobacco or vapor product use shall also constitute a violation of this Section. 
(7)  In addition to other remedies provided by this Section or by other law, any violation of this Section regarding tobacco or vapor product use may be remedied by the City Attorney or Prosecutor, including, but not limited to, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. 
(j)  Statutory construction. It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Miami to supplement applicable state and federal law and not to duplicate or contradict such law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12, § 2, 9-25-2018) 
Secs. 13-206-13-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY 

Sec. 13-221. - Eluding a police officer. 
    Any operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual and audible signal, or either, a red light and siren, or either, from a police officer driving a motor vehicle showing the same to be an official police car of the city, directing the operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, and who willfully increases his speed or extinguishes his lights in an attempt to elude such police officer, or wilfully attempts in any other manner, to elude the police officer, or who does elude such police officer, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12-33) 
Cross reference- Traffic, ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 540A. 
Sec. 13-222. - Assault and/or battery upon police officer. 
    Every person who, without justification or excusable cause, knowingly commits assault, battery or assault and battery upon the person of a police officer or other officer of the law while in the performance of his duties as a police officer, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 12-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 649. 
Sec. 13-223. - Interference with city officers. 
    Every person, who, without justification or excusable cause: 
(1)  By means of any threat or violence, deters or prevents any executive officer from performing any duty imposed upon such officer by law. 
(2)  Knowingly resists, by the use of force or violence, any executive officer in the performance of his duty. 
(3)  After having been lawfully commanded to aid any officer in arresting any person or in retaking any person who has escaped from legal custody, or in executing any legal process, wilfully neglects or refuses to aid such officer. 
(4)  Wilfully delays or obstructs any public officer in the discharge or attempt to discharge any duty of his office. 
(5)  Shall without due authority, exercise or attempt to exercise the functions of or hold himself out to anyone as a policeman, or peace officer. 
(6)  Wilfully, knowingly and without probable cause makes a false report to any person of any crime or circumstances indicating the possibility of crime having been committed, including the unlawful taking of personal property, which report causes or encourages the exercise of police action or investigation. 
(7)  Delivers any article or thing to any person under arrest and in custody without the consent and permission of the officer who has such prisoner in his charge and custody. 
(8)  Reports, or causes to be reported, directly or indirectly, the need for emergency aid, or to otherwise summons police, fire or other emergency aid, unless such person knows or reasonably believes that such emergency aid is required. 
(9)  Molests or tampers with any signal equipment or any device of any kind placed, operated and maintained by the city in connection with the administration of any of its ordinances, regulations, services and functions or the performance of duties pursuant thereto. 
(10)  Follows or blocks the way of any emergency vehicle engaged in making an emergency run, or interferes with officers at the location of any emergency event. 
(Code 1964, § 12-36; Ord. No. 1280, § 1, 6-5-89) 
State Law reference- Refusing to aid officer, 21 O.S. § 537; obstructing officer, 21 O.S. § 540; false reporting of crime, 21 O.S. § 589. 
Chapter 14 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for ordinance violations, § 1-5. 
State Law reference- Municipal court, 11 O.S. § 27-101 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief of police shall mean the peace officer in charge of the police force of the city. 
    Clerk shall mean the city clerk, including any deputy or member of the office staff of the clerk while performing the duties of the clerk's office. 
    Court shall mean the Municipal Court of the City of Miami. 
    Judge shall mean the judge of the municipal court, including any acting judge or alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state and this chapter. 
    This judicial district shall mean the district court judicial district of the state wherein the city is situated. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Establishment. 
    This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal court of the city, as put into operation by Resolution No. 267 duly passed on the twentieth day of January, 1969, and filed in accordance with the law, as authorized by 11 O.S. §§ 27-101, 27-102. To the extent of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other ordinances of this city, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-1) 
Sec. 14-3. - Jurisdiction. 
    The court shall exercise jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of this city is charged. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-103. 
Sec. 14-4. - Judges-Qualifications. 
    There shall be one (1) judge of the court who must be licensed to practice law in the state. He may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he shall not accept employment inconsistent with his duties as judge, or arising out of facts which give rise to or are connected with cases within the jurisdiction of the court pending therein, or which might become subject to proceedings therein. He need not reside within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-4) 
State Law reference- Qualifications of judge, 11 O.S. § 27-104(A). 
Sec. 14-5. - Same-Term of office. 
    The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years, expiring on the thirtieth day of June, in each odd-numbered year. Such judge, unless removed for cause as is provided by law for the removal of public officers, shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-104(A). 
Sec. 14-6. - Acting judge. 
    In the event of disqualification of the judge in a particular case, or his absence or inability to act, the mayor may appoint some person, qualified as provided in section 14-4, as acting municipal judge of the court in the place of the judge during his absence or inability to act or in a case wherein the judge is disqualified; or, in its discretion, the board of commissioners may provide by ordinance for the appointment of an alternate judge of the court, in the same manner and for the same term as the judge and possessing the qualifications prescribed by section 14-4, who shall sit as acting judge of the court in case of the absence, inability or disqualification of the judge. If both the judge and the alternate judge are unable to sit, the mayor may appoint an acting judge as provided in this section. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12A-6, 12A-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-106. 
Sec. 14-7. - Compensation of judges. 
(a)  A judge, other than an acting judge, shall receive a salary, payable monthly or semi-monthly, as shall be determined, such salary to be fixed annually by the mayor and board of commissioners. 
(b)  An acting judge shall be paid for each day devoted to the performance of his duties, a sum equal to one-thirtieth of the monthly salary of the judge of the municipal court. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-8) 
State Law reference- Compensation of judges, 11 O.S. §§ 27-104, 27-106. 
Sec. 14-8. - Appointment following removal of judge. 
    In case of the removal of a judge during the term of his office, the mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the board of commissioners, a successor judge to complete the unexpired term, upon the same procedure as an original appointment is made. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 27-104. 
Sec. 14-9. - Prohibition on change of venue, disqualification of judge. 
    No change of venue shall be allowed from any municipal court, but the judge of the municipal court may be disqualified under the same terms and conditions as are now provided by law for courts of record, and in case of such disqualification a special judge shall be appointed as provided in section 14-4. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-105. 
Sec. 14-10. - Court marshal. 
    The board of commissioners, upon the recommendation of the judge, may designate any appropriate person who is a resident of the city to serve as marshal, and in the absence of such a designation, the chief of police shall be ex officio marshal of the court. The marshal shall execute any writs and other process directed to him, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and such duty may be performed by any deputy marshal or by any members of the police force of the city, as the case may be. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-110. 
Sec. 14-11. - Clerk of court. 
    The city clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be ex officio the clerk of the municipal court. The clerk shall: 
(1)  Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court, preparation of writs, processes, or other papers. 
(2)  Administer oaths required in judicial or other proceedings before the court. 
(3)  Be responsible for the entry of all pleadings, processes, and proceedings in the dockets of the court. 
(4)  Perform such other clerical duties in relation to the proceedings of the court as the judge shall direct. 
(5)  Receive and give receipt for and disburse or deliver to the city treasurer all fines, forfeitures, fees, deposits, and sums of money properly payable to the municipal court. Such funds and sums of money while in the custody of the clerk shall be deposited and disbursed upon vouchers as directed by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-109. 
Sec. 14-12. - Disposition of fees, fines, forfeitures. 
    All of the fees, fines and forfeitures which come into the municipal court shall be paid by the clerk of the court to the city treasurer. The treasurer shall credit such deposits to the general fund or such other fund designated by the board of commissioners. The court clerk shall make duplicate receipts for the fees, fines and forfeitures collected by him, one (1) copy of which shall be retained by the city treasurer together with a detailed statement of all costs, the style of the case in which they were paid, and the name of the party paying the same. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-112. 
Sec. 14-13. - Prosecuting attorney. 
    The city attorney, or his duly designated assistant, shall be the prosecuting officer of the court. He shall prosecute all alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be authorized, in his discretion, to prosecute and resist appeals, proceedings in error and review from this court to any other courts of the state, and to represent this city in all proceedings arising out of matters in this court. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-13) 
State Law reference- Prosecuting attorney, 11 O.S. § 27-108. 
Sec. 14-14. - Bond of court clerk. 
    The clerk of the court shall give bond, in the form provided by 11 O.S. § 27-111, in the sum of $1,000.00, to be approved by the mayor and board of commissioners. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-14) 
Sec. 14-15. - Rules of court. 
    The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with the ordinances of this city, for the proper conduct of the business of the court. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-114. 
Sec. 14-16. - Contempt of court-Failure to comply with lawful order of court. 
(a)  The judge shall have power to enforce due obedience to orders, rules and judgments made by him and may fine or imprison for contempt offered to the judge while holding his court or to process issued by him in the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of the state. 
(b)  The clerk shall mail a failure to comply notice to any defendant who has failed to answer a municipal citation within the time authorized on the municipal citation or failed to comply with an order of the court. The notice shall be mailed to the address specified on the citation or information within seven (7) days following the date to appear, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays excluded, and shall notify the defendant to answer in the office of the court clerk within fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice. Following the issuance of a failure to comply notice, the defendant shall be required to post an appearance bond in the amount prescribed by the municipal judge. 
(c)  The failure to comply notice provided for in subdivision (b) of this section shall contain the name of the person charged, driver's license number, if any, the charge, the notification of the time within which the person must appear in the municipal court clerk's office to answer, and the amount of bond required. The notice shall notify the defendant that failing to appear as required in the notice will result in a new charge of failure to appear being filed, a warrant being issued for the arrest of the defendant, and notification to the department of public safety requesting the defendant's driver's license be suspended and additional fines and costs as prescribed by the court. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-16; Ord. No. 1474, § 1, 2-17-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-125. 
Sec. 14-17. - Prosecutions by verified complaint, style. 
    All prosecutions commenced in the municipal court shall be by complaint which shall be subscribed by the person making the complaint and shall be verified before a judge, the court clerk, a deputy court clerk, or a police officer. No warrant for arrest shall be issued until the complaint has been approved by the judge of the municipal court. All prosecutions for the violation of municipal ordinances shall be styled, "The City of Miami vs. ___________ (naming the person or persons charged)." 
(Code 1964, § 12A-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-115. 
Sec. 14-18. - Arrests; release by signing citation; bail; amount and conditions; temporary cash bond. 
(a)  If a resident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer for the violation of any traffic ordinance for which section 14-19 does not apply, or is arrested for the violation of a nontraffic ordinance, the officer shall immediately release the person if the person acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it; provided, however, the arresting officer need not release the person if it reasonably appears to the officer that the person may cause injury to himself or others or damage to property released, that the person will not appear in response to the citation, or the person is arrested for an offense against a person or property. If the person fails to appear in response to the citation, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest and his appearance shall be compelled. If the arrested resident is not released by being permitted to sign a citation as provided for in this subsection, he shall be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment, or shall be released on personal recognizance. 
(b)  If a nonresident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer for a violation of any ordinance for which section 14-19 does not apply, the defendant shall be eligible to be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment. 
(c)  The amount and conditions of bail granted pursuant to the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be determined by the judge who shall prescribe rules for the receipt of bail and for the release on personal recognizance. In the event of arrests at night, emergencies, or when the judge is not available, a court official, the chief of police or his designated representative may be authorized by the judge, subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge, to accept a temporary cash bond in a sufficient amount to secure the appearance of the accused. The cash bond shall not exceed the maximum fine provided for by ordinance for each offense charged. The court official, chief of police or his designated representative is authorized, subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge, to release a resident of the city on personal recognizance. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-117. 
Sec. 14-19. - Arrest for misdemeanor traffic violation other than parking or standing; bail. 
    If a resident or nonresident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a traffic ordinance, other than an ordinance pertaining to a parking or standing traffic violation, and the arrested person is eligible to sign a written promise to appear and be released upon personal recognizance as provided for in 22 O.S. § 1115.1, then the procedures provided for in the State and Municipal Traffic Bail Bond Procedure Act [22 O.S. § 1115 et seq.] as applied to municipalities, shall govern. Unless established by ordinance, the municipal court may prescribe a bail bond schedule for traffic offenses. The amount of bail shall not exceed the maximum fine provided by ordinance for each offense. 
(Code 1964, § 27-117.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-117.1. 
Sec. 14-20. - Failure to appear according to terms of bond; forfeiture. 
    If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the terms or conditions of his bond, either for hearing, arraignment, trial or judgment, or upon any other occasion when his presence in court or before the magistrate may be lawfully required, the judge may direct that fact to be entered upon the court minutes, thereby declaring the bond to be forfeited. Without advancing court costs, the judge shall then cause the forfeiture to be certified to the district court in the county, where it shall be entered upon the judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of a district court judgment. At such time as the forfeiture is entered upon the district court judgment docket, the district court clerk shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of 59 O.S. §§ 1330 through 1333 and 1335. A surety shall have all remedies available under the provisions of 20 O.S. § 1108 and 59 O.S. §§ 1301 through 1340. Court costs shall be collectible from the proceeds of the bond. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-118. 
Sec. 14-21. - Procedure; judicial notice of statutes and ordinances; writs and process; service of arrest warrant. 
    Except as otherwise provided for by law, the code of procedure in the municipal court shall be the same as is provided for by law for the trial of misdemeanors. The court shall take judicial notice of state statutes and the ordinances of the municipality in which it is located. Writs and processes of the court may be issued by the judge or clerk thereof to any proper officer. All writs and processes of the municipal court in which a violation of an ordinance is charged shall be directed to the chief of police or to some other appropriate peace officer. A law enforcement officer of the city may serve an arrest warrant issued by the municipal court any place in the county. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12A-21, 12A-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-113. 
Sec. 14-22. - Rules for conduct of court business. 
    The judge of each municipal court may prescribe rules, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, for the proper conduct of the business of the municipal court. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-114. 
Sec. 14-23. - Arraignment. 
    The arraignment shall be made by the court. The judge or the prosecuting attorney shall read the complaint to the defendant, inform him of his legal rights and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-116. 
Sec. 14-24. - Orders of no imprisonment or maximum fine. 
(a)  Prior to the trial of a case, the judge may enter an order with respect to such case providing for one (1) or both of the following: 
(1)  The defendant will not be imprisoned if he is convicted. 
(2)  A maximum fine that can be assessed if the defendant is convicted. 
(b)  If such an order is entered, sentencing must not violate such order. 
(c)  This section does not restrict the right of the judge to order imprisonment of a financially-able person for failure to pay a fine. 
Sec. 14-25. - Jury trials; qualifications of jurors. 
    In all prosecutions in the municipal court for any offense punishable by a fine of more than $200.00, or by imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment, a jury trial shall be had unless waived by the defendant and the city. In prosecutions for all other offenses, or in cases wherein a jury trial is waived by the defendant and the city, trial shall be to the court. A jury in the municipal court shall consist of six (6) jurors, five (5) of whom may return a verdict. Jurors shall be good and lawful men or women, citizens of the county in which the court sits, having the qualifications of jurors in the district court. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12A-23, 12A-26; Ord. No. 1407, § 1, 4-3-00) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-119. 
Sec. 14-26. - Selection and summons of jurors. 
(a)  Jurors in the municipal court shall be selected under the same terms and conditions as are provided for by law for the district courts. Upon written request of the judge of the municipal court for a stated number of jurors to the chief judge of the appropriate district court, it shall be the duty of the clerk of the district court to draw from the jury wheel a requested number of jurors in the same manner as is provided by law for the district court until the number requested, who from their addresses appear to reside within the corporate limits of the city, is drawn, and to prepare a list of names drawn and certify such list to the judge of the municipal court. On completion of the draw, the clerk shall immediately return to the jury wheel all names drawn which are not placed on the certified list. The judge of the municipal court shall make written request to the chief judge of the district court for a stated number of additional jurors if, after allowance of claimed statutory exemptions, the listed number is found to be insufficient. Summons of the prospective jurors shall be issued as set out by ordinance, and may be served in person by the chief of police or any member of the police force of the city, or may be served by the clerk of the municipal court by mail. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the jury list, the clerk of the municipal court shall cause a summons, in form to be prescribed by the municipal judge, to be served upon each juror, personally, by the chief of police or some member of his force, or by certified mail, as the judge shall direct. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12A-24, 12A-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-120. 
Sec. 14-27. - Juror's fees and mileage. 
    Jurors shall receive for their services the sum of $10.00 per day and those living beyond the city limits shall receive $0.10 per mile in going to and from their places of residence. They shall be paid out of the general funds of the city upon claims to be prepared by the city. Jurors shall be paid under this section for all days served as jurors from and after the twentieth day of June, 1980. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-27) 
State Law reference- Jurors fees, 11 O.S. § 27-121. 
Sec. 14-28. - Imposition, enforcement of judgment, sentence. 
(a)  If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy thereof, certified by the clerk, shall be delivered to the chief of police, and the same shall be sufficient for execution of the sentence by the chief of police. Any person convicted of a violation of any ordinance and sentenced to imprisonment shall be confined in the jail, farm or workhouse, of the city in the discretion of the court, for the time specified in the sentence; provided, however, the court may, in lieu of imprisonment, order the defendant to engage in a term of community service without compensation. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court imposing a judgment and sentence, at his discretion, is empowered to modify, reduce, or suspend or defer the imposition of such sentence or any part thereof and to authorize probation for a period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of sentence, under such terms or conditions as the judge may specify. Procedures relating to suspension of the judgment or costs or both shall be as provided in section 14-31. Upon completion of the probation term, the defendant shall be discharged without a court judgment of guilt, and the verdict, judgment of guilty or plea of guilty shall be expunged from the record and said charge dismissed with prejudice to any further action. Upon a finding of the court that the conditions of probation have been violated, the municipal judge may enter a judgment of guilty. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court may continue or delay imposing a judgment and sentence for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of sentence. At the expiration of such period of time the judge may allow the city attorney to amend the charge to a lesser offense. 
(d)  If a deferred sentence is imposed, an administrative fee of not to exceed $200.00 may be imposed as costs in the case. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12A-28, 12A-29(a); Ord. No. 1407, § 1, 4-3-00) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-122.1. 
Sec. 14-29. - Enforcement of payment of fines or costs by imprisonment; inability to pay. 
(a)  If a defendant who is financially able refuses or neglects to pay a fine or costs or both, payment may be enforced: 
(1)  By imprisonment until the same shall be satisfied at the rate of $5.00 per day; or 
(2)  In the same manner as is prescribed in subsection (b) of this section for a defendant who is without means to make such payment. 
(b)  If the defendant is without means to pay the fine or costs, the municipal judge may direct the total amount due to be entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the district court in the county, where it shall be entered upon the district court judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of a district court judgment. Thereupon the same remedies shall be available for the enforcement of the judgment as are available to any other judgment creditor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-122. 
Sec. 14-30. - Community service in lieu of fine or in conjunction with imprisonment-Supervision-Supervision fee-Time to complete. 
(a)  Whenever any person is convicted in municipal court for violation of a municipal ordinance, the court may order the defendant to a term of community service or remedial action in lieu of fine or in conjunction with imprisonment. If the defendant fails to perform the required community service or if the conditions of community service are violated, the judge may impose a sentence of imprisonment, not to exceed the maximum sentence allowable for the violation for which the defendant was convicted. 
(b)  All persons ordered by the court to a term of community service shall be supervised in the performance thereof by the municipal court. The municipal court administrator shall set a reasonable fee for this supervision, not to exceed $15.00 per month. A filing fee of $20.00 per adjudication shall also be charged. Community service shall be completed within one (1) year, unless granted leave of court for a reasonable extension by the municipal court judge. No person sentenced to a term of community service shall be allowed to buy out this service. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 1, 5-21-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-122.2. 
Sec. 14-31. - Suspension of judgment or costs; reconfinement. 
    Whenever any person shall be convicted in the municipal court of violating an ordinance, the judge trying the cause, after sentence, may suspend the judgment or costs or both and allow the person so convicted to be released upon his own recognizance. Any person so released shall be required to report at such times and to such person or officer as the judge shall direct. The judge may cause a warrant to be issued for any person so released if it shall be made to appear to the judge that such person: 
(1)  Has been guilty of the violation of any law after his release; 
(2)  Is habitually associating with lewd or vicious persons; or 
(3)  Is indulging in vicious habits. 
Upon the issuance of the warrant by the judge, the person shall be delivered forthwith to the place of confinement to which he was originally sentenced and shall serve out the full term for which he was originally sentenced. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-123. 
Sec. 14-32. - Supervision of juveniles on parole or probation. 
    In addition to the duties otherwise provided by law, the judge of each municipal court, or some other person designated by the board of commissioners, shall be required to supervise all juveniles who are either on parole or serving probation terms or suspended sentences pronounced and adjudged by the municipal court. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-124. 
Sec. 14-33. - Public work by prisoners. 
    All prisoners confined to jail, if their health permits, may be compelled to perform any work on public premises or property, and for each day of such work, the prisoner shall be credited for serving two (2) days of imprisonment under their sentence. The chief of police, or the county sheriff, in case of confinement in the county jail, shall direct where the work shall be performed and shall oversee such work. If a guard is necessary, the chief of police shall make provision therefor. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-29(b)) 
Sec. 14-34. - Costs taxed to defendant. 
    The clerk of the court is authorized to charge and collect court costs in the amount of $30.00 as well as the fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses. An additional fee in the maximum amount permitted by state law shall be added as cost if a bench warrant was issued for defendant(s). 
(Code 1964, § 12A-31; Ord. No. 1407, § 1, 4-3-00; Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 2-1-10) 
State Law reference- Costs, 11 O.S. § 27-126. 
Sec. 14-35. - Fees of defense attorney. 
    The judge may order an indigent defendant to pay the fees of any attorney appointed by the court to defend such defendant. 
Sec. 14-36. - Appeals generally. 
(a)  An appeal may be taken from a final judgment of the municipal court by the defendant by filing in the district court in the county within ten (10) days from the date of the final judgment, a notice of appeal and by filing a copy of the notice with the municipal court. In case of an appeal, a trial de novo shall be had, and there shall be a right to a jury trial if the offense is punishable by a fine of more than $100.00 and costs. 
(b)  Upon conviction, at the request of the defendant, or upon notice of appeal being filed, the judge of the municipal court shall enter an order on his docket fixing an amount in which bond may be given by the defendant, in cash or sureties for cash in an amount of not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00; except that, if the conviction involved a fine only, the amount of the bond shall be no greater than twice the amount of such fine. Bond shall be taken by the clerk of the court wherein judgment was rendered. Any pledge of sureties must be approved by a judge of the court. 
(c)  Upon appeal being filed the judge shall within ten (10) days thereafter certify to the clerk of the appellate court the original papers in the case. If the papers have not been certified in the appellate court, the prosecuting attorney shall take the necessary steps to have the papers certified to the appellate court within twenty (20) days of the filing of the notice of appeal, and failure to do so, except for good cause shown, shall be grounds for dismissal of the charge by the appellate court, the cost to be taxed to the city. The certificate shall state whether or not the municipal judge hearing the case was a licensed attorney in the state. 
(d)  All proceedings necessary to carry the judgment into effect shall be had in the appellate court. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-129. 
Sec. 14-37. - Appeal to court of criminal appeals. 
    An appeal may be taken to the court of criminal appeals from the final judgment or order of a district court in an appeal from a final judgment of a municipal court in the same manner and to the same extent that appeals are taken from a district court to the court of criminal appeals. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-132. 
Sec. 14-38. - Bond or security filing fee-Jail fund. 
    The court clerk shall charge a fee of $35.00 for the initial filing of any bond or any security deposited with the municipal court clerk for the subsequent court appearance of the defendant, which fee shall be assessed as an additional court cost to the defendant. The municipal court clerk shall make any statutorily required remittance to a special revenue fund of the entity operating the jail for the municipality or to a fund designated by the municipal governing body for operating a jail housing municipal prisoners. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 2, 2-1-10) 
State Law reference- 28 O.S. Section 153.3. 
Chapter 15 - NUISANCES AND HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1495, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 2006, amended ch. 15 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 15, §§ 15-1-15-17, 15-21-29, 15-31-15-36, 15-41-15-55, 15-61-15-71, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1489, § 1, adopted Oct. 3, 2005. 
Charter reference- Authority of city to define and abate nuisances, Art. III, § 27. 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 4; traffic, ch. 23; utilities, ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to define and abate nuisances, 11 O.S. § 22-121. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein: 
(1)  "Nuisance" means unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or is any thing or condition which either: 
a.  Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 
b.  Offends decency; 
c.  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or render dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property; or 
d.  In any way renders another person or other persons insecure in life or in the use of property; 
(2)  "Private nuisance" means every nuisance not included in paragraph (3) of this section; and 
(3)  "Public nuisance" means a nuisance which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or three (3) or more properties under separate ownership in the vicinity of such nuisance, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Cross reference- Animals, § 4-1 et seq.; buildings, § 6-1 et seq. 
State Law reference- Nuisances generally, 50 O.S. § 1 et seq.; power of city to summarily abate, 50 O.S. § 16. 
Sec. 15-2. - Certain public nuisances defined. 
(a)  In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of this Code or law, the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  The sale or offering of unwholesome food or drink; or the keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made; 
(2)  The sale, offering for sale or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale, or furnished in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city; 
(3)  The exposure, display, sale or distribution of obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents, or objects; or the keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed; 
(4)  The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual intercourse or other immoral acts are practiced; 
(5)  The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law or ordinance are practiced or carried on; 
(6)  The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease as defined by applicable health laws and regulations; 
(7)  The continued making of loud or unusual noises, music or sounds, or strong vibrations which annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises; 
(8)  The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which materially and unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others; 
(9)  Any use of a street, sidewalk, or easement or a place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street, sidewalk, or easement or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or ordinances; 
(10)  Permitting water or other liquid to flow, fall or accumulate, or ice or snow to fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk where mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety; 
(11)  All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety; 
(12)  Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse or other things which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin, disease germs, or bacteria and the premises on which such exist; 
(13)  Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health or safety because of damage, decay or other condition; 
(14)  Any pit, hole or other thing which is so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety; 
(15)  Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety; 
(16)  Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare; 
(17)  Permitting foul, noxious or offensive odors to escape from premises; or unusual quantities of dust or other deleterious substances to escape or emanate across the property line upon which the same originates; 
(18)  Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become obnoxious or annoying to any resident of this city, by reason of any noise or noises made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation; 
(19)  The keeping in violation of sections 4-1 et seq. [of this Code] of any dog kennels within this city for the breeding and raising of dogs that shall become offensive or annoying to the public by reason of the barking and noise made by the animals therein contained; 
(20)  Any vault, cesspool or sink used to receive human excrement, slops, garbage, refuse or other filthy substance; 
(21)  Any pond, slop, trash, refuse, cobs, manure, decayed or decaying vegetable matter, left, kept or maintained in such condition as to endanger the public health; 
(22)  The keeping of any hog pen within the limits of this city in violation of this Code; 
(23)  Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and dangerous from fire, decay or other cause, or shall become hazardous from fire, by reason of age, decay or construction, location or other cause, or shall be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of this city or its inhabitants from any cause; 
(24)  Allowing the exterior of buildings and structures to be maintained in such a manner that their appearance constitutes a blighting influence for adjoining property. As used in this subsection, blighting influence shall mean the maintaining of the exterior of a building or structure in a condition that, if not corrected, would or could cause surrounding buildings and structures to become likewise maintained leading to an overall deterioration of the surrounding area; or 
(25)  Failing to remove, allowing to remain or permitting any graffiti; 
(26)  Any dead tree kept, maintained or not removed in which a falling or decaying limb, branch, stem, stump or part thereof, may cause injury to property owner/occupant or any passerby, or may cause damage to any fence, structure, vehicle or any other property or utilities. 
(b)  The enumeration in subsection (a) hereof of certain public nuisances shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions of law or ordinances defining public or private nuisances either in more general or more specific terms. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Cross reference- Animals, § 4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 15-3. - Nuisance prohibited. 
    No person shall create or maintain a nuisance within the city or permit a nuisance to remain on premises under their control within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-4. - Person responsible for continuing nuisance. 
    Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is liable therefore in the same manner as the person who first created it. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-5. - Time does not legalize nuisance. 
    No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual obstruction of public right. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-6. - Remedies against public nuisances. 
    The remedies against a public nuisance are: 
(1)  Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court; 
(2)  Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate court; 
(3)  Civil action; or 
(4)  Abatement: 
a.  By the person injured as provided in Section 12 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes; or 
b.  By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-7. - Remedies against private nuisances. 
    The remedies against a private nuisance are: 
(1)  Civil action; or 
(2)  Abatement: 
a.  By the person injured as provided in Sections 14 and 15 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes; or 
b.  By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-8. - City has power to define and summarily abate nuisance. 
    As provided in Section 16 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the city is empowered to determine what is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and, for the protection of the public health, the public parks and the public water supply, outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the city has the power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner and an opportunity for him to be heard, if this can be done. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-9. - Summary abatement of nuisances. 
(a)  Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of one or more persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to require, the city manager, a designee of the city manager or other appropriate officer or agency of the city government to take immediate and proper action summarily to abate such nuisances or to reduce or suspend the danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement. 
(b)  An officer subordinate to the city manager may submit to the city manager a statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by the ordinances of the city or law, and a request or recommendation that it be abated. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall determine if a nuisance exists as defined by the ordinances of the city or law. If he finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, he shall direct the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance by any one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  First-class letter sent through the U.S. Postal Service, postage prepaid, with certificate of mailing obtained at time of mailing, which said certificate of mailing shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the recipient. 
(2)  First-class letter sent through the U.S. Postal Service, postage prepaid, with return receipt requested, which said return receipt to be signed by a person residing at or occupying the address, which said person shall be fifteen (15) years of age or older, 
(3)  Letter for overnight delivery sent through an accepted and recognized delivery service, 
(4)  By personal service performed by the city manager or his designee or by an individual appointed for that purpose by the city manager or his designee, 
(5)  By personal service performed by a certified police officer employed by the City of Miami, 
(6)  If the property owner(s) cannot be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Miami, one time not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action by the city, to abate the nuisance within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the person or persons or public adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If such peace, health, safety, morals or welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate it within the specified time, or if the persons responsible authorize the city to abate the nuisance, the manager shall direct the appropriate officer to abate the nuisance or have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as authorized by Section 16 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes. The city shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just under the circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. This cost shall include costs associated with notifying the owner or other persons responsible for causing the nuisance, if their names and addresses are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to the city collectible as other debts may be collected. 
(7)  All costs related to the service of the notice may be charged to the owner(s) or occupant(s) of the property upon which a nuisance is to be abated. 
(8)  If the city anticipates summary abatement as provided in section 15-27 of this Code, the notice shall contain further language as required by state law as to possible future summary abatement action which may be taken by the city. 
(9)  The owner or occupant may give written consent, authorizing the city to abate the nuisance. The owner or occupant must agree to pay all costs associated with the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-10. - Health nuisances; abatement. 
(a)  Pursuant to authority granted by Section 1-1011 of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the city shall have the authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in the city to remove from such premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health, within twenty-four (24) hours, or within such other time as may be reasonable. Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the city or by a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant or agent is unknown or is outside the state, the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the city. 
(b)  If the order is not complied with, the city may cause the order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be charged to the owner or occupant, enforceable as a lien or by any other method allowed by law or ordinance, including collection by charging the cost to the occupant's utility bill or to the utility bill of any property owned by the owner of the property where the abatement work was performed. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-11. - City actions not to jeopardize private action. 
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed to abridge the rights of citizens of the city to bring and maintain actions in the proper courts for the abatement of private nuisances or those specially injurious to them. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-12. - Escape of water prohibited. 
    No person shall permit or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding, or impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or create a hazardous condition to such traffic, or cause damage to the public streets of the city. Water from private pools shall be drained or disposed of in such manner as to not run on adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-13. - Open burning prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to burn any fire outside of any enclosed building in the city for the purpose of burning grass, trash, leaves, weeds, papers, refuse, garbage or any other substance except in an approved incinerator and except as may be allowed by the city fire code and any applicable state or city regulations. This section shall not prevent the public from operating any type of charcoal cooker or other type of grilling equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-14. - Abatement by suit in district court. 
    In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the city may bring suit in the district court. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-15. - Procedure cumulative. 
    The procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative one to the other. The city may elect to follow any such procedure which is applicable in abating any particular nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-16. - Obstructing health or enforcement officer. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or interfere with any health officer or other code enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of the health or nuisance laws of this city. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-17. - Abandoned ice boxes, refrigerators. 
    It is unlawful and an offense for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other container of any kind of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released from the inside of such ice box, refrigerator or container, or which has a snap-lock or other device for automatically fastening such door in a closed position, without first removing such fastener, lock, snap-lock or doors of such container. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Secs. 15-18-15-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS, GRASS AND TRASH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1607, § 1, adopted May 21, 2013, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 15-21-15-29, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1495, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 2006. 

Sec. 15-21. - Definitions. 
    The definitions provided by 11 O.S. § 22-111(D), presently in effect and as the same may be amended in the future by the state legislature, shall apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 5-21-13) 
Sec. 15-22. - Accumulation of trash or weeds unlawful. 
    It is unlawful and a public offense for owners of property or persons otherwise in possession or control of property located within the municipal limits to allow trash to accumulate, or weeds to grow or stand upon the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 5-21-13) 
Sec. 15-23. - Enforcement and abatement. 
(a)  The city may cause property within the municipal limits to be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the procedures set forth at 11 O.S. § 22-111(A), (B) and (E) as presently in effect and as the same may be amended in the future by the state legislature, the terms and conditions of which are adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  The city manager or his or her designee(s) shall serve as the administrative officer or administrative body to carry out the duties of the city council described in 11 O.S. § 22-111(A) as presently in effect and as the same may be amended in the future by the state legislature. The board of adjustment shall serve as the appellate board in the event of an appeal from any order of the administrative officer or administrative body. 
(c)  Upon failure of the owners of property or persons otherwise in possession or control of property to pay all expenses related to the abatement work as required by law, the determined costs, to include a $150.00 administrative fee, may be added to the responsible party's or parties' municipal utility bill(s) with such determined cost to be collected in the same manner and with the same procedure as utility bills are routinely collected. This collection method is in addition to those provided by state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 1637, § 1, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 1651, § 1, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 15-24. - Prosecution in municipal court, repeat offenders and other civil relief. 
(a)  The enforcement and abatement provisions authorized by 11 O.S. § 22-111(A) and (B) and implemented by this article are not exclusive remedies. 
(b)  Violation(s) of Code section 15-22, above, are punishable as provided in Code section 1-5. Each day the violation occurs may be charged as a separate offense. However, in the case of a third or subsequent violation upon the same real property, by the same owner(s) or same person(s) otherwise in possession or control of the same real property, occurring within two (2) years of a prior violation, the fine shall be imposed in the minimum amount of no less than $250.00 and no portion thereof shall be subject to suspension or deferred judgment by the municipal court. The imposition of a fine under this section shall not deprive the municipal court of the power to impose additional punishments and remedies provided under Code section 1-5. A "prior violation" for purposes of this repeat offender provision shall include (1) a finding of guilt upon trial, an entry of a plea of guilty, or entry of a plea of nolo contendere and (2) the entry of a deferred judgment upon trial, an entry of a plea of guilty, or entry of a plea of nolo contendere. 
(c)  The city may, in addition to the other remedies provided by this article and this section, pursue any other relief made available by the laws of this state, including but not limited to recourse to the State District Courts. 
(Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 5-21-13) 
Secs. 15-25-15-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS 

Sec. 15-31. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter: 
(1)  "Director" means the code enforcement director or his designee; 
(2)  "Boarding and securing" or "boarded and secured" means the closing, boarding or locking of any or all exterior openings so as to prevent entry into the structure; 
(3)  "Cleaning" or "cleaned" means the removal of trash or weeds from the premises; 
(4)  "Dilapidated building" as defined by 11 O.S. § 22-112(C), as presently in effect and as the same may be here and after amended. 
(5)  "Unsecured building" means a structure which through neglect or injury lacks necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 1663, § 1, 11-15-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. §§ 22-112, 22-112.1. 
Sec. 15-32. - Report to be made. 
    Any officer or employee of this city who discovers or receives a report of a dilapidated building which has become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property, shall report such conditions to the director. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-33. - Condemnation of dilapidated buildings, notice, removal, lien, payment. 
    The director may cause dilapidated buildings within the city limits to be torn down and removed, in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  At least ten (10) days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property before the city takes action or holds a hearing as provided herein. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to be affected. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent by mail to the property owner at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to any mortgage holder as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk to the last-known address of the mortgagee. At the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, the city shall obtain a certificate of mailing from the postal service, which certificate shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the recipient. However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property, or by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city limits of the City of Miami. Such notice shall be published once not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action to be taken pursuant to this section; 
(2)  A hearing shall be held by the director to determine whether the property is dilapidated and has thereby become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property; 
(3)  If the director finds that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or a hazard, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of such conditions, the director may cause the dilapidated building to be torn down and removed, and shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement and completion of the work. The city clerk shall immediately file a notice of lien with the county clerk describing the property, the findings of the director at the hearing, and stating that the city claims a lien on the property for the destruction and removal costs and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing of the notice; 
(4)  If the work is not performed by the property owner within the dates fixed by the director, the director shall direct the tearing down and removal, be done by one of the following methods: 
a.  By the city; 
b.  On a private contract basis, in which case it shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder; 
(5)  After the building has been torn down and removed, the director shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings, and any other expenses as may be necessary in conjunction therewith, to include a $400.00 administrative fee. The city clerk shall forward a statement of such actual cost attributable to the dismantling and removal and a demand for payment by mail to the property owner at the address specified in this section. In addition, a copy of the statement shall be mailed to any mortgage holder at the address specified in this section. At the time of mailing of the statement of costs to any property owner or mortgage holder, the city shall obtain a certificate of mailing from the postal service, which certificate shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the recipient; 
(6)  When payment is made to the municipality for costs incurred, the municipal clerk shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of the buildings is not made within six (6) months from the date of the mailing of the statement to the owner of such property, the City shall have and perfect a lien in the amount equal to the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings, and any other expenses as may be necessary in conjunction therewith, to include a $400.00 administrative fee, in the manner as prescribed by State law. 
(7)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes; and; 
(8)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from otherwise abating a dilapidated building as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 1651, § 1, 11-17-2015) 
Cross reference- Removal of weeds and trash, § 15-21 et seq.; building codes, § 6-1 et seq. 
State Law reference- Removal of dilapidated buildings, 11 O.S. § 22-112. 
Sec. 15-34. - Boarding and securing dilapidated buildings, procedure. 
    The city may cause the building to be boarded and secured in accordance with the following procedure. The city may determine that a building is unsecured and order that such building be boarded and secured in the manner provided for in this section even though such building has not been declared by the city to be dilapidated. 
(1)  Pursuant to authority granted by Section 1-1011 of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the city shall have the authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in the city to remove from such premises, within twenty-four (24) hours, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health, to board such building in the case of exigent circumstances. If said removal or said boarding is not done within twenty-four (24) hours, the city may chose to remove the nuisance or board the premises, within such time as may be reasonable. Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the city or by a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant or agent is unknown or is outside the state, the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a general circulation within the City of Miami. 
(2)  In the absence of exigent circumstances and before the city orders such action, that such unsecured building is to be boarded and secured, notice shall be given by mail to any property owners and mortgage holders as provided in section 15-33 of this Code. At the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, the director or his designee shall obtain a certificate of mailing from the U.S. Postal Service, which certificate shall indicate the date of the mailing and the name and address of the recipient. A copy of the notice shall also be posted on the property to be affected. However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located, notice maybe given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city limits of the City of Miami. Such notice shall be published one time, not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action by the city pursuant to the provisions of this section. If the director anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this section, the notice shall state that: any subsequent need for boarding and securing the building within a six-month period after the initial boarding and securing of the building pursuant to such notice may be summarily boarded and secured by the city, that the costs of such boarding and securing shall be assessed against the owner, and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner or mortgage holder; 
(3)  The owner of the property may give his written consent to the city authorizing the boarding and securing of such unsecured building and to the payment of any costs incurred thereby. By giving the written consent, the owner waives his right to a hearing as provided in this section; 
(4)  If the property owner does not give his written consent to such actions, a hearing may be held by the director to determine whether the boarding and securing would promote and benefit the public health, safety or welfare. Such hearing maybe held in conjunction with a hearing on the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass on the premises of such unsecured building held pursuant to this Code. In making such determination, the director shall apply the following standard: The director may order the boarding and securing of the unsecured building when the boarding and securing thereof would make such building less available for transient occupation, decrease a fire hazard created by such building, or decrease the hazard that such building would constitute an attractive nuisance to children. Upon making such a determination the director may order the boarding and securing of the unsecured building; 
(5)  After the director orders the boarding and securing of such unsecured building, the city clerk shall immediately file a notice of unsecured building and lien with the county clerk describing the property, stating the findings of the city at the hearing at which the building was determined to be unsecured, and stating that the city claims a lien on the property for the costs of boarding and securing the building and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing the notice; 
(6)  Pursuant to the order of the director, the agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the property for the performance of the boarding and securing of such building and for the performance of all necessary duties as a governmental function of the city; 
(7)  After an unsecured building has been boarded and secured, the director shall determine the actual costs of such actions and any other expenses that may be necessary in conjunction therewith including the cost of the notice and mailing. The city clerk shall forward a statement of the actual costs attributable to the boarding and securing of the unsecured building and a demand for payment of such costs, by mail to any property owners and mortgage holders as provided in section 15-33 of this Code. At the time of mailing of the statement of costs to any property or mortgage holder the city clerk shall obtain a certificate of mailing from the postal service, which certificate shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the recipient; 
(8)  If the city boards and secures any unsecured building, the cost to the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, materials and equipment required for the performance of such actions. If such actions are done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best responsible bidder; 
(9)  When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city clerk shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to the actual costs of the boarding and securing of the unsecured building is not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the statement to the owner of the property, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the costs to the county treasurer of the county in which the property is located. The costs shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as are other taxes authorized by law. Until fully paid, the costs and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date the notice of unsecured building and lien is filed with the office of the county clerk. The lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and shall continue until the costs and interest are fully paid. At any time prior to collection as provided herein, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon including an action in personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. Upon receipt of payment in full, the city clerk shall forward to the office of the county treasurer a notice of such payment and direct discharge of the lien; 
(10)  If the city causes a structure to be boarded and secured, in accordance with the procedures provided for in this section, any subsequent need for boarding and securing the property within a six-month period may be declared a nuisance and may be summarily abated without prior notice to the property owner. At the time of such summary abatement the city clerk shall notify the property owner of the boarding and securing and of the costs thereof. This section shall not apply if the records of the county clerk show that the property was transferred after notice was given pursuant to this section. 
Sec. 15-35. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense against the city and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-36. - Administration and appeal. 
A.  The city manager or his or her designee(s) shall serve as the administrative officer or administrative body to carry out the duties of the city council described in § 22-112(B), § 22-112.1(C)(8) and § 22-112.4(D), all as presently in effect and as the same may be amended in the future by the state legislature. 
B.  The City Council shall serve as the appellate board in the event of an appeal from any order of the administrative officer or administrative body and such appeal shall be conducted in the manner provided by Article II (Board of Appeals) of Chapter 6 (Buildings and Building Regulations). 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 1, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 15-37-15-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED, INOPERABLE, AND JUNK VEHICLES 

Sec. 15-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, and their derivations, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicate a different meaning: 
(1)  "Director" means the code enforcement director or his designee; 
(2)  "Junk vehicle" means any motor vehicle or vehicle, as defined herein, which has lost its identity, character, utility or serviceability through the ravages of time or by being wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, deteriorated or which is inoperative, abandoned or discarded, but does not include motor vehicles or vehicles for which a permit has been obtained pursuant to this chapter for so long as the terms and conditions of the permit are in force and obeyed; but does not include motor vehicles or vehicles parked on private property which display current license tags which are temporarily out of service due to mechanical breakdown or damage if the owner thereof makes diligent efforts to place same back into operable condition, but shall not exceed ten (10) days; 
(3)  "Motor vehicle" means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground or water and the term shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, boats, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, and golf carts; 
(4)  "Private property" means any real property within the city which is not public property; 
(5)  "Public property" means any real property which is dedicated to the public use which the federal or any state or municipal government, or any political subdivision thereof, owns or leases, or exercises control and dominion over for public purposes; and 
(6)  "Vehicle" means a machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and to transport persons or property or pull machinery and includes, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(7)  "Vessel" means every device, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, including but not limited to personal watercraft. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-42. - Prohibited acts; nuisances declared; exceptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful and an offense for any person to park, store or leave, or to permit the parking, storing, or leaving of, any junk vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any private property within the city for a period of time in excess of ten (10) days. 
(b)  The presence of any junk vehicle or any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or boat or parts thereof, on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to any vehicle or motor vehicle: 
(1)  Enclosed within a building on private property; 
(2)  Held in connection with a lawful business enterprise which is properly operated as such business enterprise in the appropriate zone, pursuant to the zoning provisions of this Code; 
(3)  In operable condition which is not a junk vehicle as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-43. - Permits for reconstruction/repair of vehicles. 
(a)  Any person desiring to: 
(1)  Reconstruct; or 
(2)  Make repairs to an inoperable vehicle or motor vehicle, for a period in excess of ten (10) days may, upon making application to the city, and so long as they are in compliance with the terms of the permit, keep such vehicle on a cement, asphalt, gravel or other sealed driveway or space pursuant to the terms of the permit. A maximum of two (2) vehicles shall be allowed to be permitted at one time. 
(b)  The application shall state that the owner, only, of such vehicle or motor vehicle(s) seeks to have a permit issued, permitting such vehicle or motor vehicle(s) to be on private property within the city in an inoperable condition for a specific period of time. All applications shall state with specificity how the reconstruction or repairs shall be accomplished and contain deadlines for the completion of each stage, which shall become part of the permit. 
(c)  After proper submittal of the completed application to the director, he shall forthwith determine whether or not the permit should be issued, and as soon thereafter as is practicable, enter an order approving or disapproving such permit. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant agrees in the application, to allow the city to abate any violation of the terms of any permit within ten (10) days of the mailing by U.S. Postal Service, first-class mail, with the city to obtain a certificate of mailing, of a written demand to do so. 
(e)  Initial permits for any vehicle or motor vehicle(s) shall be issued for a maximum period of six (6) months, and may be extended for periods not to exceed six (6) months each upon successful completion of a full application process for each and every renewal period. 
(f)  No permit shall be in force as to more than one person or one residence at any time. 
(g)  Such vehicle or motor vehicle(s) for which a permit has been issued shall prominently display a sticker to be provided by the city, indicating the permit number and its date of expiration. The sticker may be physically inspected without notice by any officer of the city between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., during weekdays, and the right to inspect shall be a condition of the issuance of a permit. 
(h)  Any permit may be revoked by the director upon reasonable notice if the application contains any material falsehood, or if any purported consent filed therewith is fraudulent. 
(i)  A permit may be revoked by the director upon reasonable notice if any of the terms of the permit are not complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-44. - Procedures for abatement on public property. 
    The provisions for abatement of "public nuisance" contained in sections 15-1 through 15-17 of this Code shall not apply to junk vehicles or to those which are in abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any public property within the city for a period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) hours. The notice, hearing and abatement shall be pursuant to the procedures described herein for public nuisance on public property. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-45. - Presumption of abandonment. 
    A rebuttable presumption shall exist that vehicles have been abandoned when: 
(1)  Weed or grass undergrowth would indicate to a reasonable person that the vehicle has not been moved, thereby permitting such growth to occur; 
(2)  One or more wheels are flat or missing and the vehicle or boat displays an expired license plate or tag; 
(3)  Portions of the vehicle which are needed for its operation or control are missing; 
(4)  The city has received reports from others as to the length of time such vehicle has been standing in one place without being moved, or that parts are being taken from or added to such vehicle, indicating a salvage or garage operation; or 
(5)  Evidence exists that provisions of this Code pertaining to zoning or to junk and salvage yards are being violated. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-46. - Notice to remove from public property. 
    Whenever it comes to the attention of any city official or employee that any junk vehicle, as defined herein, exists as a public nuisance on public property in the city, said city official or employee shall immediately notify the dispatch unit at the Miami Police Department. Upon investigation by a certified law enforcement officer and upon determination said vehicle is a nuisance existing on public property, a written, public nuisance "Notification to Remove" shall be placed on the vehicle advising the owner of the violation of city code and of the twenty-four (24) hours to remove the nuisance from the public property. Concurrent with the abatement notice placed on the vehicle or motor vehicle, the owner of the vehicle or motor vehicle shall be issued a citation. Failure to remove the vehicle or motor vehicle shall be an offense, and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-47. - Responsibility for removal from public property. 
    Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the junk vehicle or other abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or boat, on public property shall be liable for all expenses reasonably incurred by the removal and disposition. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-48. - Notice to remove from private property. 
(a)  The director or his designee shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where any junk vehicle or any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or boat is located at least ten (10) days before the time set for compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of a notice to remove is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property upon which the vehicle or boat is located. 
(b)  The notice to remove shall contain the demand for removal within ten (10) days, and the notice to remove shall state that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city shall prosecute a criminal complaint for failure to abate the nuisance or undertake such removal with the cost to be levied against the owner of the junk vehicle or the occupant of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-50. - Removal of motor vehicle(s) from private property. 
    If the violation described in the notice to remove has not been remedied within the ten-day period of compliance, and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the director or his designee, the city prosecutor shall institute and prosecute additional charges on a daily basis, for failure to abate the nuisance, and the city shall at the discretion of the director take possession of the junk vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder the director, or his designee, to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-51. - Notice of removal. 
    Within forty-eight (48) hours of the removal of such junk vehicle, the director or his designee shall give notice to the registered owner of the junk vehicle, if known, that the vehicle or motor vehicle was removed, that the vehicle or motor vehicle, has been impounded and stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the location where the vehicle is stored and the proper procedure for redeeming the vehicle, including cost of redemption. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-52. - Appraisal. 
    Upon removing a junk vehicle under the provisions of this chapter, the city shall, after ten (10) days, cause it to be appraised. If the vehicle or boat appraises at $75.00 or less, the director or his designee shall execute an affidavit so attesting and describing the vehicle or motor vehicle, including the license plates, if any, and stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle or motor vehicle. After complying with the above, the city may summarily dispose of the vehicle or boat and execute a bill of sale. If the vehicle or boat is appraised at more than $75.00, notice of public sale shall be given not less than ten (10) days before the date of the proposed sale. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-53. - Redemption of impounded vehicles or motor vehicles. 
    The owner of any vehicle or motor vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter may redeem such vehicle or motor vehicle at any time after its removal, but prior to the sale or destruction thereof, upon proof of ownership and payment to the city clerk of such sum as may be determined by the director and fixed as the actual and reasonable expense of removal, plus storage. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-54. - Collection of city's costs of removal. 
(a)  Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of property on which junk vehicles have been removed by the city to pay the un-recovered expense incurred by the city in such removal, the amount of the un-recovered cost may be added to the municipal utility bills directed to the occupants of the private property from which the junk vehicle was removed, and may be recovered in the same manner of such utility bills. 
(b)  If the private property is not served by the municipal utilities, or if collection efforts are not successful, the costs may be certified by the city clerk to the office of the county clerk, who shall add the same to the ad valorem taxes assessed against the property, until paid, and shall be collected in the same manner as ad valorem taxes against the property; and when collected shall be paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-55. - Penalty; continuing violations. 
    In addition to the procedures for removal of vehicles, any person who shall violate any of the provisions hereof shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of an offense against the city. Each act in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate offense and may be chargeable as such. Each days' continued violation of any of the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate offense and may be punishable as such as provided in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Secs. 15-56-15-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LITTER AND TRASH 

Sec. 15-61. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall be defined as follows except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Litter" means trash, refuse, rubbish and all like material; 
(2)  "Refuse" means all solid wastes, including ashes, dead animals, solid market and industrial wastes and all like material; 
(3)  "Roadway" means any avenue, street, road, alley or other public way within the city; 
(4)  "Rubbish" means solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, in solid or semisolid form including, but not limited to, dirt, ashes or incinerator residue, street wastes, demolition wastes, industrial wastes, tin cans, wood, leaves, glass, pieces of iron and other metals and like similar material; 
(5)  "Trash" means any refuse, litter, debris, paper, combustible materials, rubbish, offal, waste or matter of any kind of form which is uncared for, discarded or abandoned; including but not limited to: bedding, refrigerators, freezers, heating stoves, kitchen ranges, hot water tanks, laundry or dishwashing equipment, air conditioning units, or other such appliances, articles, or equipment designed for use inside a dwelling unit if stored, placed or set upon the ground or on any open porch, in any attached or freestanding carport, or in any garage or shed that is without doors to conceal such articles. 
(6)  "Vehicle" means a machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and to transport persons or property or pull machinery and includes, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(7)  "Vessel" means every device, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, including but not limited to personal watercraft. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-62. - Prohibited generally. 
    No person shall throw, place, leave, drop, spill, put or otherwise abandon litter upon any public property, private property or roadway except as otherwise specifically permitted in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-63. - Littering and spilling from vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  No driver or operator of a vehicle shall commit, or permit to be committed, from the operator's vehicle any of the acts prohibited in section 15-62. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any roadway unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from escaping from the vehicle by dropping, shifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise, except that salt or sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be used on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(c)  No person shall operate on any roadway any vehicle with any load unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the roadway or others. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-64. - Refuse, rubbish and trash. 
(a)  No person shall place or cause to be placed in or upon any public ground or easement any refuse, rubbish or trash unless it is in suitable receptacles to be disposed of in a regular and proper manner pursuant to city ordinances by the city. 
(b)  No person doing work or making excavations shall place or cause to be placed any dirt, refuse, or rubbish onto any roadway or sidewalk. 
(c)  No person shall sweep, throw, or abandon in any manner or cause to be swept, thrown, or abandoned into or upon any lot or piece of ground, whether the lot or ground shall belong to himself or another, any trash of any kind whatever, which can be, or is likely to be blown by the wind along the city's roadways or sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-65. - Deposits of dirt or rubbish on public property and roadways. 
    No owner, occupant or agent of any land abutting upon any public property shall allow dirt, earth or any rubbish from the land, to fall, or wash, upon any part of the public property. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-66. - Businesses to provide facilities for disposal of materials. 
    Each person who owns, manages, leases, or operates any business establishment within the city which delivers, sells or provides products to customers for consumption or use on or off the premises shall provide suitable containers, adequate in number and location, for the disposal of any product or their wrappings or, part thereof, abandoned, dropped, left, put or placed on the premises; and shall maintain the outside premises of the business establishment free from such product, wrappings or parts thereof or other discarded items associated with the conduct of the business. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-67. - Removal of spilled materials. 
(a)  All litter, refuse, rubbish or dirt deposited or spilled from a vehicle on any public property or roadway shall be immediately removed by either the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle. The person by whom such driver or other person is employed shall be likewise responsible for removal. The failure to immediately remove all of the material or earth so deposited or spilled shall render both the driver or other person in charge and the person by whom they are employed subject to punishment as provided herein. 
(b)  Each day that such material or dirt so wasted or spilled remains on the public property shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-68. - Allowing refuse, rubbish, trash or litter to be deposited or to remain on premises. 
    No owner or occupant of lands or lots shall knowingly permit the throwing or dumping upon his premises of any litter, or permit such materials to remain on his premises whether or not the owner or occupant shall have known of or permitted the throwing or depositing. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 1637, § 1, 5-5-2015) 
Cross reference- Duty of owner, occupant to maintain private property, § 15-23. 
Sec. 15-69. - Duty of maintenance of private property. 
    No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any private property or premises shall maintain or keep any litter or similar material, except dirt, thereon; nor shall such person allow the accumulation of the material, notwithstanding such person did not permit the accumulation; nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value of the other property in the neighborhood in which premises are located. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 1637, § 1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 15-70. - Disposal of vehicle or mechanical devices regulated. 
    No person shall discharge or dispose of any crank case, radiator, or transmission drainings, from any vehicle or other mechanical device, into the sanitary sewer system, storm drainage system, or upon any public or private property or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 15-71. - Offenses and abatement. 
(a)  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be an offense, and any person violating such provisions shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-5 of this Code. 
(b)  Upon due notice as may be required by law, the city may abate as a public nuisance any condition prohibited under this chapter pursuant to any other provision of this Code or state law, which shall be cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 1495, § 1, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 1637, § 1, 5-5-2015) 
Chapter 16 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(A.), adopted Jan. 16, 2018, amended the title of Ch. 16 to read as herein set out. Formerly, said chapter was entitled "Parks, Recreation and Cemeteries." 
Cross reference- Streets and public properties director, § 2-88 et seq.; public libraries, ch. 20; cemeteries, ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Parks and recreation generally, 11 O.S. § 33-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Police protection for facilities. 
    All parks and recreation facilities which are owned and operated by the City shall, at all times, be under the police protection of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 14-1; Ord. No. 1659, § 1(C.), 8-16-2016; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(A.), 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 16-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1581, § 1, adopted May 21, 2012, repealed § 16-2, which pertained to parks and recreation fund and derived from Code 1964, § 14-2. 
Sec. 16-3. - Spoonbill fishing permits. 
(a)  Requirement for permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to fish for or be fishing for spoonbill fish within the territorial limits of the city without having first obtained and holding in their possession a city permit as provided for herein. 
(b)  Fee for permit. The following fees shall be paid for any permit required by this section: 
(1)  A resident of the state possessing a current valid state resident fishing license shall pay a fee of $10.00. 
(2)  All other persons shall pay a permit fee of $25.00. 
(c)  Issuance. Permits required by this section may be purchased at the city clerk's office, city police department, office of parks and recreation department and such other locations as may from time to time be authorized by the city council. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of the above and foregoing requirements shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Effect upon other regulations. All other local rules, regulations and ordinances and all state regulations shall remain in full force and effect. 
(f)  Definitions. The following words and phrases shall, for the provisions of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Fishing shall mean any method of removing spoonbill fish from its natural, permanent or temporary environment, which shall include, but not be limited to fishing with a pole or other apparatus, with or without bait, snagging, noodling or any other means. 
    Spoonbill-Polydon Spathula shall mean all species commonly referred to as "spoonbill" or "paddlefish" as defined in "Fishes of Oklahoma" published by the Oklahoma Department of Wildlife Conservation. 
    Territorial limits shall mean the incorporated territorial or city limits of the city. 
(g)  Exemptions. The requirement of obtaining a permit under this section shall not apply to any person sixty-five (65) years of age or older, nor for any person fifteen (15) years of age or younger. Any person claiming an exemption hereunder shall carry and have in his possession adequate and legal proof of age. 
(Code 1964, § 14-3; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-18-01) 
Sec. 16-4. - Approval of general policy. 
    The rules and regulations set forth in the General Policy of the City of Miami Department of Parks and Recreation, as Revised September 2009, are approved and shall have full force and effect as an ordinance of the city, and any person violating the same shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in section 1-5 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1595, § 1, 12-3-12) 
Secs. 16-5-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1659, § 1(E.), adopted August 16, 2016, repealed §§ 16-31-16-43, which pertained to board of parks and recreation and derived from Code 1964, §§ 14-13-14-24, 14-26. 

Secs. 16-31-16-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(B.), adopted Jan. 16, 2018, repealed Art. III, §§ 16-66, 16-67, 16-81-16-84, 16-90, which pertained to G.A.R. Cemetery and derived from Ord. No. 1628, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2014; Ord. No. 1659, § 1(D.), (E.), adopted August 16, 2016. The user's attention is directed to § 28-1 et seq. 

Secs. 16-66-16-90. - Reserved. 
Chapter 17 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12. 
State Law reference- General municipal authority to license, 11 O.S. §§ 22-106, 22-107. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Peddlers or solicitors engaged in interstate commerce-Registration. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in interstate commerce to go from house to house or place to place in the city soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines, without having first registered with the city clerk giving the following information: 
(1)  The name, home address and local address, if any, of the registrant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person, if any, that he represents or for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared. 
(3)  The nature of the articles or things which are to be sold or for which orders are to be solicited. 
(4)  Whether the registrant, upon any sale or order, shall demand or receive or accept payment or any deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(5)  The period of time during which the registrant wishes to solicit or sell in the city. 
(b)  The term "interstate commerce," as used in this section, means soliciting, selling or taking orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, photographs, newspapers or magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines which, at the time the order is taken, are in another state or will be produced in another state and shipped or introduced into this city in the fulfillment of such orders. 
(Code 1964, § 15-1) 
Sec. 17-2. - Same-Proof of identity. 
    At the time of the registration provided for in section 17-1, the registrant shall submit, for inspection of the city clerk, written proof of his identity, which may be in the form of an automobile operator's license or an identification letter or card issued to the registrant by the person for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared. 
(Code 1964, § 15-2) 
Secs. 17-3-17-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND VENDORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-26. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, an itinerant merchant or an itinerant vendor shall be held to be any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the city soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines. For purposes of this article, an itinerant merchant or an itinerant vendor shall not include a merchant or vendor who otherwise lawfully conducts business with the public from a mobile platform such as a food truck, mobile kitchen, or mobile canteen at no more than three (3) predetermined, fixed and registered locations within the municipal limits per calendar year; provided that, however, such merchant or vendor must register the business locations with the city clerk, using forms to be provided by the city clerk, prior to conducting business thereupon and must simultaneously provide, as a condition of lawful registration, acceptable written evidences of ownership or lawful tenancy of said fixed business locations. 
(Code 1964, § 15-13; Ord. No. 1613, § 1, 9-17-13) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 17-27. - Construction of article. 
    This entire article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city for the public safety, comfort, convenience, privacy, quiet and protection of the city, the citizens thereof and all of the provisions hereof shall be construed for the accomplishment of such purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 15-21) 
Sec. 17-28. - Retail sales of ice cream or ice milk. 
    Any peddler or itinerant salesman engaging in the retail sale of ice cream or ice milk and byproducts thereof, shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article, and all other provisions of this Code. The provisions of section 17-50, however, shall not apply to a permit hereunder and a permit so issued shall be for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance. The fee for a permit issued hereunder shall be $25.00 for the permit and in addition to such fee, the applicant shall pay a license fee of $5.00 for each agent or employee so engaged. This section supersedes the fees set forth in section 17-48 in regards only to permits issued under this section. 
(Code 1964, § 15-20.1) 
Secs. 17-29-17-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 17-46. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity described in section 17-26 or otherwise required to obtain a license under 19 O.S. § 1601 et seq. without first obtaining a license to do so from the city manager. Applicants must provide written permission from the owner of the premises where said activities are to take place. Any license issued hereunder shall be effective for ninety (90) days commencing with the date of the license. 
(Code 1964, § 15-14; Ord. No. 1381, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 1585, § 1(E.), 7-16-12) 
Sec. 17-47. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to engage in any activity coming under this division shall make written application to the city clerk for a license so to do, which application shall show the name and address of the person the applicant represents, the kinds of goods offered for sale and whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand or accept a payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery, and the period of time the applicant wishes to sell or solicit in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 15-15) 
Sec. 17-48. - Fee. 
    The fee for an itinerant merchant's or itinerant vendor's license shall be $50.00. When any person engages in any activity coming under this division through one (1) or more agents or employees, he shall, in addition to such fee, pay a license fee of $5.00 for each agent or employee so engaged. The fees provided for herein shall be deposited to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 15-16; Ord. No. 1381, § 1, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 17-49. - Bond required. 
(a)  An application for a license under this division shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of $1,000.00, signed by the applicant and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for final deliverance of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines and newspapers in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal on the bond, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within thirty (30) days after delivery. Such bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons that make any purchase or give any order to the principal on the bond or to any agent or employee of the principal. 
(b)  In case the applicant is engaging in any activity coming under this division through one (1) or more agents or employees, such applicant shall be required to enter into only one (1) bond in the sum of $1,000.00, which bond shall be made to cover the activities of all of his agents or employees. 
(Code 1964, § 15-17) 
Sec. 17-50. - Term. 
    Any license issued under this division shall be valid for thirty (30) days from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1964, § 15-18) 
Sec. 17-51. - Possession. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity coming under this division unless he is carrying on his person, while so engaged, a valid license issued under this division. 
(Code 1964, § 15-19) 
Sec. 17-52. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, nor to sales made under authority and by order of law, nor to vendors of farm or dairy products, except retail sales of ice cream of any form by peddlers or itinerant salesmen, nor to persons engaged in interstate commerce, as that term is defined in section 17-1. 
(Code 1964, § 15-20) 
Chapter 18 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Airport zoning ordinance, § 5-51 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; subdivisions, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning, 11 O.S. § 41-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, etc., § 2-141 et seq. 
State Law reference- Regional planning commissions, 11 O.S. § 46-101 et seq. 

Sec. 18-26. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a commission which shall be known as the "Regional Planning Commission." The regional planning commission shall succeed to all of the rights, powers, duties and obligations which were formerly exercised by the metropolitan planning commission of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2-22) 
State Law reference- Regional planning commission authorized, 11 O.S. § 46-101. 
Sec. 18-27. - Open-end composition. 
    The regional planning commission shall consist of: 
(1)  Five (5) residents of the city who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of commissioners. They shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years, with the exception that in the first instance they shall be appointed to staggered terms as provided by statute. 
(2)  The chairman of the board of county commissioners and the county engineer who shall be ex officio members of the commission. 
(3)  Representatives, including the mayor and city engineers ex officio, from other towns or cities in the county, which towns or cities desire representation on this regional planning commission and enact ordinances similar to this article, providing, among other things, that such city or town shall bear the portion of expense of planning by the commission in ratio that the population of the city or town as reflected by the last federal census bears to the total population of the cities and towns participating in the regional planning commission. Each of such cities or towns shall be entitled to the number of representatives on the commission determined by the ratio that its population as reflected by the last federal census bears to the total population of such cities or towns participating in the commission. 
(Code 1964, § 2-23) 
Sec. 18-28. - Qualification of members. 
    The members of the regional planning commission shall be nominated and appointed solely with reference to their fitness and without reference to party affiliations. 
(Code 1964, § 2-24) 
Sec. 18-29. - Compensation. 
    The members of the regional planning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1964, § 2-25) 
Sec. 18-30. - Notice of meeting; quorum. 
    The chairman, vice chairman, or any two (2) members may call a meeting of the commission at any time or place by giving seven (7) days' notice thereof by mail prior to such meeting. Those members present at any meeting so called shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1964, § 2-26) 
Sec. 18-31. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the regional planning commission shall be as set out in O.S. tit. 11, art. XLVI [11 O.S. § 46-101 et seq.] and all amendments thereto that shall be enacted by the legislature of the state. 
(Code 1964, § 2-27) 
Chapter 19 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Police department, Art. III, § 1. 
State Law reference- Police generally, 11 O.S. § 34-101 et seq. 

Chapter 20 - PUBLIC LIBRARIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Parks, recreation and cemeteries, ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to establish library, 11 O.S. § 31-101. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Public libraries to be under management of board of directors, Art. IX, § 21. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, etc., § 2-141 et seq. 

Sec. 20-26. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, the term "board" or "library board" shall mean the Miami Library Board. 
(Code 1964, § 20-16) 
Sec. 20-27. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a board of library directors to be known as the "Miami Library Board." 
(Code 1964, § 20-17) 
Sec. 20-28. - Composition. 
    The library board shall consist of six (6) members, each of whom shall be a citizen of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 20-18; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 1565, § 1, 7-19-10) 
Charter reference- Library board consists of six members appointed as provided by ordinance, Art. IX, § 21. 
Sec. 20-29. - Appointment of members. 
    The members of the library board shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 20-19; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 20-30. - Terms of members. 
    All appointments and confirmations to the library board shall be for terms of three (3) years from the expiration of the terms of office of the members of the board whose terms have expired. 
(Code 1964, § 20-20) 
Sec. 20-31. - General powers and duties. 
    The board shall have the care and management of all libraries and reading rooms in the city, for the support and maintenance of which financial provision is made, wholly or in part, by the city, except that the library director shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 20-21; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 20-32. - Rules and regulations. 
    The board may make all necessary rules and regulations for the proper care and management of libraries and reading rooms supported by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 20-22) 
Chapter 21 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and public properties director, § 2-88 et seq.; dead or diseased trees upon parkway, § 15-2. 
State Law reference- General municipal authority relative to streets, roads and public ways, 11 O.S. § 36-101. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 21-1-21-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 21-26. - Permit. 
    Before any person shall dig or cut into any alley, street, curb or sidewalk in the city, he shall first secure from the superintendent of the street department a permit authorizing him so to do. 
(Code 1964, § 22-1) 
Sec. 21-27. - Guards. 
    Every person making any excavation in the streets or alleys of the city shall establish and maintain suitable and effective guards around the same from the time the same is first made until it is restored to a condition of safety. Such guards shall have lighted red lights placed on all sides and at points of approach and they shall be maintained in a lighted condition throughout the night from one (1) hour before dark until one (1) hour after dark in the morning. Danger signals and caution signs shall be established around the same and shall be maintained throughout the day in sufficient number and places to apprise any person of the impending danger. 
(Code 1964, § 22-2) 
Sec. 21-28. - Repairing. 
    After the digging or cutting, authorized by a permit required by this article, the permit holder shall make the necessary repairs to restore the alley, street, curb or sidewalk to the same condition it was in prior to such digging or cutting. 
(Code 1964, § 22-3) 
Secs. 21-29-21-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS OR HEAVY MACHINERY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic, ch. 23. 

Sec. 21-46. - Permit. 
(a)  No person shall move or cause to be moved, over or upon any of the streets of the city, any building, thrashing machine, ditching machine, traction engine or other heavy piece of machinery of an extreme or abnormal weight, without first making application to the City Manager or his or her designee and receiving a permit so to do. Such application and permit shall give all necessary details in connection with the desired removal, the date, and the exact time of day or night when such removal is to be made, a full description of the route to be traversed during such removal, the exact beginning and ending points, and the number, or some other particular identifying mark, of the building or piece of machinery to be moved. Such application and permit shall be on forms prescribed by the City Manager or his or her designee. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued under this section, unless in the judgment of the City Manager or his or her designee, it is deemed advisable and it is not likely that damage to public or private property will occur therefrom. 
(c)  A permit fee of $20.00 plus the state fee shall be charged for such permit, to be placed in the general fund of the city, and not more than one (1) building, machine or piece of machinery shall be described or more than one (1) route outlined in any permit. 
(d)  No permit issued under this section shall be valid if issued more than five (5) days prior to the time of making such removal. 
(e)  The permit required by this section shall be in addition to the permit required by the building code, if any, for the removal of a building. 
(Code 1964, § 22-4; Ord. No. 1640, § 1(B.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 21-47. - Designation and change of route. 
(a)  The superintendent of the street department shall have full authority to direct the route for making all removals of any building, machine or machinery for which a permit is required by this article. 
(b)  If some unforeseen difficulty should prevent the following of the route described in the permit, application shall be made to the superintendent and the permit corrected to show the description of the route desired to be traversed, before entering upon any part of the route not described in the original permit. 
(Code 1964, § 22-5) 
Sec. 21-48. - Protection of pavement. 
    If the wheels on any building, machine or piece of machinery to be removed under a permit required by this article have lugs or projections on the face thereof, or if they are insufficiently wide to prevent the marring or the causing of damage to any of the streets, alleys or other public grounds along the route to be traversed, a good and sufficient plank flooring shall be laid so as to protect the pavement from any and all damage and from being marred by any such building or machinery. 
(Code 1964, § 22-6) 
Sec. 21-49. - Damage to pavement or other property. 
    All damage to any street pavement or other public property or to private property, incident to any removal, for which a permit is required by this article, shall be held as a lien or charge against the building, machine or machinery so removed as well as against the owner thereof, and such building, machine or machinery shall not be moved from the corporate limits of the city until all such damage shall have been fully satisfied. 
(Code 1964, § 22-7) 
Chapter 22 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Airport zoning ordinance, § 5-51 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; planning and development, ch. 18; zoning, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Subdivision regulations, 11 O.S. §§ 45-104, 46-104. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley shall mean a public or private way not more than thirty (30) feet wide affording only secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Block shall mean an area of land within a subdivision, which area is entirely bounded by streets, highways, or ways, except alleys; or the exterior boundaries of the subdivision. 
    Board of public utilities shall mean the board of public utilities of the city. 
    Building setback line shall mean a line parallel to the street right-of-way, indicating the limit in front of which buildings or structures may not be erected. 
    Certificates shall mean and include the following: 
(1)  Certificate of county commission or board of commissioners acceptance of easements and dedications shall mean a statement certifying that the county commission or board of commissioners has accepted all public easements and dedications as shown on the plat. 
(2)  Certificate of planning commission approval shall mean a statement certifying that the plat was approved by the planning commission on a certain date and the approval is valid to a certain date. 
(3)  County treasurer's certificate shall mean a statement from the county treasurer certifying that no property taxes on the land were due and payable as of the date of certificate, which date shall be not more than seven (7) days in advance of the date of submittal of the final plat to the planning commission for approval. 
(4)  Engineer's or surveyor's certificate of survey shall mean a notarized statement certifying that the described survey of the plat is accurate and correct. 
(5)  Owner's certificate and dedication shall mean a notarized statement by the owners of the land being subdivided certifying that: 
a.  They are the sole owners, 
b.  All streets and alleys shown on the plat are dedicated to public uses, and 
c.  All easements for utilities and drainage are reserved as shown on the plat. 
    City planning commission shall mean the planning commission of the city. 
    Collector street shall mean a street which collects traffic from local streets and carries it to one (1) or more major thoroughfares, or to one (1) or more other collector streets. 
    Comprehensive plan shall mean the comprehensive plan of the planning area of the city. 
    County clerk shall mean the County Clerk of Ottawa County, Oklahoma. 
    County commission shall mean the board of county commissioners of the county. 
    County engineer shall mean the person so designated by the county commission. 
    Cul-de-sac shall mean a street having one (1) end open to an intersecting street and being terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Easement shall mean a grant by a property owner to the public, a corporation, or person of the use of all or part of a parcel of land for specific purposes. 
    Final plat shall mean a map or chart of a land subdivision giving, in form suitable for filing in the office of the county clerk, necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and containing a complete engineering description, including references to field markers sufficient to locate on the ground all streets, alleys, blocks, lots and other divisions of the subdivision. 
    Flood hazard area shall mean an area of special flood hazard, as delineated on a flood hazard boundary map. 
    Flood hazard boundary map shall mean an official map of the city or of the unincorporated areas of the county, issued by the federal insurance administration, where the areas within the boundaries of special flood hazards have been designated as Zone A. 
    Health department shall mean the county health department. 
    Improvements shall mean street grading and surfacing; curbs and gutters; sidewalks; water mains and lines; sanitary and storm sewers; culverts, bridges, and other utilities; and related items. 
    Inner area shall mean that part of the Miami regional district that is so identified on the map, Miami and Miami Regional District, section 22-3. 
    Local street shall mean a street intended primarily to provide access to abutting property and carrying little or no through traffic; ordinarily a street that is not a major thoroughfare or a collector street is a local street. 
    Lot shall mean a single tract of land located within a single block, which (at the time of filing for a building permit or a zoning clearance permit) is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a lot may or may not coincide with a lot of record. 
    Lot-split shall mean a subdivision that involves the dividing or redividing of a lot into not more than three (3) parcels, and that does not involve the extension, opening, vacating, narrowing, or change of alignment of any thoroughfare, street alley, or easement. 
    Lot-split plat shall mean a plat describing a lot-split. 
    Lot splitting shall mean the action of creating a lot-split. 
    Major thoroughfare shall mean an existing or proposed street or highway identified as a major thoroughfare on the Miami Area Comprehensive Plan. 
    Miami regional district shall mean the area over which the Miami Regional Planning Commission has planning jurisdiction under 11 O.S. § 46-102. The regional district which shall be construed to mean any land outside the incorporated limits of any municipality whose any one (1) boundary, at any point, shall be within a distance of three (3) miles from the incorporated limits of the municipality. See map, Miami and Miami Regional District, section 22-3 hereof. 
    Outer area shall mean that part of the Miami regional district so identified on the Miami Regional District Map, section 22-3 hereof. 
    Planned unit development (PUD) shall mean a land development project comprehensively planned as an entity via a unitary site plan which permits flexibility in building siting, mixtures of housing types and land uses, usable open spaces, and the preservation of significant natural features. A residential PUD is limited to: 
(1)  Dwelling units without regard to: 
a.  Dwelling type, or 
b.  Whether unit ownership will be on the basis of fee ownership, cooperative apartments, condominiums, or otherwise; and 
(2)  Nonresidential uses of an educational, cultural, or recreational character that are designed and intended to serve the PUD residents. 
A general PUD contains office or commercial uses exclusively or blends residential uses with office or commercial uses in a unified plan. 
    Planning area shall mean the Miami planning area, which consists of the city and all unincorporated areas on the comprehensive plan map, except the areas lying outside the planning area boundary on sheets 72NE and 83SE. 
    Planning commissions shall mean the Miami City Planning Commission and the Miami Regional Planning Commission. The singular term "planning commission" means the city planning commission in the case of plats in the city and the regional planning commission in the case of plats in the regional district. 
    Planting screen easement shall mean a grant by the subdivider to the public of a strip of land along a property line for the sole purpose of planting and/or maintaining shrubs, plants, or trees, or the erection of a fence or wall. 
    Plat shall mean a division of land into lots, streets, and alleys by means of a representation on paper so that they can be identified. 
    Plat officer shall mean the person designated by the planning commissions to administer these regulations. One (1) person may serve in this capacity for areas both within and without the city, or the planning commissions may designate separate plat officers to serve the areas inside and outside of the city. 
    Preliminary plat shall mean a map or chart of a proposed land subdivision showing the character and general details of the proposed development and submitted to the appropriate planning commission for consideration and preliminary or conditional approval. 
    Public facility shall mean any type of public improvement, other than a public street or public utility, including, but not limited to, public schools, parks, playgrounds, fire stations, libraries, hospitals and airports. 
    Public improvement shall mean any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. All such improvements shall be properly bonded. 
    Public utility shall mean any utility owned or operated by a public or quasipublic agency, including, but not limited to, flood protection and drainage, sanitary sewerage, water supply and electrical distribution. 
    Standard subdivision improvement specifications shall mean the standard subdivision improvement specifications that are part of this chapter. 
    Sketch plat shall mean a plat of a proposed subdivision that indicates, in general, the area to be subdivided, the street layout, lots and blocks, and the general nature of improvements and which may be prepared in freehand, pencil form. 
    Street shall mean a public way from which the principal means of access to abutting property is obtained. (See also collector street, cul-de-sac, frontage road, local street, major thoroughfare.) 
    Subdivider shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined. 
    Subdividing shall mean: 
(1)  In the case of land in the city, the dividing of land into two (2) or more lots, parcels, tracts or areas, any one (1) of which when divided has an area of less than ten (10) acres, or any dividing of land involving the vacating or dedicating of right-of-way or the alignment or width of an existing or proposed street or highway or public utility easement, or the resubdividing of land heretofore divided into lots, sites or parcels, whether such dividing or resubdividing is by means of a map or plat or metes-and-bounds description. 
(2)  In the case of land in the regional district, the dividing of land by means of a plan, plat or replat of land laid out in lots or blocks, and the streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public or private use. 
    Subdivision shall mean a tract of land that has been or is proposed to be subdivided. 
    Through lots shall mean interior lots that abut more than one (1) street. 
    Unplatted land shall mean land which is not described by a recorded plat. 
    Zoning ordinance shall mean the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-9.010-23-9.400), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 9-7-04) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-2. - Purpose and authority. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to further promote and secure the health, safety, and general welfare of the present and future citizens of Miami and the Miami Regional District; to help ensure coordinated, efficient, and economical development of the city and regional district and to provide general rules and regulations to platting control so that subdividers have a general indication of the standards applied in subdividing of land in the city and regional district; the following regulations are adopted, pursuant to the authority granted by the legislature of the State of Oklahoma in 11 O.S. §§ 45-104 and 46-104, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-1.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-3. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply to all forms of subdividing and lot-splitting and shall be applicable to all lands within the city and the Miami regional district. The regional district is divided into the inner area and the outer area; boundaries of the regional district and the inner and outer areas are shown on the Miami and Miami Regional District map, a copy of which may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  These subdivision regulations, exclusive of the standard subdivision improvement specifications, shall apply as follows: 
(1)  Lands within the city-fully applicable; 
(2)  Lands in the regional district (that is, the inner and outer area)-fully applicable, except that provision relating to the zoning ordinance or building permits shall not apply. 
(c)  The standard subdivision improvement specification shall apply to lands in the city, the inner area and the outer area, as provided in the specifications. 
(d)  The location of the line separating the inner area from the outer area may be revised from time to time by the regional planning commission. The plat officer shall thereupon revise accordingly the map, Miami and Regional District, maintained in his office and transmit a copy of the revised map to the county clerk. 
(e)  The location of the line separating the inner area from the outer area may be revised from time to time by the regional planning commission, subject to approval by the board of commissioners. The plat officer shall thereupon revise accordingly the map of Miami and Regional District maintained in his office and transmit a copy of the revised map to the county clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-1.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-4. - Appendices. 
    The appendices to Ord. No. 1123 are ratified and confirmed. 
Sec. 22-5. - Variances and exceptions. 
    Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual condition that the strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations would result in real difficulties and substantial hardships or injustices, the planning commission may vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider is allowed to develop his property in a reasonable manner, but so that, at the same time, the public welfare and interests of the city or county are protected and the general intent and spirit of these regulations are preserved. Such variances may be granted only by the affirmative vote of a majority of the planning commission members. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-6), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-6. - Rules authorized. 
    The planning commission may adopt rules for the administration of these regulations to the extent that such rules are not in conflict with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-7.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-7. - Penalty for violations. 
    A violation of these regulations shall be punishable as provided by 11 O.S. §§ 45-104 and 46-104, or other appropriate statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-8.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-8. - Building permits. 
    No city building permit shall be issued for any new structure or any change, improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land that does not comply with all the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-8.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-9. - Dedication of park land or greenbelt areas. 
(a)  In addition to the regulations of the comprehensive plan hereinbefore or hereinafter adopted by the city, it shall further be required that, in subdividing land or resubdividing an existing plat, due consideration shall be given by the subdivider to the dedication or reservation of suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, greenbelt areas or other public recreational areas or open spaces. Residential subdivisions shall dedicate a usable tract of land, as a common recreational area, greenbelt area or open space, according to the following schedule. 
(b)  The developer shall dedicate five percent (5%) of the total acres within each residential subdivision or development for use as open space or a park area with a minimum of one-half (1/2) acre. The acreage dedicated as park area must be suitable for that purpose. The subdivider or developer shall dedicate all such recreational areas to the city as a condition of final subdivision plat approval. 
(1)  The city council may require that the land to be dedicated for park and recreational purposes be located on the edge of the subdivision so that additional land may be added at a future date. 
(2)  Open space greenbelts or buffers depicted in the comprehensive plan shall be shown on the preliminary and final plat as open space buffers. Any such greenbelt or open space buffer depicted on the comprehensive plan shall be provided for by the subdivider of the property which when developed requires the buffering so as not to adversely affect adjacent property. 
(3)  Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the city as a whole, such as trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of grade of the land effected until approval of the preliminary plat has been granted. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be reserved, and all trees where required, shall be welled and protected against change of grade. The preliminary plat shall show the number and location of existing trees as required by these regulations, and shall further indicate all those marked for retention. 
(4)  The requirements as set forth herein may be waived by the city upon application to the planning commission and the board of commissioners if, in the city's opinion, under the particular existing circumstances it is in the best interest of the public. 
(Code 1964, § 28-1) 
Sec. 22-10. - City planning commission. 
    The City Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) citizens, all of whom shall reside within the municipality. The members shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Three members shall constitute a quorum. 
A.  The appointed members of the City Planning Commission shall serve ex officio as the members of the Board(s) of Adjustment established by the Code of Ordinances, and with concurrent terms. 
B.  The officers of the City Planning Commission each shall serve ex officio as the officers of the Board(s) of Adjustment, and with concurrent terms. 
C.  Joint meetings of the City Planning Commission and Board(s) of Adjustment are authorized for the efficient disposition of those matters subject to their respective jurisdictions. In the case of a joint meeting, the clerk shall designate on each substantive agenda item whether the particular subject matter is subject to the jurisdiction of the City Planning Commission or Board(s) of Adjustment. Further, the clerk shall accurately indicate on the minutes of each joint meeting that the appropriate public body provided consideration, discussion, motion(s), and disposition of each agenda item. 
(Ord. No. 1341, § 1, 1-15-96; Ord. No. 1642, § 1(A.), 7-7-2015) 
Secs. 22-11-22-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLAT AND LOT-SPLIT APPROVALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-36. - Information to be shown on plat. 
    In the following table, whenever the letter "x" appears in a column headed by the name of a plat and opposite an item in the "Required Information" column, then the information set forth in such item shall be shown on such plat at the time the plat is presented to the plat officer or other designated agent: 
Sketch 
 Plat Preliminary 
Plat Final 
Plat Lot-Split 
Plat Required Information   x x x x  1. Boundary and written legal description of the property in the proposed subdivision or lot-split, including a key map showing the location of the proposed major streets, section lines, city or county limit lines (if falling within or adjoining the tract) and areas to be excluded from the plat.   x x x x  2. Name and address of the owner and subdivider. x  3. Name of architect, engineer, landscape architect, planner, or other person who prepared the plat. x  4. Name and seal of registered engineer or surveyor who prepared boundary survey and topographic information. x  5. Name and seal of registered engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat.   x x x  6. Names of adjacent subdivisions and names and addresses of owners of record of adjacent platted lots that are 250 feet or more in width and of adjacent unplatted land, as such owners are shown in the county clerk's records.   x x x  7. Title, including name of subdivision, name of city, county, state, section, range, and township. x  8. Identification (subdivision, block number, lot number) of lot or lots proposed to be split.   x x x x  9. Acreage in the proposed subdivision or lot-split.   x x x 10. Locations, names, and dimensions of all existing streets, alleys, and utility easements within, bordering, or abutting the proposed subdivision or lot-split.   x x x x 11. Date; map scale (written and graphic); north arrow.   x 12. General layout of the proposed lots, blocks, streets.   x 13. Tentative street names. x 14. Ground elevations shown by contour lines at vertical intervals not exceeding 2 feet; elevations marked on such contours shall be based on a datum plane established by the engineer.   x x x 15. Location of existing bodies of water, water courses, structures, and other physical features relating thereto.   x x 16. Location of areas subject to flooding or any other impairment to the health or safety of citizens within the boundary of the proposed subdivision. x x 17. Locations, names, dimensions, and bearings of all proposed streets, alleys, easements for public service or utilities, and setback lines within the proposed subdivision. x x 18. Location and description of any land to be dedicated or reserved for parks, schools, churches, or other similar purposes, fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings. x x x 19. Lot and block numbers in a logical sequence. x x x 20. Dimensions in feet and hundredths parts thereof, bearings, and curve data for all lot, block, and street lines. x x 21. Location and description of all section line corners and government survey monuments in or near the subdivision, to at least 1 of which the subdivision is referenced. x x x 22. Locations and dimensions of building lines, setback lines, and easements. x 23. Locations and descriptions of all subdivision monuments. x x 24. Restrictive covenants, if any. 25. The following certificates and references: x a. owner's certificate and dedication, signed; x b. engineer's or surveyor's certificate of survey, signed, and his seal; x c. reference to any separate instruments filed of record that directly affect the land being subdivided; x d. county treasurer's certificate;   x x x x e. certificate of planning commission action; x f. certificate for city commission or county commission acceptance of easements and dedications; x g. certificate of city commission approval (for subdivisions in the city); x h. certificate from the county health department, where water or sewer is not connected to a municipal system, that public health requirements have been met. x 26. Border lines bounding the sheet; all lettering, signatures, and seals shall be within the margin.   x x x x 27. Statement as to whether or not any private roadways are proposed, and, if so, their identification.   x x x x 28. Indication of what parts of the subdivision are in the inner and the outer areas. (See map, Miami and Regional District, section 1.2 hereof.)  
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-3.1.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-37. - Information to be submitted with plat. 
    In the following table, whenever the letter "x" appears in a column headed by the name of a plat and opposite an item in the "Required Information" column, then the information set forth in such item shall be submitted with such plat at the time the plat is presented to the plat officer or other designated agent. 
Sketch 
 Plat Preliminary 
Plat Final 
Plat Lot-Split 
Plat Required Information x  1. Four dark-line prints of improvement plans and other information relating to proposed improvements, as required under the Standard Subdivision Improvements Specifications. x x  2. Four copies of the state health department approval of the water supply and/or sewer system, if the subdivision or lot-split is to be served other than by connection to a water supply system or sewer system operated by a governmental agency.   x  3. Two dark-line prints of the proposed plat drawn to a scale of 1 inch equals 200 feet, or larger scale. x x x  4. Dark-line prints of the proposed plat drawn to a scale of 1 inch equals 200 feet (or larger scale) as follows: preliminary, 4 copies; final, 3 copies; lot-splits, 4 copies. x  5. One original India ink tracing of plat on 100-percent rag stock cloth and 4 drawn to a scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet, on 1 or more sheets. x  6. A completed preliminary plat check list (Appendix A). x  7. A completed final plat check list (Appendix B). x x  8. Statements signed by the subdivider, describing the proposed use of the land, proposed improvements, and proposed restrictions on future construction and development, as follows: preliminary, 2 copies; final, 3 copies.  
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-3.1.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-38. - Fees. 
    At the time of submitting each of the respective plats to the plat officer, or other designated agent, the following fees shall be payable to the city clerk: 
(1)  Preliminary plat fee ..... $ 20.00 
(2)  Final plat fee ..... 20.00 
Or $1.00 per lot plus $10.00, whichever is larger. 
(3)  Lot-split plat fee as follows: 
a.  Lot-splits that meet all the requirements of the subdivision regulation and zoning ordinance as submitted ..... 4.00 
b.  Lot-splits that require only a waiver of subdivision regulations, subject to action by the board of adjustment on a minor variance, in accordance with the adopted policies of the board of adjustment ..... 6.00 
c.  Lot-splits that require the waiver of subdivision regulations, other than a minor variance, or a combination thereof ..... 15.00 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-3.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-39. - Coordination of flexible zoning applications with subdivision approval-Intent; plans. 
    It is the intent of these regulations that subdivision review be carried out simultaneously with the review of flexible zoning applications under the zoning ordinance. The plans required for flexible zoning applications shall be submitted in a form to satisfy the requirements of the subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.3.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-40. - Same-General requirement. 
    Whenever the zoning ordinance authorizes flexible zoning applications that permit uses of land and density of buildings and structures different from those that are allowed as of right within the zoning district in which the land is situated and such an application entails subdividing, then subdivision approval of the flexible zoning application shall be required by the planning commission in addition to all other procedures and approvals required in the zoning ordinance, whether or not such zoning procedures also require planning commission approval, review or recommendation. Flexible zoning applications shall include, but not be limited to, all dwelling groups, planned unit development and special zoning permits. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.3.2), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 22-41-22-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLATS 

Sec. 22-56. - Generally. 
(a)  For all cases of subdividing within the scope of these regulations, the subdivider shall submit to the appropriate planning commission a sketch plat, preliminary plat and final plat in accordance with specifications set forth in these regulations. 
(b)  Each plat submitted for preliminary or final approval shall be placed on the planning commission's agenda only after fulfilling the appropriate requirements of these regulations. However, a plat not meeting all the requirements may be submitted, provided that the subdivider presents with the plat a letter requesting specific exceptions and presenting in detail the reasons therefor. Final plats shall also comply with 11 O.S. § 41-101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-57. - Sketch plat. 
    The sketch plat, including all the information specified in sections 22-36 and 22-37, shall be presented to the plat officer at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting at which consideration is requested. The plat officer shall enter the date of the receipt of the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-58. - Preliminary plat-Procedure. 
(a)  Upon approval of the sketch plat by the planning commission, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of a preliminary plat, which shall include all the information specified for a preliminary plat in sections 22-36 and 22-37. 
(b)  After the subdivider has prepared the preliminary plat, he may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Present the preliminary plat and preliminary plat checklist (see Appendix A) to the planning commission and obtain approval thereof before proceeding with the preparation of the improvement plans, or 
(2)  Present the improvement plans to the planning commission at the time the preliminary plat and preliminary plat checklist are presented. 
(c)  All documents relating to the preliminary plat shall be presented to the plat officer at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting at which initial consideration of such documents is requested. The plat officer shall enter the date of receipt on the material submitted. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a preliminary plat, the plat officer shall notify by mail all owners of adjacent unplatted land and all owners of adjacent platted lots that are two hundred fifty (250) feet or more in width and have a common boundary of at least fifty (50) feet with the land being platted, as such owners are listed on such plat. Such owners shall have ten (10) days from the date the notification is mailed within which to notify the planning commission of any protests they may have concerning the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.3(a)), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-59. - Same-Reservation of land for public facilities or public utilities. 
    Whenever a subdivider proposes to subdivide land that includes, or appears to include, all or part of the proposed site for a public facility or public utility as designated in the Miami Area Comprehensive Plan, the planning commission shall, before approving the preliminary plat of the subdivision, promptly submit the plat to the public body responsible for acquiring the land for the site. If the public body determines that the site for the public facility or public utility should be located within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, the planning commission may require the subdivider to reserve for public acquisition such land and shall designate the boundaries of such land. Such reservation shall be for a period to be determined by the planning commission, but shall not be for a period of more than six (6) months from the date of submittal of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.3(b)), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-60. - Same-Planning commission action. 
(a)  When subdivider presents both preliminary plat and improvement plans. Whenever the subdivider presents to the planning commission the preliminary plat, preliminary plat checklist, and improvement plans, and the planning commission finds that the plat meets all the requirements of these regulations, it shall approve the preliminary plat by placing a stamp of approval on each copy of such plat. Such stamp shall bear the signature of the chairman and secretary of the planning commission and shall provide that the approval given thereby does not constitute approval for purposes of recording. 
(b)  When subdivider presents only the preliminary plat. Whenever the subdivider presents to the planning commission a preliminary plat and preliminary plat checklist, without improvement plans, the planning commission may conditionally approve the preliminary plat, subject to approval of the improvement plans, as provided in the Standard Subdivision Improvement Specifications, within ninety (90) days following the preliminary plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.3(c)), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-61. - Same-Planning commission action. 
(a)  Time limit. The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally or disapprove such preliminary plat within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt thereof. 
(b)  Notification. If the preliminary plat be disapproved or approved conditionally by the planning commission, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be attached to one (1) copy of the plat and returned to the subdivider. If no action be taken by the planning commission within the stated time, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. 
(c)  Reasons for disapproval, conditional approval. The reasons for disapproval or conditional approval by the planning commission shall refer specifically to those parts of these regulations or the comprehensive plan with which the plat does not conform. On conditionally approving a plat, the planning commission may require submission of a revised preliminary plat. 
(d)  Copies. Three (3) copies of the approved or conditionally approved plat shall be transmitted to the plat officer, one (1) copy of which shall be filed in his office. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-62. - Same-Authorization to prepare final plat. 
    Receipt of a preliminary plat and improvement plans, both of which have been approved or conditionally approved as provided herein, shall constitute authorization of the planning commission for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.3(f)), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-63. - Same-Completion of improvements. 
    After planning commission approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat and approval of the improvement plans, and prior to submitting the final plat to the planning commission, the subdivider shall meet the requirements of article IV relative to subdivision improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.3(g)), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-64. - Final plat-Submittal of plat. 
    The subdivider shall submit the final plat to the plat officer at least fifteen (15) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which consideration of the plat is requested. The plat officer shall enter the date of receipt on the material submitted. The final plat shall include all the information specified for final plats in sections 22-36 and 22-37. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.4(a)), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-65. - Same-Approval by the planning commission. 
(a)  The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove the final plat within forty-five (45) days from the date of receipt thereof. Planning commission approval of the final plat shall be obtained before the plat may be recorded by the county clerk. The planning commission's approval of the final plat shall be contingent upon their receipt, in accordance with section 22-189, of evidence that the improvements specified in the approved improvement plans have been made. 
(b)  Where the final plat includes the dedication of any public street or easement, the planning commission shall not approve the final plat unless and until the public dedications and the required improvements or a surety bond therefor have been accepted by resolution by the board of commissioners or county commission, as the case may be, and such acceptance evidenced on the plat. In the case of dedication of land to the public, the acceptance of such dedication shall be by the governing body of the appropriate public agency. 
(c)  After approval of the final plat by the planning commission, the subdivider may present the plat to the county clerk for recording. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.4(b)), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-66. - Same-Time limit on submission. 
    The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the planning commission for final approval within one (1) year of the date on which the preliminary plat was approved by the planning commission. If not submitted for final approval within such time, the preliminary plat shall be considered as having been abandoned, unless the planning commission agrees to an extension of time, each such extension to be for a stated period not to exceed six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-67. - Same-Approval for portion of subdivision. 
    If the subdivider requests permission to develop only a portion of the property for which the preliminary plat was approved, the planning commission may approve a final plat for such portion alone. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.4(d)), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-68. - Same-Notification. 
(a)  If the final plat be disapproved by the planning commission, grounds for this refusal shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be sent to the subdivider, together with tracings and prints. 
(b)  After planning commission approval of the final plat, the original tracing and one (1) copy of such plat shall be sent to the subdivider and three (3) copies to the plat officer. One (1) copy of such plat shall be filed in the office of the plat officer. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.4(e)), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-69. - Same-Time limit on filing. 
    The final plat shall be filed in the office of the county clerk within six (6) months after approval by the planning commission. The planning commission stamp of approval upon the face of the final plat shall give the expiration date of the planning commission approval. If the final plat is not filed within such time, such approval shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.1.4(f)), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 22-70-22-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOT-SPLITS 

Sec. 22-86. - Approval by plat officer. 
    The planning commission may empower the plat officer to approve by endorsement, on behalf of the planning commission, lot-split plats that meet all of the requirements for lot-split plats as set forth in these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.2.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-87. - Referral to planning commission. 
    Whenever a subdivider desires to create a lot-split, he shall present the lot-split plat to the plat officer for approval or disapproval. If the plat officer disapproves the lot-split plat because such plat does not meet all the requirements set forth in these regulations for lot-split plats, the plat officer shall refer the lot-split plat to the planning commission for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.2.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-88. - Report to planning commission. 
    All lot-split plats approved by the plat officer shall be reported to the planning commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.2.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-89. - Distribution. 
    After the plat officer or planning commission approval of the lot-split plat, one (1) copy shall be transmitted to the applicant and three (3) copies shall be transmitted to, or retained by, the plat officer. One (1) copy of the plat shall be filed in the office of the plat officer. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-2.2.4), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 22-90-22-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-116. - Flood hazard areas. 
    The location, alteration or use of any structure or land in a flood hazard area is subject to the granting of a development permit as follows: 
(1)  In the city by the city engineer in accordance with the regulations set forth in chapter 10. 
(2)  In the regional district by the county engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-117. - Alleys. 
(a)  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except where it has been determined by the planning commission that other definite and assured provisions have been made for service access, such as off-street loading and unloading. 
(b)  Where required, alleys shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All alleys shall have a minimum right-of-way width of twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Dead ends and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided. 
(3)  T- and L-shaped alleys shall have a radius of not less than ten (10) feet at the point of intersection. The planning commission may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in lieu of rounded corners. 
(4)  All alleys shall be opened and graded to a grade approved by the plat officer. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-118. - Blocks-Width. 
    Blocks shall be two (2) tiers of lots in width, except where it is necessary to provide only one (1) tier of lots in order to overcome unusual topography or other physical conditions. Where a single tier of lots is permitted, the planning commission may require a planting screen easement along the rear lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.4.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-119. - Same-Length. 
    Blocks shall have a minimum length of three hundred (300) feet and a maximum length of one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet; measurements shall be between property lines and not between street centerlines. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.4.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-120. - Easements and dedications for public use generally. 
    No dedication for a street, other public use, or drainage easement shall be shown on a plat unless the board of commissioners or the county commission, as the case may be, determines to accept such dedication, and no utility easement shall be shown unless approved by the board of commissioners or the county commission. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.6.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-121. - Utility easements. 
    Where alleys are not provided or may not be used for that purpose, easements not less than seven and one-half (7.5) feet in width shall be provided at the rear of each lot for poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, water mains and lines and other such similar purposes. In no case shall any easement be less than fifteen (15) feet in total width. Additional easements shall be provided where required by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.6.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-122. - Drainage easements. 
    Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, stream or creek, the subdivider shall provide a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way of sufficient width for such purpose and for maintenance, wherever the planning commission determines that such easement is desirable. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.6.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-123. - Conformance to official plans. 
    All subdivision plats shall conform to the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.7), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 22-124-22-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETS 

Sec. 22-141. - Conformance to the comprehensive plan. 
    All major thoroughfares shall conform to the area comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.2.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-142. - Relation to the existing street system. 
    All proposed streets shall connect to existing streets, unless the planning commission determines that such connections are undesirable. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.2.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-143. - Street alignment. 
    The radii of curvature shall not be less than the following number of feet: 
(1)  Major thoroughfares: 
a.  Collector streets ..... 150 
b.  All other major thoroughfares ..... 500 
(2)  Local streets ..... 100 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.2.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-144. - Street intersections. 
(a)  Angle of intersection. In general, streets shall be laid out to intersect one another at right angles, and a curve may be used in approaching an intersection to bring about this result. No street shall intersect another street at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees. 
(b)  Minimum distance between intersections with a major thoroughfare. There shall be a minimum of six hundred (600) feet between intersections with a major thoroughfare having a planned right-of-way width of one hundred (100) feet or more. 
(c)  Property-line radius. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of ten (10) feet, or of greater radius where the planning commission may determine it necessary. The planning commission may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in lieu of rounded corners. 
(d)  Street jogs. Street jogs shall be avoided. There shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet between the centerlines of street intersections. The planning commission may require that streets be connected by a curve or diagonal line in such manner that a smoother flow of traffic and the reduction of traffic hazards are assured. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.2.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-145. - Street right-of-way widths. 
(a)  Major thoroughfares shown in the comprehensive plan. Where an existing or proposed thoroughfare is shown as a major thoroughfare in the comprehensive plan, right-of-way widths shall be as shown in such plan, but no dedication shall be required in excess of sixty (60) feet on either side of the centerline thereof. In the case of a planned state highway on a new alignment, not on an existing right-of-way, no dedication shall be required. 
(b)  Culs-de-sac and loop streets. Culs-de-sac and loop streets that will intersect no other streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  Other local streets. All other local streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.2.5), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-146. - Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets. 
(a)  Length. Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length. 
(b)  Turnaround. Culs-de-sac shall terminate in a turnaround with a property-line radius of not less than fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  Stub streets. In the case of dead-end streets that are stub streets designed to provide future connections with adjoining unsubdivided areas, the planning commission may require one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  A temporary easement for a turnaround of the nature mentioned in subsection (a). 
(2)  A roadway at least twenty-six (26) feet in width, and not of excessive length, to connect the temporary dead-end street with an existing street. 
(3)  An appropriate area for a back-around. 
(d)  Provision of future street access to adjoining property. Wherever permanent culs-de-sac are not provided, the planning commission may require that dedication of street right-of-way be extended to the boundary of adjoining property in order to provide future street access to the adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.2.6), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-147. - Access from the rear of through lots. 
    Where the planning commission deems it necessary to control access along a thoroughfare abutting on the rear lot lines of a single tier of lots, it may require the subdivider by appropriate instrument, deemed sufficient by the city or county attorney, as the case may be, to relinquish the right of access to the thoroughfare from the rear of such lots. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.2.7), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-148. - Private roadways. 
(a)  Election. The subdivider may elect to establish in the subdivision one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Private roadways, subject to subsection (b), 
(2)  Public streets, or 
(3)  A combination thereof. 
(b)  Election to establish private roadways. The subdivider may elect to establish private roadways in the subdivision under either or both of the following alternatives: 
(1)  Where the land proposed to be subdivided is more than one-fourth (1/4) mile from both sanitary sewerage facilities and water facilities furnished by a governmental entity, or 
(2)  Where the developer has elected to plan and develop the subdivision as a planned unit development (PUD). 
Where the subdivider elects to establish private roadways in the subdivision, such roadways shall comply with the standards of this division, unless the planning commission shall authorize a variance therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.2.8), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 22-149-22-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOTS 

Sec. 22-166. - Lot dimensions. 
(a)  Inside the city, lot dimensions shall conform to the city zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Outside the city, lots shall not be required to be larger than eight thousand (8,000) square feet, unless a larger area is required by the health department to meet sanitary requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.5.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-167. - Building setback lines. 
    Building setback lines shall comply with the city setback ordinance where such ordinance applies; in all other cases in the city, the building setback lines shall comply with zoning district yard regulations of the zoning district within which the subdivision is located. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.5.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-168. - Alignment of side lot lines. 
    Side lot lines shall be radial to street lines. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.5.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-169. - Lots with a private water supply or septic tank. 
    Each lot shall be served by an approved public or private water supply and sanitary sewer or septic tank. Where a lot is to be served by a private water supply or septic tank, such lot shall be of sufficient size to conform to the health department specifications and standards for septic tanks and individual water supply systems. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.5.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-170. - Large lots. 
    Whenever a parcel is proposed to be divided into lots containing twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or more, the dimensions and arrangements of lots, streets, and utility easements shall be such as to facilitate the future resubdividing of such lots. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-4.5.5), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 22-171-22-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 22-186. - Required generally. 
    The subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets, highways, alleys, or other ways and provide drainage improvements, all in such manner as is necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and to meet local traffic and drainage needs, as a condition precedent to the approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-5.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-187. - Types and extent of improvements required. 
    The improvements that the subdivider shall make, agree to make, or cause to be made prior to the approval of the final plat shall be as described by the Standard Subdivision Improvement Specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-5.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-188. - Improvement plans. 
    Improvement plans shall be prepared and approved as provided in the Standard Subdivision Improvement Specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-5.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 22-189. - Evidence that specifications have been met. 
(a)  As evidence that the Standard Subdivision Improvement Specifications have been met, the planning commission shall accept a letter from the appropriate engineer to the effect that either: 
(1)  All of the specifications have been met, or 
(2)  Adequate assurance, in the form of performance bond or otherwise, has been given that the specifications will be met, and 
(3)  If certain of the specifications have been waived or modified by the governing body, its reasons for this action. 
(b)  Such letters shall be accepted as follows for subdivisions in the indicated areas: 
(1)  City, from the city engineer. 
(2)  Inner area, from the city engineer or the county engineer. 
(3)  Outer area, from the county engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1(23-5.4), 6-18-79) 
Chapter 23 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Transporting nonintoxicating beverages, § 13-119; transporting intoxicating beverages, § 13-120; eluding a police officer, § 13-221; nuisances, ch. 15; abandoned vehicles, § 15-66 et seq.; moving of buildings or heavy machinery, § 21-26 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 25. 
State Law reference- Traffic generally, O.S. tit. 47; general powers of local authorities, 47 O.S. § 15-102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, except where expressly provided to the contrary, or where the context requires a different meaning, the following words and phrases shall be deemed to have the following meanings: 
    Ancient vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle owned by a resident of this state, which is thirty (30) years of age or older, based upon the date of manufacture thereof, and which travels on highways of this state primarily incidental to historical or exhibition purposes only. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-101.1. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle shall mean vehicles of fire departments, ambulances, county sheriff vehicles and full-time commissioned deputies and police vehicles, including vehicles owned and operated by the United States Marshals Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, or by any local organization for civil defense as defined by 63 O.S. § 683.3. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-103. 
    Automobile shall mean every motor vehicle of the type constructed and used for the transportation of persons for purposes other than for hire or compensation. This shall include all vehicles of the station wagon type whether the same are called station wagons, or ranch wagons, van wagons, except those used for commercial purposes, suburbans, town and country, or by any other name, except when owned and used as a school bus or motor bus by a school district or a religious corporation or society as elsewhere provided by law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-103.1. 
    Bicycle shall mean every device propelled by human power which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is over twenty (20) inches in diameter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-104. 
    Bus shall mean every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-105. 
    Business district shall mean the territory contiguous to and including a street when, within any six hundred (600) feet along such street, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings, which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one (1) side, or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the street. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-106. 
    Congested district shall mean all that part of the city defined and described as follows: Main Street, from the north line of Second Avenue North unto the south line of Second Avenue South; and Central Avenue, from the west line of A Street West to the east line of A Street East. 
    Controlled-access highway shall mean every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-110. 
    Crosswalk shall mean that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway or any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-111. 
    Curb shall mean the boundary lines of the roadway portion of a street, whether curbstones are located at such boundaries or not. 
    Double parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle upon a street alongside of another vehicle which is parked at the curb. 
    Driver shall mean every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-113. 
    Highway or street shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. The words "highway" and "street" are synonymous. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 1-122, 1-171. 
    Implement of husbandry shall mean every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for agricultural, horticultural or livestock raising operations or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry and in either case not subject to registration if used upon the highways. Farm wagon type tank trailers of not over one-thousand-two-hundred-gallon capacity, used during the liquid fertilizer season as field storage "nurse tanks" supplying the fertilizer to a field applicator and moved on highways only for bringing the fertilizer from a local source of supply to farms or fields or from one (1) farm or field to another, shall be considered implements of husbandry for purposes of this chapter. Trailers or semitrailers owned by a person engaged in the business of farming and used exclusively for the purpose of transporting farm products to market or for the purpose of transporting to the farm materials or things to be used thereon shall also be considered implements of husbandry for purposes of this chapter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-125. 
    Intersection shall mean the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) streets which join one (1) another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
    Where a street includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, every crossing of two (2) roadways of such streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-126. 
    Laned street or roadway shall mean a roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-127. 
    Limit lines shall mean lines painted or marked upon curbs, pavements or sidewalks to indicate directions and regulations to be observed by persons using the streets. 
    Motor vehicle shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails; the term shall exclude implements of husbandry. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-134. 
    Minibike shall mean any self-propelled vehicle or motor-driven cycle having less than an eight-inch wheel rim, or less than a forty-inch wheel base or less than a twenty-five-inch seat height. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-133.1. 
    Motorcycle shall mean every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor or a motorized bicycle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-135. 
    Motor-driven cycle shall mean every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, equipped with a motor which produces not to exceed five-brake horsepower at full throttle without a governor as determined by a dynamometer test and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-136. 
    Motorized bicycle shall mean every vehicle having fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power, an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding fifty (50) cubic centimeters, which produces no more than two-brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a maximum design speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-136.1. 
    Official traffic-control devices shall mean all signs, barricades, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-139. 
    Park or parking, when prohibited, shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-142(a). 
    Pedestrian shall mean any person afoot. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-143. 
    Police officer shall mean every officer of the police department and any other officer who is authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of state traffic laws or traffic ordinances. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-147. 
    Private road or driveway shall mean every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-148. 
    Railroad shall mean a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-149. 
    Railroad sign or signal shall mean any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-150. 
    Railroad train shall mean a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-151. 
    Resident district shall mean the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-154. 
    Right-of-way shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-156. 
    Roadway shall mean that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein refers to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-158(a). 
    Safety zone shall mean the area of space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-159. 
    School bus shall mean every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school, provided, however, that this definition of school bus shall not be extended to include buses normally used in city transit which may be used part time for transportation of school children within such cities during some portion of the day. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-160. 
    Shoulder shall mean the portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-158(b). 
    Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-163. 
    Stand or standing shall mean the halting of a vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-167. 
    Stop, when required, shall mean complete cessation of movement. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-169. 
    Stop or stopping, when prohibited, shall mean any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-170. 
    Taxicab shall mean any motor vehicle for hire, designed to carry seven (7) persons or less, operated upon any street or highway, or on call or demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for transportation for hire between such points along streets or highways as may be directed by the passengers so being transported; but this classification shall not include motor vehicles of seven-passenger capacity or less operated by the owner where the cost of operation is shared by fellow workmen between their homes and the place of regular daily employment, when not operated for more than two (2) trips per day, nor shall the classification include automobiles operated by the owner where the cost of operation is shared by the passengers on a "share the expense plan," nor shall this classification include motor vehicles transporting students from the public school system when said motor vehicle is so transporting under contract with public, private or parochial school board or governing body. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-174. 
    Traffic shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-177. 
    Traffic-control signal shall mean any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-178. 
    Through highway shall mean every highway or portion thereof on which vehicle traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-175. 
    Traffic lane shall mean the portion of the traveled way for the movement of a single line of vehicles. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-179. 
    Truck shall mean every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-182. 
    Urban district shall mean the territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred (100) feet for a distance of a quarter of a mile or more. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-185. 
    Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; provided, however, the definition of vehicle as used in this chapter shall not include implements of husbandry. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 1-186. 
(Code 1964, § 26-1) 
Sec. 23-2. - Application of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon the highways except: 
(1)  Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section. 
(2)  The provisions of article III and article IV, division 2 of this chapter shall apply upon highways and public parking lots throughout the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-101. 
Sec. 23-3. - Compliance. 
    It is an offense for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. Every person using the streets and highways of the city shall comply with, observe and obey, when applicable to him, all regulations and orders issued in pursuance of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 26-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-102. 
Sec. 23-4. - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-103. 
Sec. 23-5. - Persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles to obey traffic regulations. 
    Every person riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1964, § 26-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-104. 
Sec. 23-6. - Public officers and employees to obey traffic regulations. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, any state, county, city or other governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. It is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 16-103; exemption for military convoys, 47 O.S. § 11-107. 
Sec. 23-7. - Application of chapter to persons working on streets. 
    Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this chapter, except those relating to reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance or repair of public utilities; provided that all highway and public utility operations shall be protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices or flagmen; but the provisions of this chapter shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-105. 
Sec. 23-8. - Application of chapter to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, except that such driver, when responding to an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm, may exercise the privilege set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits, so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions granted by subsection (b) shall apply only when the authorized emergency vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 12-218, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from the front of the vehicle. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1964, § 26-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-106. 
Sec. 23-9. - Permitting unauthorized minor to drive. 
(a)  No person shall cause or knowingly permit his child or ward under the age of sixteen (16) years to drive a motor vehicle upon any street or highway within the city when such minor is not authorized as stated in section 23-101. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly causes or permits his child or ward under the age of sixteen (16) years to drive a motor vehicle upon any street or highway within the city when such minor is not authorized shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 26-27.2) 
Sec. 23-10. - Presumptive operator. 
(a)  If any vehicle unoccupied by a licensed driver is found upon a street or roadway in violation of any provision of this Code or state statutes, or if any vehicle has been driven in violation of this Code or state statutes, then proof of the identity of the person in whose name such vehicle is registered pursuant to O.S. tit. 47 may be sufficient evidence that such person was responsible for such violation, in the absence of probative contrary evidence and if the city judge is so persuaded. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall limit the defenses to or evidence otherwise probative and admissible concerning such violation or responsibility therefore. 
(c)  The registered owner of such violation, if not the person responsible for such violation, shall upon request inform the city police or city attorney of the identity of the person responsible for such violation, if known. 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 1, 2-21-95) 
Sec. 23-11. - General duties of police department with respect to traffic. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce traffic regulations of the City of Miami and all the State of Oklahoma vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the City of Miami, on the roadways, streets, alleys and highways within the corporate limits of the City of Miami, including upon the roadways, streets and highways that form the boundary line of the City of Miami pursuant to 47 O.S. § 15-101.1, as amended, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents in accordance with the provisions of 47 O.S. § 10-101, as amended, to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with ordinance violations causing or contributing to such accidents, to cooperate with other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon such department by this chapter and by any other traffic ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1645, § 1, 10-6-2015) 
Secs. 23-12-23-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-26. - Enforcement of chapter; temporary traffic regulations. 
    The mayor, and under his instructions the police department, shall have power to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all regulations and rules relative to traffic on the public streets. Whenever, in the judgment of the mayor, it shall be advisable for the public safety or convenience to temporarily close any street, alley or parts of streets to vehicular traffic, or to vehicles of a particular description, or to divert traffic thereon, or to divert or direct the course of pedestrian travel, he shall have the power and authority to do so, and any violation of any rule or regulation so made shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 26-15) 
Sec. 23-27. - Authority of police officers to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, not withstanding the provisions of this chapter and other traffic laws. 
(Code 1964, § 26-2) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, 47 O.S. § 15-102(2). 
Sec. 23-28. - Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 26-3) 
Sec. 23-29. - Designation, marking of one-way streets and alleys. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to cause any street or alley or section or portion thereof to be designated and maintained as a one-way street or alley and to designate the direction in which vehicles shall lawfully travel thereon, as may be authorized from time to time by the mayor and board of commissioners. Whenever any street or alley is so designated, the chief of police shall cause the same to be identified as a one-way street or alley by signs or markings painted on the surface of the street or alley or by clearly visible and uniform signs erected adjacent thereto, or both, which signs or markings shall indicate the designation of such street or alley as a one-way street or alley and the direction on which vehicles shall lawfully travel by arrows pointing in that direction. Such signs or markings shall be erected or painted at each entrance to the one-way street or alley and at each cross intersection and at such other points as may be deemed advisable by the chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 26-37) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to designate one-way streets and require traffic to move in one specific direction thereon, 47 O.S. §§ 11-308, 15-102(a)(4); necessity of signs designating one-way streets, § 15-102(c). 
Secs. 23-30-23-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES AND MARKINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic-control devices, 47 O.S. § 11-201 et seq.; authority to erect traffic-control signals, devices, etc., 47 O.S. §§ 15-102, 15-106. 

Sec. 23-46. - Conformity with manual and specifications of state highway commission. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved and adopted by the state highway commission. 
(Code 1964, § 26-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 15-106(a). 
Sec. 23-47. - Obedience to traffic-control devices. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle by section 23-8. 
(Code 1964, § 26-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-201(a). 
Sec. 23-48. - Necessity of signs. 
    No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator, if at any time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective, even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1964, § 26-68) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-201(b). 
Sec. 23-49. - Traffic-control signal legend. 
(a)  Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights or colored lighted arrows successively one (1) at a time, or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and such lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal, except when prohibited under section 23-50, may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn; but vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, pedestrians facing any green signal except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Steady yellow indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter. 
b.  Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(3)  Steady red indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown except as provided in paragraph b. below. 
b.  Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to turn right or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street after stopping as required by paragraph a. above. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, pedestrians facing a steady circular red signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
(b)  In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1964, § 26-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-202. 
Sec. 23-50. - Pedestrian-control signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way in the direction of the signal by the driver of all vehicles. 
(2)  Wait or Don't Walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the wait signal is showing. 
(Code 1964, § 26-71) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-203; authority of city to pedestrian obedience to traffic-control signals, 47 O.S. § 15-107. 
Sec. 23-51. - Flashing signals. 
    Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection; and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution, and in obedience to any signs posted in addition to such signal device denoting rate of speed either for approaching or passing through the intersection or zone governed by such caution signal. 
(Code 1964, § 26-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-204. 
Sec. 23-52. - Lane use control signals. 
    When lane use control signals are placed over individual lanes, such signals shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles as follows: 
(1)  Green indication. Vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a green signal is shown; 
(2)  Steady yellow indication. Vehicular traffic is thereby warned that a lane control change is being made; 
(3)  Steady red indication. Vehicular traffic shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a red signal is shown; and 
(4)  Flashing yellow indication. Vehicular traffic may use the lane only for the purpose of approaching and making a left turn. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-204.1. 
Sec. 23-53. - Pedestrian-actuated school crossing signals. 
    Whenever a pedestrian-actuated school crossing signal is provided, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic and pedestrians in accordance with sections 23-49 and 23-50. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-205. 
Sec. 23-54. - Avoiding traffic-control devices. 
    No driver shall drive through a filling station driveway, other driveway or private property so as to avoid use of a street or a traffic-control device intended to control the flow of traffic in which such driver is traveling. 
(Code 1964, § 26-67.1) 
Sec. 23-55. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which projects any flashing or revolving beams of light, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign, signal or device bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)  Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance; the chief of police is hereby empowered to remove the same without notice. 
(Code 1964, § 26-73) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-206. 
Sec. 23-56. - Injuring, removing, etc., official devices. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, or any other part thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 26-74) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-207. 
Sec. 23-57. - Installation of traffic lights. 
    The chief of police, as authorized by the mayor and board of commissioners from time to time, shall designate intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by electric traffic-control signals or lights and shall cause such signals or lights to be installed and maintained at such intersections. 
(Code 1964, § 26-69) 
Sec. 23-58. - Designation, marking of parking spaces and areas in which parking is prohibited or limited. 
(a)  The chief of police, as authorized by the mayor and board of commissioners from time to time, shall cause spaces to be designated, marked off and maintained on the streets of the city for the parking of vehicles. The chief of police shall also, as directed from time to time by the mayor and board of commissioners, cause spaces or areas to be designated, marked off and maintained on the streets or portions thereof in which the parking of vehicles is prohibited, limited or otherwise restricted. 
(b)  Areas or spaces designated in which parking is prohibited, limited or restricted shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs, barriers or markings. Such prohibitions, limitations or restrictions may apply at all times or only on certain days or at certain hours, all as determined by the mayor and board of commissioners. 
(c)  In areas designated as time limit parking areas, parking may be limited to any period prescribed by the mayor and board of commissioners, the same to be designated with clearly distinguishable markings or signs at both ends of the time limit area and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time limit area, indicating the time allowed for parking in such area. 
(Code 1964, § 26-93) 
Secs. 23-59-23-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ACCIDENTS AND ACCIDENT REPORTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Accidents and accident reports, 10 O.S. § 10-101 et seq. 

Sec. 23-76. - Application of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply upon highways and elsewhere throughout the city. 
(Code 1964, § 26-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-101. 
Sec. 23-77. - Accidents involving death or personal injury. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 23-79. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(Code 1964, § 26-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-102(a). 
Sec. 23-78. - Accidents involving damage to vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 23-79. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(Code 1964, § 26-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-103. 
Sec. 23-79. - Duty to give information and render aid. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his correct name, address and registration number of the vehicle he is driving, and shall upon request and if available exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license and his security verification form, as defined in section 23-102, to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. 
(Code 1964, § 26-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-104. 
Sec. 23-80. - Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the correct name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, and provide said operator or owner with information from his security verification form, as defined by section 23-102, or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking, and providing information from his security verification form, as defined by section 23-102, and a statement of the circumstances thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 26-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-105. 
Sec. 23-81. - Duty upon striking fixtures upon a highway. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license and his security verification form, as defined in section 23-102, and shall make a report of such accident when and as required in section 23-83. 
(Code 1964, § 26-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-106. 
Sec. 23-82. - Immediate notice of accident. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police department, after complying with the requirements of section 23-79. 
(Code 1964, § 26-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-107. 
Sec. 23-83. - When written report required. 
    The operator of a motor vehicle which is in any manner involved in a collision upon any road, street, highway or elsewhere within this city resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or in which it is apparent that damage to one (1) vehicle or other property is in excess of $300.00 shall forward a written report of such collision to the state if settlement of the collision has not been made within six (6) months after the date of the accident and provided that if a settlement has been made a report of such settlement must be made by the parties. 
(Code 1964, § 26-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-108(A). 
Sec. 23-84. - When driver unable to report. 
(a)  An accident report is not required under this chapter from any person who is physically incapable of making a report during the period of such incapacity. 
(b)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an accident as required in section 23-82 and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall make or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver. 
(Code 1964, § 26-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-111. 
Sec. 23-85. - False reports. 
    Any person who gives information in reports as required in this article knowing or having reason to believe that such information is false shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 26-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-112. 
Secs. 23-86-23-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL RULES OF VEHICLE OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-101. - Driver's license. 
(a)  Any person who operates a motor vehicle in the city without a current and valid driver's license in his or her possession for the class of vehicle being operated shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation of any restrictions contained in his or her driver's license. 
(c)  Any person who operates a motor vehicle within the city at a time when his privilege to do so is cancelled, suspended or revoked shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, §§ 26-27, 26-27.1; Ord. No. 1656, § 1, 6-21-2016) 
State Law reference- Drivers' licenses, 47 O.S. § 6-101 et seq. 
Sec. 23-102. - Possession of security verification form required by the compulsory liability insurance law. 
(a)  Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in this state shall while operating or using such vehicle, carry either an operator's or an owner's security verification form issued by a carrier, providing the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon; or an equivalent form issued by the Oklahoma Department of Public Safety, reflecting liability coverage. An owner's security verification form issued to the owner of a motor vehicle may be used as an operator's security verification form by an operator who is not the owner of the motor vehicle, if the operator is not excluded from coverage on the motor vehicle liability insurance policy for the vehicle. Any such exclusions from the policy shall be included on the owner's security verification form. Any person producing proof that a current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the state department of public safety was in force for such person at the time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of the charge of violating this subsection upon payment of court costs; however, if proof of security verification is presented to the court within forty-eight (48) hours after the violation, the charge shall be dismissed without payment of court costs. 
(b)  (1)  The nonresident owner of a motor vehicle not registered in this state may give proof of financial responsibility by providing proof of compliance with the financial responsibility laws of the state in which the vehicle is registered or by filing with the state department of public safety a certificate of an insurance company authorized to transact insurance in the state in which the vehicle is registered, or if such nonresident does not own a motor vehicle, then in the state in which the insured resides, provided such certificate otherwise conforms to the provisions of this article, and the department shall accept the same upon condition that such insurance company complies with the following provisions with respect to the policy so certified: 
a.  The insurance company shall execute a power of attorney authorizing the department to accept service on its behalf or notice of process in any action arising out of a motor vehicle accident in this state. 
b.  The insurance company shall agree in writing that such policies shall be deemed to conform with the laws of state and municipality in relation to the terms of liability policies issued in this state. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection shall apply to nonresident owners and operators of vehicles that are not registered in this state only if the state in which the vehicle is registered required compulsory liability insurance. In such cases, compliance with the requirements of the law of the state of registration shall be deemed compliance with the laws of this state. 
(c)  The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or operator's security verification form or equivalent form from the Oklahoma Department of Public Safety during operation of the vehicle and shall not be required to surrender such form for vehicle registration purposes: 
(1)  Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or any agency or political subdivision thereof; 
(2)  Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business, corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the compulsory insurance law according to the records of the department of public safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance, or fleet policy; 
(3)  Any vehicle authorized for operation under a permit number issued by the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Oklahoma Corporation Commission; 
(4)  Any licensed taxicab; and 
(5)  Any vehicle owned by a licensed used motor vehicle dealer. 
(d)  Every owner of a motor vehicle which is not used upon the public highways or public streets shall be exempt from the provisions of this section if the owner of such vehicle has filed an affidavit with the appropriate motor license agent which states that the vehicle shall not be driven upon the public highways or public streets during the uninsured period. The form of the affidavit shall be prescribed by the Oklahoma Tax Commission and shall contain blanks for the owner to specify the length of time the vehicle shall not be driven upon the public highways or public streets, the reason the vehicle shall not be driven, and any other information deemed necessary by the tax commission. 
(e)  The owner or transporter of a manufactured home, as defined by 47 O.S. § 1102, who is moving or transporting such manufactured home on state roads or federal highways shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Any person engaged in the business of operating a taxicab shall be exempt from the provisions of this section if the person has complied with the provisions of 47 O.S. § 8-104. 
(g)  Any person who knowingly operates a vehicle or owns a vehicle in violation of the above and foregoing shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 26-26.1; Ord. No. 1347, § 1, 7-1-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-117.1; 47 O.S. §§ 7-602.1, 7-602(B)(1), 7-602(B)(3), 7-607. 
Sec. 23-103. - Obedience to traffic officers. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or of a fire department official invested by this chapter or other law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(Code 1964, § 26-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-103. 
Sec. 23-104. - Designation and marking of truck routes; restrictions. 
(a)  Whenever the mayor and city council designate any route through the city to be used by semi tractor trailers (eighteen wheelers) or other such vehicles, the chief of police shall cause the route to be clearly marked and it shall then be unlawful for the driver of any such truck to use any streets not so marked (other than state or federal designated highways) except for the purpose of making local deliveries or pickups by the most direct route. 
(b)  In the interests of public safety, it shall be unlawful for any semi tractor trailer (eighteen wheeler) or other such vehicles to utilize 22nd Avenue Northeast (Veterans Boulevard) as a through truck route. For the purposes of local pickup or delivery, these trucks shall utilize Veterans Boulevard only when no other route is available or accessible. 
(Ord. No. 1278, § 1(26-55), 6-15-89; Ord. No. 1448, § 1, 2-4-02) 
Sec. 23-105. - Parking of wide vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, let, permit, or suffer any vehicle, truck or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control which is in excess of seven (7) feet in width to be parked or remain on any street, alley or right-of-way of the city unless the person is actually engaged in loading or unloading or otherwise using such vehicle, truck or trailer for the purpose of repairs and construction. No such person shall park such a vehicle, truck or trailer on any municipal parking lot operated by the city except for vehicles, trucks or trailers owned by the city or associated with activities being conducted at that location with the approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1277, § 1(26-99), 6-15-89) 
Sec. 23-106. - Quiet zones, designation and use of horns in. 
    The chief of police, as authorized from time to time by the mayor and board of commissioners, may designate areas of the streets of the city to be known as "Quiet Zones," in the vicinity of any hospital, church, school or public institution, and mark such areas with appropriate signs directing the drivers of vehicles not to sound a horn or other warning device while traveling in the areas thus designated. It shall be unlawful for any person to sound any horn or other warning device in violation of such signs. 
(Code 1964, § 26-11) 
Sec. 23-107. - Operation of vehicle over diagonal lines. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any area where it is indicated that operation of motor vehicles is prohibited by diagonal lines. 
Secs. 23-108-23-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECKLESS DRIVING, DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED, ETC.[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 3. 

Sec. 23-126. - Reckless driving. 
    No person shall drive any motor vehicle in a careless or wanton manner without regard for the safety of persons or property. 
(Code 1964, § 26-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-901. 
Sec. 23-127. - Inattentive driving. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any driver to fail to remain alert and give full attention to the safe operation of his vehicle while it is in motion. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any driver to engage in any activity while driving that interferes with the safe control of his vehicle. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to engage in any activity or to do any act which interferes with a driver's safe operation of a vehicle. 
(Code 1964, § 26-61) 
Sec. 23-128. - Persons driving under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating substance or combination thereof. 
A.  It is unlawful and punishable as provided by Code Section 1-5 for any person to drive, operate, or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within this municipality, whether upon public roads, highways, streets, turnpikes, other public places or upon any private road, street, alley or lane which provides access to one or more single or multi-family dwellings, who: 
1.  Has a blood or breath alcohol concentration, as defined in § 756 of this title, of eight-hundredths (0.08) or more at the time of a test of such person's blood or breath administered within two (2) hours after the arrest of such person; 
2.  Is under the influence of alcohol; 
3.  Has any amount of a Schedule I chemical or controlled substance, as defined in § 2-204 of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, or one of its metabolites or analogs in the person's blood, saliva, urine or any other bodily fluid at the time of a test of such person's blood, saliva, urine or any other bodily fluid administered within two (2) hours after the arrest of such person; 
4.  Is under the influence of any intoxicating substance other than alcohol which may render such person incapable of safely driving or operating a motor vehicle; or 
5.  Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any other intoxicating substance which may render such person incapable of safely driving or operating a motor vehicle. 
B.  The fact that any person charged with a violation of this section is or has been lawfully entitled to use alcohol or a controlled dangerous substance or any other intoxicating substance shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section. 
C.  Any person who is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this section or pleading guilty or nolo contendere for a violation of any provision of this section shall be ordered to participate in an alcohol and drug assessment and evaluation by an assessment agency or assessment personnel certified by the Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Services for the purpose of evaluating the receptivity to treatment and prognosis of the person. This subsection shall be administered in the manner provided by 47 O.S. § 11-902(G), as provided on the effective date of HB 1441, Laws 2013, and as the same may be amended from time to time by the Oklahoma State Legislature. 
(Code 1964, §§ 26-54, 26-52; Ord. No. 1427, § 1, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 1635, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-902. 
Sec. 23-129. - Operation of motor vehicle while impaired. 
A.  Any person who operates a motor vehicle while his ability to operate such motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption of alcohol, or any other substance, other than alcohol, which is capable of being ingested, inhaled, injected or absorbed into the human body and is capable of adversely affecting the central nervous system, vision, hearing or other sensory or motor functions shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, or imprisonment in jail for not more than sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Any person who is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this section or pleading guilty or nolo contendere for a violation of any provision of this section shall be ordered to participate in an alcohol and drug assessment and evaluation by an assessment agency or assessment personnel certified by the Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Services for the purpose of evaluating the receptivity to treatment and prognosis of the person. This subsection shall be administered in the manner provided by 761 O.S. § 761(D), as provided on the effective date of SB 2007, Laws 2010, and as the same may be amended from time to time by the Oklahoma State Legislature. 
(Code 1964, §§ 26-54, 26-52; Ord. No. 1635, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 761. 
Sec. 23-130. - Composing, sending, reading text message while vehicle in motion. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or highway within this municipality while using a hand-held electronic communication device in the manner prohibited by Oklahoma State Law at 47 O.S. § 11-901d, as the same is in effect now and as may be subsequently amended by the State Legislature. Any person who violates this provision shall, upon conviction, be punished by a total fine and court cost of not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 1649, § 1, 11-3-2015) 
Secs. 23-131-23-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY, OVERTAKING, PASSING, ETC.[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Driving on right, overtaking, passing, etc., 47 O.S. § 11-301 et seq. 

Sec. 23-146. - Drive on right side of roadway. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; 
(4)  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic; or 
(5)  Upon a roadway having four (4) or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic. 
(b)  Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane when available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(c)  Upon any roadway having four (4) or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (a), paragraph (2) of this section. However, this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Code 1964, §§ 26-29, 26-39.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-301. 
Sec. 23-147. - Passing vehicle proceeding in opposite direction. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and, upon streets having width for not more than one (1) line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the street, as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1964, § 26-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-302. 
Sec. 23-148. - Overtaking a vehicle on the left generally. 
    The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(3)  Every driver who intends to pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, which requires moving his vehicle from one (1) lane of traffic to another, shall first see that such movement can be made with safety and shall proceed to pass only after giving a proper signal by hand or mechanical device. 
(Code 1964, §§ 26-31, 26-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-303. 
Sec. 23-149. - Overtaking a vehicle on the right. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of a vehicle proceeding in the same direction only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the overtaken vehicle is making or about to make a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving traffic in each direction. 
(3)  Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway upon which traffic is restricted to one (1) direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the street. 
(Code 1964, § 26-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-304. 
Sec. 23-150. - Limitations on overtaking on the left. 
    No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within one hundred (100) feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1964, § 26-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-305. 
Sec. 23-151. - Other limitations on driving to left of center of roadway. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction. 
(2)  When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing unless otherwise indicated by official traffic-control devices. 
(3)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching when within one hundred (100) feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(b)  The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway; nor under the conditions described in section 23-146(a)(2), nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-306. 
Sec. 23-152. - No-passing zones. 
    Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone, no driver shall at any time drive to the left side of the roadway within such no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark such no-passing zone throughout its length. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-307(b). 
Sec. 23-153. - Driving on one-way roadways. 
    Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. 
(Code 1964, § 26-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-308(b). 
Sec. 23-154. - Rotary traffic islands. 
    A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-308(c). 
Sec. 23-155. - Driving on roadways laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane, and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety, and then given a signal, not less than one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle, of his intention to change lanes. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation. 
(3)  Upon a roadway which is divided into four (4) or more lanes, a vehicle proceeding at less than the maximum posted speed, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, shall not impede the normal flow of traffic by driving in the left lane. Such vehicle shall be driven in the right-hand lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(4)  Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-309. 
Sec. 23-156. - Following too closely. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. 
(b)  The driver of any truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residential district and which is following another truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this shall not prevent a motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle from overtaking and passing any like vehicle or another vehicle. 
(c)  No vehicle which has more than six (6) tires in contact with the road shall approach from the rear of another vehicle which has more than six (6) tires in contact with the road closer than three hundred (300) feet except when passing the vehicle. 
(d)  Motor vehicles being drawn upon any roadway outside of a business or residential district in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. The distance between such vehicles shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet under all conditions. This provision shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(Code 1964, § 26-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-310. 
Sec. 23-157. - Driving on divided highways. 
    Whenever any highway has been divided into two (2) or more roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a cross-over or intersection as established unless specifically prohibited by public authority. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-311. 
Sec. 23-158. - Restricted access. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-312. 
Sec. 23-159. - Restrictions on use of controlled-access roadway. 
    When the department of highways or local authorities may, with respect to any controlled-access roadway under their respective jurisdictions, prohibits the use of any such roadway by pedestrians, bicycles or other nonmotorized traffic or by any person operating a motor-driven cycle and erects and maintains official signs on the controlled-access roadway on which such regulations are applicable, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-313. 
Secs. 23-160-23-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPEED RESTRICTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to alter speed limits, 47 O.S. §§ 15-102(a)(10), 11-803; speed generally, 47 O.S. § 11-801 et seq. 

Sec. 23-176. - Basic rule. 
(a)  Any person driving a vehicle on a highway shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the highway and any other conditions then existing. No person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle or combination of vehicles with solid rubber or metal tires at a speed greater than ten (10) miles per hour. 
(c)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (a), drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when driving upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic, or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
(Code 1964, §§ 26-34, 26-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-801. 
Sec. 23-177. - Speed limits-Generally. 
    Except as otherwise posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle within the city at a rate of speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(Code 1964, § 26-34; Ord. No. 1311, § 1, 5-3-93) 
Sec. 23-178. - Same-In school zones. 
    In passing schoolhouses and school grounds, during the school year, and during the hours that school is in session or when children are going to and from school, or are in the school yard or on the street adjoining school property, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than ten (10) miles per hour. 
(Code 1964, § 26-36) 
Sec. 23-179. - Same-On specific streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle on the streets or public highways of the city hereinafter faster than the following rates of speed: 
(1)  On South Third Avenue, also known as Steve Owens Boulevard, from the east city limits through and along South Third Avenue to the west city limits, thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(2)  From South Third Avenue through and along Main Street to North Third Avenue, twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(3)  From North Third Avenue northerly to North Ninth Avenue, through and along Main Street, twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(4)  From North Ninth Avenue through and along Main Street northerly to 22nd Street, thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(5)  From North 22nd Street to North 24th Street, through and along Main Street, forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(6)  From North 24th Street to Highland Avenue, through and along Main Street, fifty (50) miles per hour. 
(7)  a.  Beginning two and one-tenth (2.10) miles south of the junction of U.S. Highway 69, extending north to a point eight-tenths (0.80) mile south of 7th Avenue S.E./S.W., forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
b.  Beginning at a point eight-tenths (0.80) mile south of 7th Avenue S.E./S.W., extending north to 7th Avenue S.E./S.W., thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
c.  Beginning at 7th Avenue S.E./S.W., extending north to U.S. Highway 69, thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(8)  G. Street N.W. from 22nd Street to 30th Street, thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(9)  East "D" Street from Steve Owens Boulevard north to B.J. Tunnell, thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(10)  On Elm Street from East Steve Owens Boulevard north to Central, thirty-five (35) miles per hour; from Central north to 7th Street, thirty-five (35) miles per hour; from 7th Street north to Quail Creek Bridge, thirty (30) miles per hour; north from Quail Creek Bridge to 22nd Street, thirty-five (35) miles per hour; north from 22nd Street to the city limits, twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(11)  From South 580 Road west three-tenths (.3) of a mile on East 90 Road, thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(12)  On P Street Northwest from Newman Road (E 65 Road) south six-tenths (.6) of a mile, twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(13)  On P Street Northwest from six-tenths (.6) of a mile south of Newman Road (E 65 Road) south one and a half (1.5) mile to Goodrich Boulevard, thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(14)  E 65 Road west from P Street Northwest seven-tenths (.7) of a mile west to the city limits, forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(15)  Newman Road from P Street Northwest east four-tenths (.4) of a mile east to the west edge of the small bridge, thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(16)  Newman Road from the west side of the small bridge four-tenths (.4) of a mile east of P Street Northwest to city limits, twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 5-2-94; Ord. No. 1443, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1530, § 1, 4-7-08; Ord. No. 1566, § 1, 8-2-10) 
Sec. 23-180. - Minimum speed. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(b)  Whenever the state, the city or other local authority has determined on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any part of a highway consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, no person shall drive a vehicle below such speed except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-804. 
Sec. 23-181. - Special speed limitation on motor-driven cycles. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "motor-driven cycle" shall mean every bicycle with motor attached, and every motor scooter with wheel diameters twelve (12) inches or less, measured from one (1) side of the rim to the other. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motor-driven cycle or any motor scooter at a speed greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. However, all motor-driven cycles and motor scooters shall at all times conform to section 23-176(a). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-805. 
Sec. 23-182. - Special speed limitations. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge, viaduct, or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure, when such structure is signposted as provided by law. 
(b)  Where any street or state or federal highway shall be under construction or repair or a detour shall have been designated by reason of construction or repairs in progress and the Oklahoma Department of Highways, or the city shall have determined a maximum safe, careful and prudent speed on such highway, street or detour during the period of such construction or repairs and shall have plainly posted at each terminus thereof and at not less than each half mile along the route thereof such determined maximum speed, no person shall drive any vehicle upon such portion of such highway or upon such detour at a speed in excess of the speed so determined and posted. 
(c)  Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this section, proof of said determination of the maximum speed by the city or the department of highways and the existence of said signs shall constitute conclusive evidence of the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety as provided in this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-806. 
Sec. 23-183. - Excessive acceleration. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle shall not either purposely or inadvertently cause his vehicle to accelerate at such an excessive or rapid rate of speed so as to spin or squeal the tires of such vehicle, or cause his ability to control such vehicle to be impaired to any appreciable degree. 
(Code 1964, § 26-59) 
Secs. 23-184-23-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RIGHT-OF-WAY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Right-of-way generally, 47 O.S. § 11-401 et seq. 

Sec. 23-201. - Vehicle approaching or entering intersection. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different highway; provided that the driver of a vehicle on a street which is not a state or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(b)  When two (2) vehicles enter or approach an intersection from different highways, at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(c)  The right-of-way rules declared in subsections (a) and (b) are modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 26-44) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-401. 
Sec. 23-202. - Vehicle turning left at intersection. 
    The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given the signal required by this article, may make such left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
(Code 1964, § 26-44) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-402. 
Sec. 23-203. - Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection. 
(a)  Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs. 
(b)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by section 23-248(d) and after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on such highway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary as provided in section 23-248(e), and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving, and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. Said driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding, provided, however, that if such driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield right-of-way. 
(d)  Where two (2) or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or signals on two (2) or more intersecting cross streets, and are approaching so as to enter the intersection at the same time, where each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where each vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where one (1) vehicle is required to stop and the other to slow or take caution, the one slowing or taking caution shall have the right-of-way. Where one (1) vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution, the one required to take caution shall have the right-of-way. In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the intersection shall have the right-of-way over one which has not so entered the intersection. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-403. 
Sec. 23-204. - Vehicles entering highway from private road or driveway. 
    The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such highway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-404. 
Sec. 23-205. - Procedure on approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 12-218, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1964, § 26-46) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-405. 
Secs. 23-206-23-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TURNING MOVEMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate turning, 47 O.S. § 15-102(a)10; turning movements generally, 47 O.S. § 11-601 et seq. 

Sec. 23-221. - Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection; and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  Left turns on other than two-way roadway. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle; and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(b)  When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1964, § 26-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-601. 
Sec. 23-222. - Turning on curve or crest of grade. 
    No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within five hundred (500) feet. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-602. 
Sec. 23-223. - Starting parked vehicle. 
    No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-603. 
Sec. 23-224. - Turning movements and required signals. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required by ordinance; or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway, unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(c)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(Code 1964, § 26-42) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-604. 
Sec. 23-225. - Signals by hand and arm or signal lamps. 
(a)  Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b). 
(b)  Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen (14) feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, and also to any combination of vehicles. 
(Code 1964, § 26-42) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-605. 
Sec. 23-226. - Method of giving hand-and-arm signals. 
    All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Code 1964, § 26-43) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-606. 
Sec. 23-227. - Restrictions on turning at intersections. 
    The chief of police may cause any street intersection to be designated as an intersection at which no "U" turn shall be made, or at which no right turn shall be made, or at which no left turn shall be made and to cause any street intersection to be designated as an intersection at which no turn shall be made, as may be authorized from time to time by the mayor and board of commissioners. The chief of police is further authorized to cause appropriate signs and markings to be painted on the surface of the street or intersection or clearly visible and uniform signs to be erected at such intersection indicating that it has been designated as an intersection at which no "U" turn shall be made, or as an intersection at which no right turn shall be made, or as an intersection at which no left turn shall be made, or as an intersection at which no turn shall be made. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn the same contrary to any such sign or marking. 
(Code 1964, § 26-40) 
Sec. 23-228. - Reverse turns. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a complete reverse turn on any street in the city, or to utilize any private or public property, easement or roadway to effect said turn, except at street intersections, and no such reverse turns shall be made at any intersection where signal lights have been installed. 
(Code 1964, § 26-41) 
Sec. 23-229. - Meeting and overtaking stopped church buses. 
(a)  Church bus as used herein shall mean a vehicle operated by a nonprofit religious organization which transports persons, including school-age children, to and from religious services. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a church bus that is stopped to take on or discharge passengers, and on which the red loading signals are in operation, is to stop his vehicle before it reaches the church bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then proceed past such bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for the safety of such occupants. 
(c)  Every church bus used for the transportation of persons to and from religious services shall bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly visible signs containing the words "CHURCH BUS" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height and in addition may be equipped with visual signals meeting the requirements of law, which shall be actuated by the driver of said church bus whenever, but only whenever, such vehicle is stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separated roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a church bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the church bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-705.1. 
Secs. 23-230-23-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SPECIAL STOPS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Special stops, 47 O.S. § 11-701 et seq. 

Sec. 23-246. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly-visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train. 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train. 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard. 
(4)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1964, § 26-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-701. 
Sec. 23-247. - Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings. 
(a)  The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at grade any tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks. 
(b)  No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-702. 
Sec. 23-248. - Signs and yield signs. 
(a)  Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs. 
(b)  Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the nearest line of the intersecting roadway; however, such yield signs shall not be erected upon the approaches of but one (1) of the intersecting streets. 
(c)  Every stop sign shall bear the word "Stop." Every yield sign shall bear the word "Yield." Every stop sign and every yield sign shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by internal illumination, or by a floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements in or on the face of the sign. 
(d)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly-marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. 
(e)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly-marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(Code 1964, §§ 26-45, 26-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-703. 
Sec. 23-249. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
    The driver of a vehicle within a business or residential district emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-704. 
Sec. 23-250. - Meeting or overtaking stopped school bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is stopped to take on or discharge school children, and on which the red loading signals are in operation, is to stop his vehicle before it reaches the school bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then proceed past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for the safety of such school children and other occupants. 
(b)  Every school bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly visible signs containing the words "School Bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height and in addition shall be equipped with visual signals meeting the requirements of law which shall be actuated by the driver of such school bus whenever but only whenever such vehicle is stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-705. 
Secs. 23-251-23-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate stopping, standing or parking, 47 O.S. § 15-102(a)2; stopping, standing or parking generally, 47 O.S. § 11-1001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-266. - Notice of parking violations. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to supply police officers with citation tags for the purpose of giving notice to persons parking any vehicle in violation of any provision of this chapter. Such notice may be given by delivering such tags to the violator or by affixing it to the vehicle by means of which the violation occurred. Such citation tag shall direct the violator to appear and to present such tag at a designated place on or before a date and hour specified thereon. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power of a police officer to arrest any violator and take him into custody. 
(b)  Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the city, for the driver to answer to the charge against him at the time and place specified in the notice. 
(Code 1964, § 26-98) 
Sec. 23-267. - Exceptions, etc., for authorized emergency vehicles and vehicles used in road construction or maintenance. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or to vehicles or machinery used in the construction or maintenance of highways, and such vehicles or machinery may be operated on any part of the road, whether same is open to traffic or closed, when such operation is necessary in the maintenance or construction of the highway; provided that all such operations shall be protected with adequate warnings, signs, signals, lights, devices or flagmen. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1005. 
Sec. 23-268. - Outside of business or residence districts. 
(a)  Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of the highway when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of such highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of two hundred (200) feet in each direction upon such highway. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main-traveled portion of a highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1001. 
Sec. 23-269. - Officers authorized to remove illegally stopped vehicle. 
(a)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in violation of any of the provisions of section 23-268, such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main-traveled part of such highway. 
(b)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or causeway or in any underpass where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1002(a), (b). 
Sec. 23-270. - Parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at any time in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or ordinance or at the direction of a police officer or traffic-control device: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  On an easement. 
(3)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(4)  Within the distance as marked by the fire department to allow for clear access to a fire hydrant in case of emergency. 
(5)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(6)  On a crosswalk. 
(7)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(8)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(9)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the city indicates a different length by signs or markings. 
(10)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance when properly signposted. 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway underpass. 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 1475, § 1, 2-17-04; Ord. No. 1496, § 1, 3-6-06) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1003. 
Sec. 23-271. - Method of parking. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle parked on a city street shall be parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb. 
(b)  On one-way streets, a vehicle may be parked with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb. 
(c)  Angle parking will be permitted on those streets or portions thereof designated by the mayor and board of commissioners and marked accordingly. Where such angle parking is permitted, the vehicle shall be parked entirely within the lines designating the parking space, with the front of the vehicle to the curb. 
(Code 1964, § 26-95) 
State Law reference- Method of parking and authority of city to permit angle parking and left-hand parking on one-way streets, 47 O.S. § 11-1004. 
Sec. 23-272. - Parking in spaces designated for the handicapped. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any parking space on private property accessible to the public and where the public is invited that is designated and posted as a reserved area for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person unless such vehicle is eligible for a detachable insignia or reflective insignia of a physically disabled person under the provisions of 47 O.S. § 15-112 and such insignia is displayed as provided in 47 O.S. § 15-112 or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1007; municipal authority to provide special parking privileges for disabled persons, 47 O.S. § 15-111. 
Sec. 23-273. - Prohibited for certain purposes. 
(a)  The stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle upon any public street for the purpose of demonstrating, exhibiting or advertising such vehicle or a similar vehicle for sale, or for the purpose of demonstrating, exhibiting or advertising any article for sale, is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  The stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle upon any easement for the purpose of demonstrating, exhibiting, or advertising such vehicle or a similar vehicle for sale, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1964, § 26-87; Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 3-20-06) 
Sec. 23-274. - Stopping to load or unload passengers or freight. 
    The regulations contained in this division relative to the parking of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles which stop for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight. When stopped for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight, vehicles may stop parallel to the right curb or, in case of one-way streets, to the left curb, providing there is no vehicle parked or standing at the curb at such point. Vehicles may also stop for the purpose of unloading or loading passengers or freight at all places in the city where parking is prohibited, with the following exceptions and limitations: 
(1)  No vehicle of any character shall stop for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant, or within sixty (60) feet of the intersecting street on the side of any street where buses stop for the purpose of discharging and receiving passengers, when a bus is stopped at such place for such purpose. 
(2)  When taking up or discharging passengers or freight, vehicles shall be headed in the direction of the movement of traffic, and shall stop only at the right curb or, in case of one-way streets, at the left curb. 
(3)  In all cases where it is possible, freight, coal and ice shall be unloaded from the curb side and not from the rear of the vehicle, and the vehicle shall not back to the curb, but shall stand parallel thereto and be drawn in close to the curb. 
(4)  No vehicle shall remain upon any street within the congested district for the purpose of receiving or discharging freight or merchandise between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. where there is a public alley upon the premises where such freight or merchandise is being delivered or received, or where such premises are connected with such alley. 
(5)  All vehicles of every character, which stop for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight, shall stop only long enough to load or unload its passengers or freight, and then immediately move on. 
(Code 1964, § 26-92) 
Sec. 23-275. - Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, let, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain in any prohibited parking area designated and marked according to the provisions of section 23-58, or in a time limit parking area for a longer period of time than that designated by the markings on the street or by clearly visible signs. 
(Code 1964, § 26-94) 
Sec. 23-276. - Parking in alleys. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a passenger motor vehicle, except for the purpose of loading and unloading, in the alleys between Main Street and A Street, east and west, from the Northeast Oklahoma Railroad Tracks south to Third Avenue Southwest and Third Avenue Southeast. 
(b)  Vehicles parked in public alleys, where such parking is permitted, shall be parked parallel to the property line, with both right wheels not farther than twelve (12) inches from the property line and both right wheels parallel to the property line. No vehicle shall be parked or left standing in any public alley in such a place as to obstruct or prevent the free passage of other vehicles through such alley. 
(Code 1964, § 26-96) 
Sec. 23-277. - Trucks and other large vehicles not to park on certain streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of any motor vehicle, motor van, motor bus or any other vehicle of any character, the total length of which exceeds sixteen (16) feet and eight (8) inches, or any motor vehicle or other vehicle the width of which, at its widest point, exceeds six (6) feet, to park such vehicle on any street within a business district, except where vehicles are required to park parallel to the curbline. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting any such vehicle from stopping on any such street for a sufficient length of time to load or unload passengers or freight in accord with the provisions of section 23-274. 
(Code 1964, § 26-97) 
Sec. 23-278. - Parking or remaining on public or private property. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain on or park any vehicle (which for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to any device used for transportation) on any public or private property in violation of any posted notice as defined in the following subsection. Any violation of this section shall be considered a violation of the traffic ordinances of the city, and shall constitute a trespass as defined herein and shall be punishable as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Notice. Before any person shall be guilty of a violation of the preceding subsection, the property in question must be posted in a clearly visible manner with a notice which indicates the hours that such property is opened to the public and further a statement that a trespass at any other time is prohibited. Upon the posting of the notice as required herein, the owner of the property posting such notice is authorizing the city to act as the owner's agent for the enforcement of such notice, the same as if the property was owned and controlled by the city. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall receive a citation for parking or remaining on closed property, either in person or by affixing the same to the vehicle found on such property if the owner or operator shall not be immediately ascertainable, and shall be guilty of an offense. If the citation issued hereunder shall not be personally delivered but is affixed to a vehicle, the registered owner of such vehicle shall be responsible for allowing such vehicle to remain on such property in violation of posted notice. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Trespass shall mean a trespass with a vehicle. Trespass shall further be defined as follows: 
a.  Each and every actual entry upon the premises of another person's real property, public or private, without the owner's or occupant's consent thereof, whether expressed or implied, if such property has a notice posted, giving times and prohibiting the trespass during certain hours. 
b.  Each and every entry in or upon such public or private posted property, except at times and upon conditions when the same is subject to public use. 
c.  Remaining upon the premises of another, whether public or private, and refusing to leave such premises forthwith, after demand by owner or occupant, either in person or by posted notice. 
d.  This definition shall not apply to persons, including employees whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner, or by a person in lawful possession of such premises; any person alleged to be guilty of violating this section shall have the responsibility of showing evidence that they are authorized to be on such property in violation of any posted notice; nor shall the provisions of this section apply unless hours of business operation are posted upon such premises. Trespass shall also be defined as the act of returning to private property before the posted time of opening for business operation on the next business day after having been directed to vacate such premises under the terms of this section. 
(2)  Vehicle shall mean any device used for the transportation from one (1) place to another of a person or persons. 
(Code 1964, § 26-100) 
State Law reference- Parking of vehicles on posted private property, 47 O.S. § 11-1006. 
Sec. 23-279. - Grounds for towing of vehicles from roadway; towing rotation log. 
(a)  Any peace officer of the Miami Police Department shall be authorized to cause to be towed any vehicle found upon a roadway within the city limits in such manner, and subject to such terms, as provided by Oklahoma state law and municipal ordinances. Further such officer has authority to cause a vehicle to be towed at the sole expense of the owner thereof immediately if: 
(1)  The person driving or in control of a motor vehicle is arrested or otherwise taken into law enforcement custody; or 
(2)  At the scene of an accident, when the owner or driver is not in a position to take charge of his vehicle and direct or request its proper removal; or 
(3)  If the officer has reasonable cause to believe that a vehicle is in a location which would be hazardous to the free flow of traffic or be highly susceptible to damage from vandalism or other harm. 
(b)  The city manager or his or her designee may temporarily close a public parking area for purposes of maintenance, repair, construction, and special events. 
(1)  Whenever reasonably possible, the city manager or his or her designee shall post a notice of temporary closure at or upon the affected public parking area at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the temporary closure thereof. When it is not reasonably possible to post such notice at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance, the city manager or his or her designee shall post such notice as soon as reasonably possible, but not less than the otherwise lawful duration of parking plus one (1) hour except in the case of emergency. 
(2)  If a vehicle is stopped or parked upon such public parking area at the time it is posted as provided by subsection (b)(1), above, then the city manager or his or her designee shall place an adhesive-backed notice upon the vehicle which states the purpose of the temporary closure, the date and time it shall take effect, the date and time it shall expire, and a statement that a parked or standing vehicle during the period of temporary closure shall constitute a trespass and that any vehicles which are parked upon the affected public parking area after the date and time of the temporary closure are subject to removal by the city at the expense of the owner thereof. The city manager or his or her designee shall have no duty to place this notice upon any additional vehicle which may subsequently stop, stand or park on the affected public parking area after the initial posting. 
(3)  Any vehicle which remains stopped, standing or parked upon the affected public parking area during the temporary closure thereof may be removed at the direction of a peace officer of the Miami Police Department at the sole expense of the owner thereof. Further, such act shall be punishable as provided by section 23-278 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  In the case of an emergency directly affecting life or property in which the removal of the vehicle is reasonably necessary to address the emergency situation, a peace officer of the Miami Police Department may cause the removal of otherwise lawfully parked vehicles at the expense of the city. In such case the city shall take reasonable steps to notify the owner thereof. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, all licensed wrecker services located within the city limits shall be placed upon a towing rotation log, which shall be maintained by the Miami Police Department and utilized to insure, as nearly as possible, that wrecker services are requested on an impartial basis. All licensed wrecker services located outside the city limits may petition for inclusion upon the towing rotation log to the city council, who shall determine their eligibility for inclusion upon the towing rotation log after receiving recommendations from the city manager and chief of police. The towing rotation log shall be used in instances involving an arrest, accident or temporary closure of a public parking area as described herein. In instances involving a stolen or abandoned car, the owner shall, if at all possible based upon the circumstances of the particular situation, be allowed to choose the means and method by which the vehicle shall be retrieved. 
(Ord. No. 1430, § 1, 8-20-01; Ord. No. 1589, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 23-280. - Fire safety lanes. 
(a)  Fire lanes on public and private property. 
(1)  General. Fire access roads, hereinafter known as fire lanes, shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section. Fire lanes may be required at industrial and commercial properties and at multi-story residential properties at the discretion of the fire chief, or his designee. 
(2)  Fire chief's designee. The fire chief, or acting fire chief, may appoint a designee to implement and enforce the requirements of this section. If the occupant or owner of a building wants to establish fire lanes at his/her property, a request shall be made to the fire chief or his designee for consideration and possible approval. 
(3)  Requests for fire lanes. The occupant or owner of a building may request a review by the fire chief to add the necessary fire lanes if needed. 
(4)  Fire lane markings. Fire lanes shall be designated on all sides by painted curbs and stripes, said curbs and striping to be red in color, and by signs of design, shape and wording approved by the fire chief, or his designee. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" shall appear in four-inch white letters at intervals of no less than every twenty-five (25) feet within the red border markings on both sides of the fire lane. Curbs shall be painted red to the top seam of the curb to a point even with the driving surface and lettered in the same manner as the flat surface. 
(5)  Width. Fire lanes shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and with an overhead clearance of no less than fourteen (14) feet. 
(6)  Surface. Fire lanes shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather access with an asphalt or concrete surface sufficient to support fire equipment. 
(7)  Exceptions. Where a building, facility, or structure might have an unusual building design, topography, waterway, non-negotiable or difficult to negotiate grades or other similar conditions the fire chief, or his designee, may require additional fire lanes or fire protection systems. Clearances or widths required by this section may be increased when the fire chief, or his designee, determines that minimum clearances or widths are not adequate to provide fire apparatus access. The fire chief, or his designee, may make other exceptions for good cause and at his discretion. 
(b)  Enforcement. The fire department and police department shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To enforce parking regulations in those areas properly marked and designated as a fire lane. 
(2)  To issue citations for vehicles improperly parked in fire lanes. The citation shall contain the time, date, vehicle tag number, make, year and color of the vehicle. The citation shall be conspicuously placed upon the vehicle. The citation shall be on a form provided by the city. 
(c)  Fines and towing. 
(1)  The fine for improperly parking in a fire safety lane shall be $100.00 plus related court costs. 
(2)  Vehicles improperly parked in fire safety lanes may also be immediately towed with all costs of towing to be paid by the owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 1, 11-6-06) 
Secs. 23-281-23-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS 

Sec. 23-296. - Definition. 
    The word "vehicle," as used in this division, shall mean any device by which any person or property may be transported upon a street, except those operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Code 1964, § 26-104) 
Sec. 23-297. - Meter zones established. 
    Parking meter zones are hereby established on such streets or parts of streets as are designated from time to time by the mayor and board of commissioners. 
(Code 1964, § 26-105) 
Sec. 23-298. - Installation; maintenance and mechanical requirements. 
    The mayor and city clerk shall provide for the installation of parking meters, including curb or street marking lines, in the parking meter zones, and the regulation and operation thereof, and they shall cause such meters to be maintained in good workable condition. Meters shall be placed upon the curb next to individual parking places and meters shall be so constructed as to display a signal showing legal parking upon deposit therein of the proper coins, as indicated by instructions on the meter, and for a period of time as provided in this division, such signal to remain in evidence until expiration of the parking period designated, at which time a change of signal or some other mechanical operation shall indicate expiration of the parking period. 
(Code 1964, § 26-107) 
Sec. 23-299. - Manner of parking in meter zones. 
    Every vehicle parked within any parking meter zone shall be parked entirely within the lines or markings designating a particular parking space in the zone. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in such manner that is not entirely within such lines or markings. 
(Code 1964, § 26-108) 
Sec. 23-300. - Time limit for parking and required coin deposit. 
(a)  The mayor and board of commissioners shall establish the time limit for parking in the parking meter zones and the amount of deposit required to be made in the parking meters therein, which shall be indicated on the meters or on signs erected in the zones. 
(b)  When any vehicle is parked next to a parking meter, the driver or owner thereof, upon entering the parking space, shall immediately deposit in the meter the coins indicated on the meter as required for the particular parking space. Such parking space may then be used by such vehicle for the length of time purchased by such deposit, but not beyond the time limit established for the space and indicated on the meter or by appropriate signs. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or driver to fail to deposit the coins as required by subsection (b). Also, any vehicle shall be considered as unlawfully parked if it remains in any space within a parking meter zone beyond the time limit established therefor or when the parking meter for such space displays a signal showing that the time has expired. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this subsection. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall be in force and effect on such days and during such hours as designated by the mayor and board of commissioners. 
(Code 1964, § 26-109) 
Sec. 23-301. - Deposit of coin to extend maximum time limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter any coin for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the maximum time limit fixed for the parking space by the mayor and board of commissioners. 
(Code 1964, § 26-110) 
Sec. 23-302. - Purpose of deposit requirement. 
    The fee required to be deposited in parking meters is hereby levied as a police regulation and inspection fee to cover the cost of providing parking spaces, parking meters and the installation and maintenance thereof; the cost of regulation, inspection, operation, control, and use of parking meters and zones; for the regulation and control of traffic moving in and out and parking in the parking spaces and zones; and for the costs of any resultant traffic administration expense. 
(Code 1964, § 26-111) 
Sec. 23-303. - Revenue to general fund. 
    All funds derived from the use of parking meters shall be paid into the office of the city clerk to the credit of the general fund of the city, and the salary and expense of servicing and maintenance; and the purchase of any equipment shall be paid from the general fund of the city upon the authority of the mayor and board of commissioners. 
(Code 1964, § 26-112) 
Sec. 23-304. - Deposit of slugs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Code 1964, § 26-113) 
Sec. 23-305. - Tampering with, breaking, etc., meters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, open or wilfully break or destroy any parking meter. 
(Code 1964, § 26-114) 
Sec. 23-306. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Any person who shall violate or permit or allow anyone to violate any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-5 of this Code; provided that, if the violation is that of overparking; i.e., leaving an automobile in the zoned area for a longer period of time than that for which money has been deposited, or time allowed for free parking, then the violator shall be given a citation envelope which shall allow him to deposit $2.00 within the envelope, then deposit the envelope in the proper containers for same, placed at intervals in the parking zones. The charge for overtime parking is $2.00 if paid on the day of violation by 6:00 p.m. (Monday through Friday-9:00 p.m. Saturday). If not paid by designated time, the minimum charge will be $6.00. 
(Code 1964, § 26-115) 
Sec. 23-307. - Impoundment of vehicles parked in violation of division. 
    Any police officer may impound any motor vehicle parked at a place where parking is prohibited by this division, or which has been parked for more than one (1) hour in excess of the time allowed for parking in any parking meter zone, or which has been involved in two (2) or more violations of this division, for which citation tags have been issued and not presented as required by section 23-266. Any person desiring to redeem such impounded vehicle shall first pay such fine as may be assessed by the municipal judge for the violation for which such vehicle was impounded and such costs as are incurred in impounding and storing such vehicle. 
(Code 1964, § 26-116) 
Sec. 23-308. - Proof of parking violations under division. 
    In any prosecution for parking a vehicle in violation of any provision of this division, proof of registration of a motor vehicle and proof of the violation shall be construed as prima facie proof that the registered owner of such motor vehicle was the user or operator thereof at the time of the violation charged. 
(Code 1964, § 26-117) 
Sec. 23-309. - Parking time limit. 
    Where official signs are erected giving notice that parking is limited to a certain period, i.e., two (2) hours free parking, no person shall park a vehicle for a period exceeding the specified limit, except on Sundays and legal holidays. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to move a vehicle in any manner or leave a parking space and then reenter it to avoid the intent of this section. Any violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 23-306. 
(Code 1964, § 26-118) 
Sec. 23-310. - Exceptions; Miami Tower parking and handicapped parking. 
(a)  Miami Tower parking. For each apartment rented in the Miami Tower located at the southwest corner of First Street and North Main, there shall be allowed one (1) free parking space. Each tenant shall make application for a special permit to be issued by the chief of police. Upon receiving the permit the tenant shall display the same as required by the chief of police in order for the permit to remain valid. Each permit shall be renewed annually but shall in no event be valid except for an actual resident of Miami Towers and then shall remain valid for only the time in which the permit holder shall remain a tenant of the tower. The permit shall only be valid for the parking lots located between Main Street and West A Street in the block between Central and First Street North and the block between First Street North and Second Street North. 
(b)  Handicapped parking. Special handicapped parking shall be designated in the following areas: The northwest and southwest parking space of the controlled public parking lots located between Main Street and East A Street in all blocks from Second Avenue South to Second Avenue North and the northeast and southeast parking space of the controlled parking lots located between Main Street and West A Street in all blocks from Second Avenue South to Second Avenue North. Only vehicles clearly identified as that of a handicapped person shall be allowed in these designated parking areas. Any other vehicle located in these areas shall be deemed to be in violation of this subsection and shall be penalized as set forth in section 23-306. 
(Code 1964, § 26-119) 
Secs. 23-311-23-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MAINTENANCE, CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY ZONES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Maintenance, construction and safety zones, 47 O.S. § 11-1301 et seq. 

Sec. 23-326. - Driving through safety zone prohibited. 
    No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1301. 
Sec. 23-327. - Maintenance and construction zones. 
(a)  When any highway has been closed to traffic by the state department of highways, the county or the city while the highway is under repair, maintenance or construction and traffic-control devices or barricades have been erected, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through, under, over, or around such traffic-control devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter said closed area; except, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons while engaged in the construction, maintenance and repair of such highway or to persons entering therein for the protection of lives or property; provided that persons having their places of residence or places of business within such closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through such area at their own risk. 
(b)  Whenever construction, repair and maintenance of any highway is being performed under traffic, the governing body having jurisdiction over the highway shall erect, or cause to be erected, traffic-control devices to warn and guide the public, and every person using such highway shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagmen or other traffic-control devices which are placed to regulate, control, and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance area. 
(c)  No person shall remove, change, modify, deface or alter any traffic-control device or barricade which has been erected on any highway under the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 26-53) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1302. 
Secs. 23-328-23-345. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES, PLAY VEHICLES, ETC.[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate the operation of bicycles, 47 O.S. § 15-102(a)8; bicycle regulations, 47 O.S. § 11-1201 et seq. 

Sec. 23-346. - Compliance, parental responsibility and scope. 
(a)  It is an offense for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article. 
(b)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to the exceptions stated herein. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1201. 
Sec. 23-347. - Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of this city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1202. 
Sec. 23-348. - Manner of riding on bicycles. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one (1) time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1203. 
Sec. 23-349. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    No person on foot, riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1964, § 26-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1204. 
Sec. 23-350. - Riding on roadways and bicycle paths. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(c)  Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1205. 
Sec. 23-351. - Carrying articles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one (1) hand upon the handle bars. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1206. 
Sec. 23-352. - Equipment. 
(a)  Every bicycle in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible for a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(b)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1207. 
Sec. 23-353. - Use of bicycles or skateboards on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride any bicycle, skateboard, scooter or rollerblade type skate in the downtown business district in a manner that would endanger the health or safety of another. Further, no individual riding such instrument shall perform any tricks or stunts, to include the performance of tricks in, on or around any planters, benches, trashcans or other type public or private improvement. 
(b)  All those found in violation of the above section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to fines, community service, restitution for any damage done, or any other punitive measure the court deems appropriate. 
(Code 1964, § 26-6; Ord. No. 1429, § 1, 8-6-01) 
Secs. 23-354-23-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDESTRIANS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Pedestrians generally, 47 O.S. § 11-501 et seq. 

Sec. 23-371. - Subject to traffic regulations. 
(a)  A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device specifically applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian-control signals as provided in sections 23-49 and 23-50. 
(c)  At all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-501. 
Sec. 23-372. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(c)  Subsection (a) shall not apply under the conditions stated in section 23-373(b). 
(d)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-502. 
Sec. 23-373. - When pedestrian shall yield. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(Code 1964, §§ 26-124, 26-125) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-503. 
Sec. 23-374. - Roadway to be crossed at right angles; exception. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1964, § 26-126) 
Sec. 23-375. - Use of right half of crosswalks. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-505. 
Sec. 23-376. - Reserved. 
Sec. 23-377. - Soliciting rides or business in the roadway-Boot blocks. 
(a)  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(b)  Those charitable organizations seeking to solicit donations in the roadway from occupants of vehicles (commonly referred to as a "boot block") shall apply for a permit with the chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 26-128; Ord. No. 1444, § 1, 11-19-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-507. 
Sec. 23-378. - Walking on roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction, and shall yield to approaching vehicles. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any portion of a bridge for the purpose of diving or jumping therefrom into a lake, river or stream for recreation. It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to use a bridge where sidewalks are not provided for the purpose of standing or sightseeing. 
(Code 1964, § 2G-127) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-506. 
Sec. 23-379. - Duty of drivers with regard to pedestrians. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1964, § 26-129) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-505. 
Secs. 23-380-23-395. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MOTORCYCLES AND SIMILAR VEHICLES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Motorcycles, etc., generally, 47 O.S. § 40-103 et seq. 

Sec. 23-396. - Generally. 
(a)  No driver of a two- or three-wheel motor vehicle shall carry any other person on, upon or within such vehicle on any street, alley or highway within the city except as hereinafter provided. If any two- or three-wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter of twelve (12) inches or greater shall have either a double seating device with double footrests or a sidecar attachment providing a separate seat space within such sidecar attachment for each person riding therein so that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of such sidecar, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of sixteen (16) years or older to carry a passenger. A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is excepted from the provisions hereof. No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk of the city. Handlebars on motorcycles and motor scooters shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in height, measured from the crown or point of attachment. No rider of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall hold to any moving vehicle for the purpose of being propelled. No driver of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall pass other vehicles in between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction, authorized emergency vehicles excepted. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor driven cycle (including minibikes, mopeds, gopeds, motorscooters, and motorized skateboards) without having a valid Class A, B, C, or D license with a motorcycle endorsement, as well as complying with all other State and municipal laws and ordinances relating to the operation thereof. (See similar provision in O.S. Title 47 Section 6-101, et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1477, § 1, 6-3-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 40-103. 
Sec. 23-397. - Speed. 
    No person shall operate any motorcycle or any motor scooter at a speed greater than the speed limit legally posted; provided, however, in no event nor at any time may an operator under the age of sixteen (16) years operate a motorcycle or motor scooter at a speed greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 40-104. 
Sec. 23-398. - Required equipment. 
    The following equipment shall be required on all motorcycles and all motor scooters except on actual trail rides conducted outside of public roads and highways: 
(1)  Rear view mirrors. All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped with two (2) mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than three (3) inches in diameter, mounted one (1) on each side of the vehicle and positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet to the rear of his vehicle. 
(2)  Windshield. All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped with a windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect the operator from foreign objects, except that in lieu of such windshield the operator shall wear goggles or a face shield of material and design to protect him from foreign objects. 
(3)  Brakes. All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of same to stop and hold such vehicles, including two (2) separate means of applying the brakes; one (1) means shall be effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel and one (1) means shall be effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a stop lamp on the rear of the vehicle, which shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be actuated upon application of the service brake. 
(4)  Speedometer. All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped with a properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least the maximum legal speed limit for that vehicle. 
(5)  Fenders. All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped with a fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided by the manufacturer. 
(6)  Lights. All vehicles covered under this section shall carry at least one (1) lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at least three hundred (300) feet in the direction in which the same are proceeding, and one (1) tail lamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible from at least three hundred (300) feet to the rear, and such lights required by this section shall be burning whenever such vehicles are in motion during the period from one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet ahead. 
(7)  Headgear. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall operate or ride upon any vehicle covered under this section unless such person is equipped with and wearing on the head a crash helmet of a type which complies with standards established by the state. All crash helmets shall consist of lining, padding and chin straps and be of the type as not to distort the view of the driver. 
(Code 1964, § 26-131) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 40-105. 
Sec. 23-399. - Safety helmet prerequisite to renting, leasing or lending. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, lease or lend any motorcycle, motorscooter, or motorbike to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without first ascertaining that such person or passenger is equipped with a type of safety helmet approved by the chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 26-132) 
Sec. 23-400. - Operator's license or permit prerequisite to use. 
    No person shall rent, lease or lend any motorcycle, motor scooter or motor bike without first ascertaining that such person possesses a valid state operator's license or permit for the operation of a motor vehicle upon the public streets and highways of this state. 
(Code 1964, § 26-133) 
Secs. 23-401-23-415. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - VEHICLE CONDITION, EQUIPMENT, ETC. 

Sec. 23-416. - Vehicle equipment generally. 
    Every vehicle operated within the city shall be equipped with such lights, brakes, signaling or warning devices, mirrors and other equipment as are required by the state law, all of which equipment shall be maintained in good, safe working condition. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle within the city, unless it is so equipped. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to use on any vehicle in the city any device or equipment which is prohibited by state law. 
(Code 1964, § 26-7) 
State Law reference- Equipment of vehicles, 47 O.S. § 12-101 et seq. 
Sec. 23-417. - Muffler noise and smoke abatement equipment. 
    Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noises and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a street. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in any manner which will amplify or increase the noise or sound emitted louder than that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle. 
(Code 1964, § 26-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-402. 
Sec. 23-418. - Inspection sticker. 
(a)  No person shall drive or move on any highway any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers, semitrailers or pole trailers, or ancient vehicles which are not used primarily incidental to historical or exhibition purposes only or which have been modified from their original state of manufacture by changes or modifications to the engine and/or chassis, which are licensed by the Oklahoma Tax Commission and operated on the streets or highways of this state or any combination thereof, unless the equipment upon any and every vehicle is in good working order and adjustment as required in O.S. tit. 47 and the vehicle is bearing an official inspection sticker and is in such safe mechanical condition as not to endanger the driver or other occupant of any vehicle upon the highway. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any manufactured home which requires a permit to be moved upon the highways of this state; nor shall the provisions of this section apply to any ancient vehicle which has not been modified from its original state of manufacture. Ancient vehicles shall be exempt from retrofitted pollution control devices. 
(Code 1964, § 26-57) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 851. 
Sec. 23-419. - State vehicle license. 
    It shall be an offense for any person to operate a motor vehicle of any kind upon the streets or highways within the city without a state vehicle license as may be required by law of the state, or to fail to display the state vehicle license as may be required by law of the state. 
(Code 1964, § 26-26) 
State Law reference- Vehicle license and registration, 47 O.S. § 22 et seq. 
Sec. 23-420. - Loads on vehicles. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(b)  No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load unless such load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent such covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, or other loose material susceptible to blowing or otherwise escaping shall have such load covered so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of such load from the vehicle. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry or agricultural products only except baled agricultural products, provided that any such truck shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent such livestock or poultry from escaping therefrom. 
(Code 1964, § 22-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 14-105. 
Sec. 23-421. - Child restraint devices. 
    Every driver, when transporting a child under eight (8) years of age in a motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways located within the City of Miami, Oklahoma, shall provide for the protection of said child by properly using a child passenger restraint system in the manner provided by Oklahoma State Law at 47 O.S. § 11-1112, as the same is in effect now and as may be subsequently amended by the State Legislature. Any person who violates this provision shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of $50.00 plus court costs. The fine shall be suspended and the court costs limited to a maximum of $15.00 in the case of the first offense upon proof of purchase or acquisition by loan of a child passenger restraint system. 
(Ord. No. 1284, § 1(26-63.1), 9-18-89; Ord. No. 1650, § 1, 11-3-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1112. 
Sec. 23-422. - Safety belts. 
(a)  Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated in this city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat belt system, required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208. For the purposes of this section, "passenger car" shall mean "vehicle" as defined in 47 O.S. § 1102, except that "passenger car" shall not include trucks, truck tractors, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, motorized bicycles or vehicles used primarily for farm use and licensed pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 1134. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a passenger car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written verification from a physician licensed in this state that he is unable to wear a safety seat belt system for medical reasons. Provided, the issuance of such verification by a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall such physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in damages or otherwise, to any person injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt system. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is a route carrier of the United States Postal Service. 
(d)  Fine and court costs for violating this section shall not exceed $20.00. 
(Ord. No. 1283, § 1(26-63), 9-18-89; Ord. No. 1372, § 1, 11-3-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-417. 
Secs. 23-423-23-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MISCELLANEOUS RULES 

Sec. 23-441. - Unattended vehicles. 
    No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the roadway. 
(Code 1964, § 26-85) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1101. 
Sec. 23-442. - Limitations on backing. 
    No vehicle shall be backed upon any street except for such distance as may be necessary to permit the vehicle to enter the proper driving lane from a parked position. Such backing shall be done only after the driver of the vehicle has ascertained that such movement can be made without endangering other traffic. 
(Code 1964, § 26-49) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1102. 
Sec. 23-443. - Riding on motorcycles, etc. 
    No person shall drive a motorcycle, motor scooter, or a motorbicycle while transporting more than one (1) passenger, except a motorcycle, motor scooter or motorbicycle factory-designed for the purpose of carrying additional passengers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1103. 
Sec. 23-444. - Hindrance of driver; capacity of school buses. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(c)  No school bus shall be operated on the streets or highways in the city when loaded with passengers in excess of the number of which such bus is designed to carry. The number of passengers, as determined by the local school board, which the bus is designed to carry shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the bus. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1104. 
Sec. 23-445. - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so; nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1105. 
Sec. 23-446. - Coasting. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle when traveling on a downgrade shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral. 
(b)  The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a downgrade shall not coast with the clutch disengaged. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1107. 
Sec. 23-447. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any emergency vehicle or shall not purposely drive to any location on a highway where an emergency exists which would interfere with the free movement of authorized emergency vehicles or any other traffic using the highway at that location. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the definition of emergency shall include traffic accidents, airplane accidents, disasters, explosions, civil disturbances and (without limitation by the foregoing) any other related circumstances which tend to cause traffic congestion. 
(c)  The purpose of this section is to eliminate sightseers and other persons who do not have official business at the scene of an emergency, and whose presence would tend to cause traffic congestion. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1108. 
Sec. 23-448. - Driving over fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1964, § 26-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1109. 
Sec. 23-449. - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1964, § 26-48) 
Sec. 23-450. - Obstructing traffic. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon or in any street in such manner as to unnecessarily interfere with or interrupt the free passage of other vehicles or hold up traffic. 
(Code 1964, § 26-88) 
Sec. 23-451. - Driving through parade or procession. 
    No vehicle, except apparatus and vehicles of the fire and police departments, vehicles carrying the United States mail, and ambulances engaged in emergency work, shall be driven through any funeral procession, parade or other procession. 
(Code 1964, § 26-50) 
Sec. 23-452. - Driving in sidewalk area. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1964, § 26-52) 
Sec. 23-453. - Putting glass, etc., on highway. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substances likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such highway. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such vehicle. 
(d)  No person shall throw any substance at a standing vehicle or any occupant thereof, nor shall any person throw any substance at a person on or adjacent to a highway. 
(Code 1964, § 26-10) 
Cross reference- Littering from vehicles, § 15-81. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1110. 
Sec. 23-454. - Golf carts for use by hospital personnel-Transportation of patients. 
(a)  Golf carts shall be allowed to transport patients between their attending physician's medical building and the hospital, provided that the following subsections are strictly observed: 
(1)  Golf carts are to be operated during daylight hours only. Daylight hours are from sun up to sun down. 
(2)  Flashing lights, extended flags, or other similar warning device is to be attached to the golf cart at all times to alert others to the carts presence. 
(3)  Safety belts are to be utilized by transported patients at all times. 
(4)  Carts are to adhere to an established cart path as established by the city police chief. 
(b)  Failure to abide by the provisions in paragraph (a) will constitute a misdemeanor and will be punishable by a $50.00 fine and subsequent court costs. 
(Ord. No. 1422, § 1, 6-18-01) 
Chapter 24 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Plumbing code, § 6-376 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Tampering, etc., with utility service. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Utility shall mean any person or district, whether private, municipal, body politic or cooperative, which is engaged in the sale, generation, distribution, or delivery of electricity, water, sewer or gas. 
(2)  Utility service shall mean the furnishing, sale, generation, distribution or delivery of electricity, water, sewer or gas by a utility. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to defraud a utility, to: 
(1)  Alter, tamper with, injure or knowingly allow the altering, tampering with or injuring of any pipeline, line, wire, conduit, conductor, meter, meter seal, transformer or other equipment used by a utility to deliver or register service. 
(2)  Prevent any installed metering device from registering correctly the quantity of service passing through such metering device. 
(3)  Make or cause to be made any connection between pipelines, lines, wires, conduits, conductors, meters, transformers or other equipment in such manner as to prevent the correct registration of service by any metering device, or to otherwise use electricity without the consent of the utility. 
(4)  Supply of cause to be supplied any utility service to any person without such service first passing through the metering device provided for the utility for measuring and registering the quantity of service. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to licensed and certified contractors while performing usual and ordinary service in accordance with recognized standards. 
(d)  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. A person convicted of violating this section shall be required to make restitution to the utility, along with all other punitive measures the city municipal court may impose. If the utility is a city utility the person convicted shall also be required to reimburse the city for the expenses incurred by the city correcting the violation. 
(Code 1964, §§ 13-1, 13-22; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1494, § 2, 12-5-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1494, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2005, renumbered §§ 24-1-24-10 as §§ 24-164-24-173. Section 2 of said ordinance reenacted the provisions of § 24-1 as set out prior to the amendment of Ord. No. 1488, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 2005. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 71 O.S. § 23. 
Sec. 24-2. - [Community development block grant funding requirements.] 
    It shall be required that any entity connecting its facilities to utilities of the City of Miami or the Miami Public Utilities Authority which utilities are Community Development Block Grant - Economic Development Infrastructure financed and funded infrastructure improvements shall as a condition of said connection enter an agreement to provide job tracking data to the City of Miami as a condition of attaching or connecting to the utility improvement. 
(Ord. No. 1456, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 24-3. - Right of entry. 
    Every person owning, leasing, operating or in possession of any building or structure receiving City of Miami utility service must provide reasonable access for the Utility Department to enter upon the grounds for the purpose of installing, maintaining, or reading water and electrical meters, and it shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or lessee of any premises to prevent or to refuse to permit such entry. Reasonable access includes, but is not limited to, providing entrance to private roads or fields if this entry is required to install, read or maintain water or electrical meters. The Utility Department shall, upon request of the owner, occupant or lessee of any premises, exhibit their authority to make such entry. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, 4-2-2019) 
Secs. 24-4-24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATES AND CHARGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-26. - Established. 
    The following rates and charges are hereby established and shall be collected monthly from all consumers of utility services furnished by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-26.1. - Exceptions for employees. 
    Any and all residential rates for electric, water, sewer and solid waste usage and services provided by Miami Special Utility Authority (MSUA) hereinafter set forth shall be reduced by twenty percent (20%) for the following: 
(1)  This reduced rate shall apply for the primary residence of all full-time employees of the city, or any other employee approved by the city council, including the department of public utilities receiving the above-mentioned utilities/services, provided that said employee was hired by the city on or before June 30, 2018. 
(2)  This discount will not apply in any manner to probationary employees, temporary part-time employees, employees not receiving utilities or services supplied by the city and elected or appointed officials. 
(3)  This discount will extend to retired employees hired by the city on or before June 30, 2018, qualifying for and receiving authorized retirement benefits. It will also extend to the surviving spouse of the deceased full-time employee hired by the city on or before June 30, 2018 who dies during their eligible service period so long as the surviving spouse owns/rents a residence in question and remains unmarried and is not cohabitating with another. 
(4)  Provided, however, if any qualified city employee hired on or before June 30, 2018, retires on or before June 30, 2023, and is vested at that time, said employee will continue to receive the discount as long as he/she continues to otherwise qualify under the requirements set forth herein. Any qualified city employee hired on or before June 30, 2018, who retires on or after July 1, 2023, shall no longer receive the discount as of the effective date of the retirement. 
(5)  Provided, further, if any qualified city employee, retiree or surviving spouse should move their primary residence outside of the MSUA service area, they will forever lose this benefit, and even if they should later move their primary residence back into the MSUA service area, this benefit will not be reinstated. 
(Ord. No. 1336, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 6-26-2018) 
Sec. 24-27. - Purpose, intent. 
    The following rates and charges are designated to produce revenue sufficient to properly and adequately maintain the utility systems according to reasonable standards of capacity and reliability. The intent and basis for the rate design is to provide for equitable charges, insofar as is practical, for each customer classification and for each individual customer; based on the character of loads served and the resultant costs of providing the services. 
(Code 1964, § 13-2; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-28. - Service deposits required. 
(a)  All applications for new electrical, sewer, sanitation and water service require a minimum deposit and are defined as follows: 
(1)  Residential accounts: 
a.  Homeowner(s) and lessee(s) not currently in the City of Miami billing data base ..... $150.00 
b.  Person(s) who are not in good standing shall be required to pay two (2) times the average monthly bill determined with reference to the most recent twelve (12) month period in which the premises were occupied. 
(2)  Commercial accounts: 
a.  Twice the expected average monthly bill as estimated by the utility. 
(3)  Landlords of rental property: 
a.  Need not put up a deposit if the landlord is in good payment standing as determined by the utility. If not in good standing, the deposit for the applicable residential or commercial account will apply. 
When the deposit required is more than $100.00, the requirement may be satisfied by one (1) of the following alternatives: 
(1)  A certificate of deposit properly assigned; 
(2)  An unconditional letter of credit from a federally insured financial institution. 
(3)  Letters of Good Standing: 
a.  Residential Accounts -Letter of good standing from the requester's previous utility company, applicable only to residential accounts. 
b.  All Other Account Types -Letter of good standing from three (3) entities doing business with the requester. 
(b)  The utility board shall have the authority to establish policies that shall be applied equally throughout the service to refund the deposits required in this section to those customers who qualify for the same under the policies established by the utility board. 
(Code 1964, § 13-5; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 1413, § 1, 11-6-00; Ord. No. 1549, § 1, 10-19-09; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1664, 12-6-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06, 4-18-2017, eff. 7-1-2017) 
Sec. 24-29. - Billing period defined. 
    The billing period may be referred to as "month" or "billing month." The intent is to represent a period of approximately thirty (30) days between regular meter readings irrespective of calendar months. The first bill may be for services spanning less than 30 days. 
(Code 1964, § 13-6; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 24-30. - Effective date of certain rate schedules. 
    The rate schedules set out in sections 24-36, 24-37, 24-57 through 24-61, and 24-82 shall be in effect thirty (30) days from the adoption of Ordinance No. 1436 (October 15, 2001) by the city council and shall be applied to all December 2001 and subsequent months' usage beginning with January 2002 billings and on all billings thereafter until otherwise amended by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 13-7; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-30.4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-08, § 2, adopted May 16, 2017, repealed § 24-30.4, which pertained to utility board-Adjustments to rates and derived from Code 1964, § 13-15.3; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, adopted April 16, 1990; Ord. No. 1373, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 1997; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, adopted Oct. 15, 2001; Ord. No. 1480, § 1, adopted June 21, 2004. 
Sec. 24-30.5. - Utility board-Rate incentives. 
    Other provisions of this article notwithstanding, the utility board shall have the authority to negotiate with any prospective commercial customer or any existing commercial customer who increases its load by such an amount as to qualify for a rate incentive for such loads from the city's power supplier, in order to reduce that customer's rates so as to pass all or a part of that rate incentive on to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 1, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-31. - Use of service without payment. 
    Any person using water, electrical energy or sewer services from the department of public utilities without paying, or who shall be found guilty of breaking the seal of any meter, switch or valve, or who shall install any piping or wiring, make connections, or attach wires, or any electrical device or appliance to wires in a manner so that electrical energy or water may be used without being supplied under the terms of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be required to make restitution to the city, along with any other punitive measures as determined by the court. 
(Code 1964, § 13-22; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-32. - Due date for bills; penalty for late payment. 
    All accounts provided for by this article, together with the charge for solid waste services and other services furnished by and billed by the city shall be due and payable monthly on or before the due date printed on the customer bill. If a bill is not paid when due, ten percent (10%) will be added monthly to the unpaid balance thereon. This late charge may be waived at the discretion of the city manager or his designee for appropriate circumstances. 
(Code 1964, § 13-18; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 1342, § 1, 1-15-96; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 24-33. - Interruption of service for failure to pay and discontinuance and final billing. 
(a)  Interruption of service for failure to pay. It shall be the duty of the city manager or designee to cause any utility service furnished to any person to be interrupted, without further notice, if such person shall fail, refuse or neglect to pay on or before ten (10) days following the due date in which such utility service is furnished by the city. During the event of this process the following actions and fees may apply: 
(1)  A delinquent call/text notification will be administered the next business day following the corresponding monthly due date and a fee equal to the city's computer system cost will be applied to all applicably tried accounts. The notification call/text will notify the customer of the intended cutoff date unless payment in full is received. 
(2)  If a utility service bill is not fully paid on or before the tenth (10 th ) day following a billing due date, utility service will be interrupted for nonpayment and the utility account charged the dispatch-interrupt fee at the time the account is placed in the queue for utility service interruption. 
(3)  If a utility service is interrupted pursuant to this section, the city, or its agents shall not restore the utility service until the full amount of the outstanding utility service bill with penalties provided in this section, and any applicable utility service charges to restore the service is paid. 
(b)  Discontinuance and Final Billing. The city manager or designee shall, in one (1) weeks' time from making the above interruption, discontinue the utility service and compute the amount due the city, with penalties thereon. They shall also credit the account with any monies, credit, or deposit in the hands of the city deposited by any such person as a meter deposit. If, thereafter, any such person shall request the city restore or re-establish utility services, such person shall pay all charges in arrears and pay a new meter deposit as is required by the city prior to dispatching for the connection/restore. 
(Code 1964, § 13-19; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 2017-06, 4-18-2017, eff. 7-1-2017) 
Sec. 24-34. - Failure to receive statement. 
    The failure of any customer to receive a statement for any utility charges provided for in this article shall not excuse the customer from their obligation to pay such charges within the time specified in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 13-20; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-35. - Account dispatch fees. 
    A customer's utility service account will be assessed the following dispatch fees: 
Description Fee Dispatch-Connect during business hours $55.00 Dispatch-Interrupt during business hours $55.00 Dispatch-Restore during business hours $55.00 Dispatch-Connect after business hours $125.00 Dispatch-Restore after business hours $125.00 Dispatch-Re-read $55.00  
    If no additional dispatch is required to restore utility service, the above fee will be waived. 
    Any dispatch fee may be waived upon the written recommendation of the customer service department head or designee. Any waivers will be reported to council at their next regular meeting. 
(Code 1964, § 13-21; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 2017-06, 4-18-2017, eff. 7-1-2017) 
Sec. 24-36. - Water service rate schedule. 
(a)  Availability. Water service schedule WS-587 shall be available to all locations in the service area of this utility. 
(b)  Application. The rates prescribed in this schedule shall apply to all customers taking water service from this utility. 
(c)  Metering. Water service to a customer will be measured through a single meter in a location on public right-of-way, or the customer's premises, to be agreed upon by the customer and the utility. 
(d)  Net monthly rates. 
(1)  Residential minimum monthly charge shall be as follows: 
Meter size Effective Nov-18 Effective Oct-19 Effective Oct-20 Effective Oct-21 Min Charge ?" OR 3/4" $12.56 $14.44 $15.89 $16.20  
(2)  Residential volume rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons shall be as follows: 
Usage Charge Effective Nov-18 Effective Oct-19 Effective Oct-20 Effective Oct-21 From To 1,000 5,000 $5.01 $5.77 $6.34 $6.47 5,001 20,000 $6.52 $7.50 $8.25 $8.41 20,001 above $8.02 $9.22 $10.14 $10.34  
(3)  Commercial and municipal volume rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons shall be as follows: 
Usage Charge Effective 
Nov-18 Effective 
Oct-19 Effective 
Oct-20 Effective 
Oct-21 $5.88 $6.76 $7.43 $7.58  
(4)  The office of the city manager shall maintain a chart of current rates and subsequent rate increases ordained herein. 
(e)  Minimum charge. The minimum monthly bill is based on meter size for residential, municipal and commercial meters as follows: 
(1)  The following rates shall be effective the first day of the following dates: 
Min Charge Effective Nov-18 Effective Oct-19 Effective Oct-20 Effective Oct-21 ?" OR 3/4" $12.56 $14.44 $15.89 $16.20 1" $18.27 $21.01 $23.12 $23.58 2" $45.67 $52.52 $57.77 $58.92 3" $137.00 $157.55 $173.30 $176.77 4" $194.09 $223.20 $245.52 $250.43 6" $479.48 $551.40 $606.54 $618.67  
(f)  Fire protection service. Where distribution system capacity is available, fire protection service for sprinkler systems, etc., will be provided upon written request by the customer. The customer will reimburse the utility for actual expenses incurred in the initial installation. In addition, the customer will pay a monthly charge according to the following rates: 
Size 
2-inch line ..... $5.00 
4-inch line ..... 15.00 
6-inch line ..... 20.00 
8-inch line ..... 25.00 
10-inch line ..... 35.00 
An additional fee of $25.00 shall be charged for each two-inch line increase above a ten-inch line. 
In lieu of an additional tap fee, an additional $100.00 shall be charged any time the system is activated by fire or tested by the customer. 
(g)  Meter tap charges. The following rates will apply to new meter taps: 
Size 
3/4 inch ..... $490.00 
1 inch ..... 680.00 
2 inch ..... 2,350.00 
Larger than two (2) inch subject to time and materials cost estimate by city. 
(h)  Seasonal meters. The following rates for installation will apply to seasonal meters: 
Size 
3/4" and under ..... $150.00 
Larger than 3/4"-Installed on a time and materials cost basis only. 
(i)  Minimum bill. The minimum monthly bill, as outlined in subsection 24-36(e), will only be assessed when the monthly consumption on a seasonal meter registers one thousand (1,000) gallons or more. 
(Code 1964, § 13-16; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. 1369, § 1, 10-20-97; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1450, § 1, 6-17-02; Ord. No. 1554, § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 2018-14, § 1, 10-2-2018; Ord. No. 2018-16, § 1, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 24-37. - Sanitary sewer rate. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  City shall mean the City of Miami, Oklahoma, together with all its governing and operational bodies. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer system shall mean all facilities for collection, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewaters. 
(3)  Use shall mean the monthly gallonage of water billed to any user of the sanitary sewer system as measured through the water meter. 
(4)  User shall mean any person, establishment or owner who discharges sewage into the sanitary sewer system of the City or any sanitary sewer system connected thereto, or which ultimately reaches and discharges into the sanitary sewer system of the City. 
(5)  User charge shall mean a charge on a user of the sanitary sewer system for the cost of improvements, extensions, operations, maintenance and replacement of such sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Establishing rates . Each user of the sanitary sewer system shall be charge the following rates per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water usage commencing on the following dates: 
Usage Charge Effective 
Nov-18 Effective 
Oct-19 Effective 
Oct-20 Effective 
Oct-21 Residential $6.07 $6.98 $7.68 $7.83 Commercial and municipal $6.07 $6.98 $7.68 $7.83  
(c)  Excessive strength charges. Users shall be charged a surcharge for excessive strength waste when the user's waste discharge biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) exceeds two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, or when the user's waste discharge suspended solids exceeds two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. The surcharge shall be calculated by the following formula: 
Cs = [Bc (B) + Sc (S) + Pc (P)] Vu 
(Based on Model No. 2, 40 CFR 35, Appendix E) 
Symbols and definitions: 
Cs = A surcharge for wastewaters of excessive strength. Bc = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). B = Concentration of BOD from a user above a base level. Sc = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of suspended solids (SS). S = Concentration of SS from a user above a base level. PC = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of any pollutant. P = Concentration of any pollutant from a user above a base level. Vu = Volume contribution from a user per unit of time.  
(d)  Disposition of funds. The funds derived from the sewer use charges shall be deposited in the general revenues of the department of public utilities to be used for the maintenance, repair, operation, expansion, replacement or reconstruction of the sanitary sewer system. 
(e)  Records. The department of public utilities shall maintain proper and adequate records to reflect the costs of providing sanitary sewer service and to document compliance with federal regulations pertaining to this section and shall review said costs with federal regulations pertaining to this section and shall review said costs biannually and adjust as necessary the user charge system to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and user classes; 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the treatment works; and 
(3)  Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year, and the rates shall be adjusted accordingly. 
(f)  Toxic pollutants charges. Each user that discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the treatment works shall pay for such increased costs. 
(g)  Charges for extraneous flows. The costs of operation and maintenance for all flows not directly attributable to users (such as infiltration/inflow) shall be distributed among users on the same basis as operation and maintenance charges. 
(h)  Charges for unmetered water to sewer. Users may be charged a surcharge for unmetered water entering the sanitary sewer. 
(1)  This includes but is not limited to: roof drains, driveway drains, surface drains, area drains, open or leaking service lines, any water which does not pass through the customer water service meter (unmetered). 
(2)  The monthly surcharge shall be based on the following formula: ($0.55 per 100 square feet of area drained) = monthly charge. 
(Code 1964, § 13-16.1; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 1369, § 1, 10-20-97; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1554, § 2, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 2018-15, § 1, 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 24-38. - No statement fee and meter re-read. 
(a)  A utility customer shall submit the billing statement with tender of payment. If the utility customer fails to comply with this requirement, then a $5.00 administrative fee shall be assessed. 
(b)  A utility customer may request a meter re-read. If the meter re-read indicates less usage than indicated on the billing statement, then no dispatch fee shall be assessed for the re-read. If the meter re-read indicates equivalent or greater usage than indicated on the billing statement, then the dispatch fee shall be assessed. 
(c)  One hundred thousand dollars of the accumulated funds from these assessments shall be transferred and budgeted for roadway maintenance for the fiscal year 2010-2011. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1563, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 2017-06, 4-18-2017, eff. 7-1-2017) 
Sec. 24-39. - Hydrant meter fees. 
    The following hydrant meter fees shall apply: 
(1)  Hydrant meter set up fee ..... $230.00 
(2)  Hydrant meter deposit ..... 1,300.00 
(3)  Hydrant meter minimum monthly fee ..... 100.00 
(4)  Hydrant meter move fee ..... 95.00 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 24-40. - Temporary rate adjustments. 
(a)  The electric service rate schedule established by section 24-64 (Billing Tables) of the Code of Ordinances shall be reduced by three percent (3%) for utility bills issued in the month of January, 2014, for the service period immediately preceding the utility bill. This temporary adjustment shall apply to customer usage only and shall not apply to that portion of such bills attributable to PPA (Purchase Power Adjustment), etc. 
(b)  The water service rate schedule established by section 24-36 (Water Service Rate Schedule), subparagraph (d) only, of the Code of Ordinances shall be reduced by five percent (5%) for utility bills issued in the month of January, 2014, for the service period immediately preceding the utility bill. This temporary adjustment shall apply to customer usage only. 
(c)  The sanitary sewer service rate schedule established by section 24-37 (Sanitary Service [Sewer] Rate), subparagraph (b) only, of the Code of Ordinances shall be reduced by five percent (5%) for utility bills issued in the month of January, 2014, for the service period immediately preceding the utility bill. 
(d)  This temporary adjustment shall apply to customer usage only. Any customer which has paid such bill(s) prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall receive an overpayment credit to their account for application to future billing. No cash refunds shall be issued. Late fees for this service period and this bill shall not begin to accrue until the next succeeding billing cycle. Any customer which has paid a January 2014 bill prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall receive an overpayment credit to their account for application to future billing. No cash refunds shall be issued. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to customers who are municipalities. 
(Ord. No. 1621, § 1, 2-4-14) 
Secs. 24-41-24-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICITY 

Sec. 24-57. - Residential electric service rate schedule. 
(a)  Application. The rates prescribed in this schedule shall apply to residential customers for all residential uses, but not for resale, standby, business or manufacturing service. 
(b)  Character of service. The service provided under this schedule shall be alternating current, 60 Hz, single-phase, 120/240 volts, unless otherwise specifically agreed to by the city, and with payment by the customer of any extra costs incurred by the city. 
(c)  Residential electric service billing rates are established by the billing tables established by Section 24-64 of this Division. 
(d)  Adjustments. This rate schedule will be adjusted by Section 24-60, Purchase Power Adjustment Schedule PPA. 
(e)  Single point delivery. The above rates and conditions are based on the supply of service at a single delivery and metering point at a single system voltage. Separate supply for the same customer at other points of delivery, or at other voltages, will be separately metered and billed. 
(Code 1964, § 13-11; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1553, § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 1646, § 1(B.), 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 1(B.), 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 24-58. - General service electric rate schedule. 
(a)  Application. The rates prescribed in this schedule shall apply to any commercial customer except churches whose electric load is not in excess of 25 kw for any use but not for resale or standby service, and to any church whose electric load is not in excess of 150 kw. 
(b)  Character of service. The service provided under this schedule shall be alternating current, 60 Hz, single-phase or three-phase where readily available. The voltages will include 120/240 volts single-phase, 120/208 volts wye or 240 volts delta, 277/480 volts wye or 480 volts delta. The type (wye or delta) and voltage will be at the discretion of the utility. 
(c)  General service electric billing rates are established by the billing tables established by Section 24-64 of this Division. 
(d)  Adjustments. This rate schedule will be adjusted by Section 24-60, Purchase Power Adjustment Schedule PPA. 
(e)  Single point delivery. The above rates and conditions are based on the supply of service at a single delivery and metering point at a single system voltage. Separate supply for the same customer at other points of delivery, or at other voltages, will be separately metered and billed. 
(Code 1964, § 13-12; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1553, § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 1646, § 1(C.), 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 1(C.), 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 24-59. - Commercial and municipal service electric rate schedule. 
(a)  Application. The rates prescribed in this schedule shall be applicable to commercial, municipalities, institutional and industrial customers except churches with usage exceeding 25 kw and to churches with usage exceeding 150 kw in any month of the year, for all uses, but not for resale or standby service. The utility shall be the sole judge as to the applicability of this rate and may require a written contract. The term of service will not be less than one (1) year. 
(1)  Customers classified on this rate schedule whose electric load subsequently falls below and remains below the usage described in subsection (a) of this section may be reclassified to the general service electric rate during the fourth quarter of any year. 
(2)  This load shall not be highly fluctuating to the extent that it causes interferences with standard quality service to other customers. The customer will be expected to maintain a power factor of at least ninety-five percent (95%) lagging. 
(b)  Character of service. The service provided under this schedule shall be alternating current, 60 Hz, single-phase, or three-phase where readily available. Three-phase service under this schedule is available at standard nominal voltages. The type (wye or delta) three-phase service supplied will be, finally, at the discretion of the utility. 
(c)  Commercial service electric billing rates are established by the billing tables established by Section 24-64 of this Division. 
(d)  Determination of demand. For billing purposes, the monthly demand shall be defined as the integrated load during the fifteen-minute period of greatest load in the billing month. 
(e)  Metering. Appropriate indicating meters will be furnished by the city to measure the energy delivered and the maximum kilowatt demand for the month. The reactive demand will be measured at appropriate intervals with temporary or permanent meters at the city's election. 
(f)  Adjustments. The following adjustments shall be made under this schedule: 
(1)  The demand will be increased by one percent (1%) for each one percent (1%) that the monthly peak hour power factor falls below ninety-five percent (95%) lagging and unity. 
(2)  Adjustments. This rate schedule will be adjusted by Section 24-60, Purchase Power Adjustment Schedule PPA. 
(g)  Single point delivery. The rates and conditions set out in this section are based on the supply of service at a single delivery and metering point at a single voltage. Separate supply for the same customer at other points of delivery or at other voltages will be separately metered and billed. 
(Code 1964, § 13-13; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1553, § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 1646, § 1(D.), 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 1653, § 1(A., B.), 11-17-2015; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 1(D.), 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 24-60. - Purchase power adjustment schedule PPA. 
(a)  Application. The rates prescribed in this schedule shall apply to all service furnished under rate schedules RS, GS, CS and IS. 
(b)  Method. The sale price of each kWh of energy sold will be adjusted monthly by the purchase power adjustment factor (PPA) for changes in the cost of energy purchased by the city from GRDA or other power supplier(s). The factor will be calculated from the following formula: 
If positive Adjusted PCA then PPA = PCA/kwH consumed multiplied by 1.1 
If negative Adjusted PCA then PPA = 0 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
i.  PCA shall mean the power cost adjustment surcharge, or credit, on the power supplier(s) invoice. 
ii.  Adjusted PCA shall mean the PCA adjusted by the staff to offset the wholesale power cost rate change of April 1, 2019. 
iii.  kWh consumed refers to the invoice item of the same name on the GRDA, or other power supplier's invoice for purchased power. 
iv.  PPA shall mean the purchase power adjustment factor in cents per kWh. The PPA will be calculated and modified monthly and will be based upon the power cost adjustment in the most recent billing period. 
v.  Electric Utility CIP : Any decrease in the monthly bill to the City for power and/or energy from the GRDA, or other power supplier, as the result of a negative PCA power cost adjustment, will be retained by the Municipal Special Utility Authority in a utility capital improvements plan (CIP) fund to be utilized for electric utility improvements. 
(Code 1964, § 13-15; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1511, § 1, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 2017-09, § 1, 5-16-2017; Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 4-2-2019) 
Sec. 24-61. - Private area lighting schedule PAL. 
(a)  Application. The rates prescribed in this schedule are for exterior lighting service for any customer where lighting equipment can be installed on conventional overhead electric facilities of the utility. 
(b)  Availability. This schedule shall be available to all locations in the service area of the utility. 
(c)  Character of service. The utility will install, own, operate and maintain a lighting unit designed to operate from dusk to dawn. 
(d)  Net monthly rate. The following shall be the net monthly rates imposed under this schedule: 
Rate Schedule Rate Effective Dates Rate Code Description 07/01/10 PI Wood and Steel Pole Initial Installation Cost (one time cost, before installation) 112.50 Wood and Steel Pole Monthly Fee (incorporated into the Rate Codes) SP One Span of Wire 150 feet or less 0.55 15-RHA 150 W High Pressure Sodium Roadway Luminaire on Existing City of Miami Pole 12.00 15-RH-B 150 W High Pressure Sodium Roadway Luminaire on New City of Miami Wood Pole 15.00 4-RH-A 400 W High Pressure Sodium Roadway Luminaire on Existing City of Miami Pole 18.30 4 RH 8 400 W High Pressure Sodium Roadway Luminaire on New City of Miami Wood Pole 21.70 4-FMA 400 W Metal Halide Flood Luminaire on Existing City of Miami Pole 18.90 4 FM 8 400 W Metal Halide Flood Luminaire on New City of Miami Wood Pole 22.30 4-FM-C 400 W Metal Halide Flood Luminaire on New City of Miami Steel Pole 29.30 4-FNA 400 W High Pressure Sodium Flood Luminaire on Existing City of Miami Pole 18.00 4-FH-B 400 W High Pressure Sodium Flood Luminaire on New City of Miami Wood Pole 21.40 4 FH C 400 W High Pressure Sodium Flood Luminaire on New City of Miami Steel Pole 28.70 10-FMA 1000 W Metal Halide Flood Luminaire on Existing City of Miami Pole 33.25 10-FM-B 1000 W Metal Halide Flood Luminaire on New City of Miami Wood Pole 36.25 10-FM-C 1000 W Metal Halide Flood Luminaire on New City of Miami Steel Pole 42.50 10-FH-A 1000 W High Pressure Sodium Flood Luminaire on Existing City of Miami Pale 32.50 10-FH-B 1000 W High Pressure Sodium Flood Luminaire on New City of Miami Wood Pole 35.50 10-FH-C 1000 W High Pressure Sodium Flood Luminaire on New City of Miami Steel Pole 41.75  
Notes: 
1.  The cost for New City of Miami Steel and Wood Poles is included in the Luminaire Rate Codes. 
2.  The "SP" (span of wire) rate is for placing luminaries on existing poles that do not have secondary voltage available. 
3.  The "PI" rate is currently a $112.50 charge for the initial installation of a wood or steel pole and the per month fee is incorporated into the rate codes. 
4.  RH = Roadway luminaire and high pressure sodium type. 
5.  FM = Flood luminaire and metal halide type. 
6.  FH = Flood luminaire and high pressure sodium type. 
7.  A = On Existing City of Miami Pole (we don't have to install a pole, we use an existing one). 
8.  B = On New City of Miami Wood Pole. 
9.  C = On New City of Miami Steel Pole. 
(e)  Cost of installing poles. If any additional pole is required for installation of requested lighting, this pole will be set with a charge to the customer of $100.00 per pole in advance. The utility shall maintain ownership of all poles so installed. 
(f)  Billing. Charges under this schedule will be listed separately on the regular utility bill. Where no other service is provided by the utility, a separate bill will be issued. If a unit is inoperative after three (3) working days following notification of the utility by the customer, the monthly charge will be adjusted according to the duration of the outage following notification. 
(g)  Change of location. If a customer requests a change in the location of an existing installation under this schedule, the customer shall pay the cost of moving with a minimum charge of $50.00. 
(Code 1964, § 13-15.1; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 1406, § 1, 2-7-00; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 24-61.1. - Residential surge protection. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the residential surge protection program (RSPP) is to provide residential customers of the city utility service a mechanism to protect their home appliances from potentially damaging electrical surges. This program is offered on a strictly voluntary basis, and is available to utility customers as either a lease program, whereby utility customers pay a fee every month for surge protection equipment, or the surge protection system can be directly purchased from the City of Miami. 
(b)  Availability. Both the lease and purchase programs shall be available to all residential locations in the service area of the utility. 
(c)  Procedure for establishing service. Any customer that desires to install surge protection equipment in their home on either a lease or purchase option shall first order the start-up kit, which contains the basic surge protection equipment needed to protect major appliances in the home. Additional surge protection devices can be obtained from the utility according to the customer's needs by the customer purchasing or leasing the additional units. The first step of the installation (see "installation fee" in Table 1) is to perform a ground system integrity test for interested customers. This test is designed to determine if the customer's electrical grounding system meets the minimum requirements as established by the National Electric Code. Any improvements to the customer's utility system necessary to establish this service shall be the responsibility of the customer, and shall be done in compliance with the National Electrical Code. Once the customer's electrical grounding system tests adequately (less than twenty-five (25) Ohms of resistance), the utility shall install the surge protection meter base unit designed to protect customers' electrical system from transient voltages and voltage spikes. After installation of the surge protection meter base, the installation of the indoor surge protection equipment shall follow. This is the responsibility of the individual consumer. Utility personnel will assist on a limited basis if necessary. 
(d)  Purchase program warranty. The purchasing customer shall be responsible for contacting the surge protection manufacturer in the event of sacrificial operation or damage claims, as outlined in the warranty provided with the surge protection equipment. 
(e)  Lease program warranty. The leasing customer shall be responsible for contacting the surge protection manufacturer in the event of any damage claim, as outlined in the warranty provided with the surge protection equipment. In the event of sacrificial operation, where the device is damaged while protecting the customer's system, the customer is required to contact the utility for a replacement. 
(f)  Utility board adjustment to rates. Based on the cost of the surge protection units and the labor to install, the utility board as it deems advisable, may apply a cost adjustment of plus/minus ten percent (10%) to any and all of the surge protection device lease fees, purchase fees, and/or the installation fees. 
(1)  Residential surge protection lease program. 
a.  Lease rates. The rates prescribed in Table 1 are for leasing of surge protection equipment in residential applications only, and only in instances where the surge protection equipment is determined feasible to be installed by utility personnel. 
Table 1 
Rate Code Lease Rates and Fees SP-INS Installation Fee 
(After 2 month free installation introductory offer) $40.00 Lease Rates for Surge Protection Kit SP-N Monthly fee if installation is paid at the time of program start-up 6.50/mo. SP-F Monthly fee for the first year if installation is not paid at the time of program start-up 
($6.50 after the first 12 months) 11.00/mo.  
b.  Monthly lease fees for additional surge protection devices. The following items listed in Table 2 are monthly lease fees for additional surge protection equipment available from the city utility. 
Table 2 
Rate Code Description of Device Monthly Lease Fees for Additional Surge Protection Devices SP-8 8 Receptacle Strip $3.75 SP-8C 8 Receptacle Strip with Cable Protection 4.50 SP-8P 8 Receptacle Strip with Phone Protection 3.75 SP-8CP *8 Receptacle Strip with Cable & Phone Protection 4.50 SP-AS Appliance Shield 5.00 SP-3 3 Receptacle Unit 1.50 SP-1 *Single Outlet Unit 1.00 SP-1P *Single Outlet Unit with Phone Line Protection 1.00 SP-1C *Single Outlet Unit with Cable Line Protection 1.00 SP-C Cable TV Module 1.50 SP-P Phone Line Module 1.50 SP-GF Portable GFCI Adapter suitable for 2 or 3 wire apps 4.50 SP-P2 Two Line Telephone Protection 4.50  
* Indicates unit is included in Start-Up Kit 
c.  Cost of installation. The cost of installation for the requested surge protection kits will be as stated under Rate Code "SP-INS" in Table 1 above. All installations of purchased surge protection kits will be paid in advance. In the event the customer's ground system cannot achieve the twenty-five (25) Ohms or less requirement, the installation fee will be refunded. Regarding leased surge protection kits, the customer may forego the installation fee by electing to pay the fee outlined in Table 1 listed as Rate Code "SP-F" for the first year (twelve (12) months). After the first year, the customer will revert to the "SP-N" Rate Code. 
d.  Lease billing. Charges under this schedule will be listed separately on the regular utility bill. If a unit is inoperative after three (3) working days following notification of the utility by the customer, the monthly charge will be adjusted according to the duration the unit remained inoperable following notification. The replacement of surge protection devices will be according to the warranty. 
e.  Change of location. If a customer requests the utility to move the surge protection kit to a new location, for example the customer is moving to another address, under this schedule, the customer shall pay the cost of moving the system and ground system testing at the new location with the installation fee "SP-INS" outlined in Table 1. 
(2)  Residential surge protection purchase program. 
a.  Purchase rates. The rates prescribed in Table 3 are for the purchasing of surge protection equipment in residential applications only, where the surge protection equipment is determined feasible to be installed by utility personnel. All purchases will be paid for at the time of installation or at the time the customer receives additional protection devices. 
Table 3 
Purchase Cost of Individual Units 
Rate Codes Unit Description List Price SP-P HomeGuard Defender Plus - Start-Up Kit $300.00 SP-INS Installation Fee 40.00 Additional Protective Devices Available for Purchase One 8 Receptacle Strip 60.00 One 8 Receptacle Strip with Cable Protection 70.00 One 8 Receptacle Strip with Phone Protection 70.00 *One 8 Receptacle Strip with Cable & Phone Protection 80.00 Appliance Shield 40.00 One 3 Receptacle Unit 25.00 *One Single Outlet Unit 11.00 *One Single Outlet Unit with Phone Line Protection 13.00 *One Single Outlet Unit with Cable Line Protection 13.00 Cable TV Module 30.00 Telephone Line Module 30.00 Portable GFCI Adapter suitable for 2 or 3 wire apps 55.00 Two Line Telephone Protection 55.00  
* Indicates unit is included in Start-Up Kit 
(Ord. No. 1451, § 1, 6-17-02) 
Sec. 24-62. - Renewable resources-Net metering. 
A.  Net Metering-Definition: Net metering, is a single meter at the point of delivery that measures the amount of power the customer uses in a forwarded direction, and the same meter measures any excess amount generated by the customer, which is not consumed by the customer, in a reverse direction. 
B.  Application: Net metering is applicable to electric customers who desire to generate at least a portion of their energy requirements by operating a small electric generating system in parallel with the city's electric system. Customer's source of parallel generation may include, but not limited to windmills, water wheels, solar generators, geothermal devices, or other renewable resources. This schedule is not applicable to maintenance, backup, interruptible, supplementary or resale electric service. 
C.  Character of service: The customers generating connection shall be alternating current, 60 hertz, at the voltage and phasing of the city's established secondary distribution system at the location of the customer. 
D.  Billing: The Utility Billing Department will retain the maximum meter reading. At the end of the billing period: 
a.  If the meter reading is higher than that on record, the new reading is recorded and the usage is billed according to the customer's acceptable rate. 
b.  If, at the end of the billing period, the customer's meter reading is less than the maximum reading, then the energy amount is "0" and the customers electric charge is only the monthly "Customer Charge". 
E.  Conditions of service: The following terms and conditions shall apply to service under this schedule: 
a.  As with any other electrical device or service, the customer must apply for a City permit and have the generating facility inspected before startup. 
b.  The facilities of the customer shall meet the requirements of the National Electric Code, the National Electric Safety Code, and any municipal, county or state codes applicable. The city reserves the right to disconnect the facilities if safety or operating stability warrants. 
c.  The size of the generating facility shall be limited to 100 KW; and the maximum excess amount of KWH's the customer can generate back to the City's electric distribution system shall be 20,000 KWH or less per year. 
d.  There may be an additional administrative billing charge to cover the handling of negative meter readings. 
e.  The cost of any additional equipment or labor needed for the City to receive power generated by the customer will be borne by the customer. 
(Code 1964, § 13-15.2; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1624, § 1, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 3-7-2017, eff. 4-7-2017) 
Sec. 24-63. - Industrial service electrical rate schedule IS-1001. 
(a)  Application. Applicable to commercial, institutional and industrial customers at each single location with demand exceeding one thousand (1,000) kW in any month and with average total monthly energy consumption exceeding four hundred twenty-five thousand (425,000) kWh per month, established over twelve (12) billing cycles, for uses other than resale or standby service. For the purposes of this section "single location" is defined as any and all industrial property owned and operated by the qualified industrial customer within city's service system. 
    Customers classified on this rate schedule whose electric load subsequently falls below and remains below the load described above, may be reclassified to the commercial service electric rate set out in section 24-59 of this Code, during the fourth quarter of any year. 
    This load shall not be highly fluctuating to the extent that it causes interferences with standard quality service to other customers. The customer will be expected to maintain a power factor of at least ninety-five percent (95%) lagging. 
(b)  Character of service: AC, 60 Hz, three-phase. Three-phase service under this schedule is available at standard nominal voltages. The type (wye or delta) three-phase service supplied will be, finally, at the discretion of the utility. 
(c)  Industrial service electric billing rates are established by the billing tables established by Section 24-64 of this Division. 
(d)  Determination of demand. For billing purposes, the monthly demand shall be defined as the integrated load during the fifteen-minute period of greatest load in the billing month. 
(e)  Metering. Appropriate indicating meters will be furnished by the city to measure the energy delivered and the maximum kilowatt demand for the month. The reactive demand will be measured at appropriate intervals with temporary or permanent meters at the city's election. 
(f)  Adjustments. 
(1)  The demand will be increased by one percent (1%) for each one percent (1%) that the monthly peak hour power factor falls below ninety-five percent (95%) lagging and unity. 
(2)  Adjustments. This rate schedule will be adjusted by Section 24-60, Purchase Power Adjustment Schedule PPA. 
(g)  Point of delivery. The above rates and conditions are based on the supply of service at a single voltage and at a single metering point or at multiple delivery points. If service is applied to multiple delivery points, then each point will be separately metered and billed, except when it is technically possible to integrate the combined metering of the separate delivery points. If in the sole judgment of the utility it is more economically feasible to add an additional delivery/metering point not integrated with the single metering point, the kWh and kW demands of that meter will be combined with the single metering location. In any case, the customer charge will apply once to each metering point. 
(h)  Subsidiaries. 
(1)  Definition of a subsidiary company: A subsidiary company is one in which over half its ownership is initially controlled by a qualified industrial customer (hereinafter, QIC). Thus, for purposes of this section, 50.1% or greater ownership of a subsidiary company by a QIC is sufficient to qualify for an electrical rate adjustment, dependent upon this QIC-subsidiary relationship meeting the additional criteria established in the following section. At least 50.1% of the owners of the QIC must have controlling interest in the subsidiaries when service is initiated. 
(2)  Criteria for subsidiary company to receive electrical rate adjustment. In addition to the requirement of majority ownership by the QIC, the following criteria must be complied with in order to receive the subsidiary electrical rate adjustment: 
a.  The QIC shall demonstrate to the city manager that a direct connection exists between the production of the subsidiary company and the needs or requirements of the QIC. In other words, a causal connection must exist between parent and subsidiary in order for the subsidiary to qualify for the electrical rate adjustment. This interconnection between QIC and subsidiary company can be demonstrated by evidence that the subsidiary company supports or supplements the manufacturing output of the QIC company, either by producing components used by the QIC, providing services that facilitate the manufacturing output of the QIC, or provide some other key component of the QIC's manufacturing output. 
b.  Direct evidence must be provided to the city manager upon request that the parent company retains at least 50.1% control of the subsidiary company. This evidence shall be provided in the form of income tax returns, filings with the secretary of state's office, sworn affidavits, or other reliable means to insure that only those qualified and eligible for the subsidiary rate adjustment shall receive it. 
c.  The subsidiary company must employ twenty (20) personnel by the end of its third year of operation, and maintain this minimum number every year thereafter in order to maintain eligibility for the electrical rate adjustment. 
d.  The subsidiary company must be a new business, requesting service after June 1, 2001, either utilizing an existing facility or opening in a new building. 
(3)  Adjustments based on percentage of ownership of the subsidiary company - Majority and minority. 
a.  Majority owned subsidiary: To initially qualify for the subsidiary electric rate adjustment, the subsidiary company must be majority owned (defined as 50.1% of ownership or greater) by the QIC. A majority owned subsidiary would be eligible to receive the Majority Industrial Subsidiary Rate established by the billing tables of Section 24-64 of this division. 
b.  Minority owned subsidiary: To qualify for the Minority subsidiary electric rate, the subsidiary company must have initially qualified as stated above, but the ownership has fallen below 50.1%, but not less than 40.1%. A qualified minority owned subsidiary would be eligible to receive the Minority Industrial Subsidiary Rate established by the billing tables of Section 24-64 of this division. 
(i)  Management discretion. In the event the amendments made hereto on January 6th, 2015, shall result in a billing dispute or claim, then the City Manager may, in his sole and exclusive discretion, for good cause shown, make a favorable adjustment to the customer's account as of and commencing October, 2014. 
(Ord. No. 1373, § 1, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 1392, § 1, 4-5-99; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1553, § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 1632, § 1, 1-20-2015; Ord. No. 1646, § 1(E.), 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 1(E.), 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 24-64. - Billing tables. 
    The following billing tables shall provide the rate schedule for Electric service. The columns labeled 'customer charge' provide for a charge in addition to the charges for usage otherwise indicated on the billing tables. All rate changes indicated by the billing tables shall go into effect on the 16 day of June, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 1553, § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 1606, § 1, 5-8-13; Ord. No. 1632, § 2, 1-20-2015; Ord. No. 1646, § 1(A.), 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 1(A.), 5-16-2017; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, 2-13-2018) 
Editor's note- The billing tables are attached as an Exhibit to this Ordinance and are incorporated by reference. 
Sec. 24-65. - Electric services fees. 
    The owner of property or a bona fide representative of the property owner to which City utilities are to be provided, existing, or to be removed, may with a 48-hour notice, request that the City install, disconnect or relocate the Electric Service Drop that feeds to the point of delivery from the City's utility pole or padmounted device at the following rates: 
1. Electric Service Drop extensions beyond the standard "Service Connections" of Section 6-185 (per span). $150.00 2. Relocation of Overhead Electric Service Drops $75.00 3. Temporary Electric Service Drops for Single Phase Service $75.00 4. Temporary Electric Service Drops for Three Phase Service $150.00 5. Removal of Single Phase Electric Service Drops $50.00 6. Removal of Three Phase Electric Service Drops $75.00 7. Disconnect and Reconnect of Single Phase Electric Service Drops $75.00 8. Disconnect and Reconnect of Three Phase Electric Service Drops $150.00  
    The above rates are based on the Electric Department Crews normal work hours. A request for these services beyond normal work hours (after-hours) will be at two (2) times the above stated rates. 
    Other requested Electric Department Services not listed above will be billed at a rate of $150.00 per hour, per two (2) man crew needed to safely complete the service. If services are requested after-hours, the service will be billed at a rate of $300.00 per hour, per two (2) man crew needed to safely complete the service. 
(Ord. No. 1652, § 1, 11-17-2015) 
Secs. 24-66-24-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLID WASTE SERVICE CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1313, § 1, adopted June 21, 1993, repealed in its entirety Art. II, Div. 3, "Solid Waste Service Charges," §§ 24-81-24-90, which derived from Code 1964, §§ 21-32-21-35 and §§ 21-37-21-42. Ord. No. 1324, § 1, adopted April 4, 1994, amended §§ 24-82-24-86, which had been repealed by Ord. No. 1313. At the city's direction, §§ 24-82-24-86 have been restored, incorporating the changes set out in Ord. No. 1324. At the editor's discretion, the Div. 3 title, "Solid Waste Service Charges," has been restored to §§ 24-82-24-86. 
State Law reference- Service charges authorized, 62 O.S. § 2256(f). 

Sec. 24-82. - Rates. 
    The rates prescribed in the tables below shall commence with the billing for August 2007 for fiscal years 2007-2008, and on July 1st, 2008 and July 1st, 2009. 
(1)  Solid waste service charge billing rates are established by the following billing tables. All rate changes shall go into effect as of January 1st of the indicated year. 
Editor's note- The billing tables are attached as an exhibit to the ordinance from which this section is derived and are incorporated by reference. 
(2)  Disposal fees, waste disposal facility: The City of Miami hereby establishes a $55.00 per ton fee for all waste generated from within the city limits and a $59.00 per ton charge for all waste generated from outside the city limits. Any utility customer living outside of the city limits shall receive the $55.00 per ton in-city charge upon displaying a current City of Miami utility bill to officials at the transfer station. 
a.  Minimum tipping fee charge, city residents, public utility customers: 
RATES FOR FY 2007-2008 RATES FOR FY 2008-2009 RATES FOR FY 2009-2010 $5.00 $5.00 $5.00  
Minimum tipping fee charge, residents who are not city residents: 
RATES FOR FY 2007-2008 RATES FOR FY 2008-2009 RATES FOR FY 2009-2010 $10.00 $10.00 $10.00  
b.  Tire disposal charges: 
TIRE SIZE RATES FOR FY 2007-2008 
AUGUST 1, 2007 RATES FOR FY 2008-2009 
JULY 1, 2008 RATES FOR FY 2009-2010 
JULY 1, 2009 Passenger Tires $1.70 $1.70 $1.70 Truck Tires $2.30 $2.30 $2.30 Semi-Truck Tires $4.00 $4.00 $4.00 Heavy Equipment Tires $6.25 $6.25 $6.25  
(3)  Roll-off container service: 
a.  Services available. The city may have available for rent, containers for the removal of solid waste, excluding food items. The city will deliver and remove as needed, containers within the city limits, for billing periods not to exceed fourteen (14) days for the fees hereinafter set forth. The city shall have no liability for any damages occurring as a result of the delivery or removal of said containers. 
Any request for said containers must be made at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance. All scheduling shall be on a first-come, first-serve basis. 
b.  Fees. The following fees will be charged for roll-off container service. 
1.  The city shall charge $125.00 plus the applicable per ton tipping fee charge for a one (1) to five (5) day roll-off rental service, regardless of the number of days used, up to five (5). 
2.  The city shall charge $175.00 plus the applicable per ton tipping fee charge for a six (6) to fifteen (15) day roll-off service, regardless of the number of days used, up to fifteen (15). 
3.  The city shall charge $300.00 plus the applicable disposal tonnage fee for the monthly lease of a city roll-off container. 
4.  There shall be a set up fee of $85.00 per roll-off container. This set up fee shall include two removals at no additional charge. After two (2) removals of a roll-off container from a site, the city shall charge $35.00 per additional removal. The applicable solid waste disposal per ton fee will be charged for all solid waste placed in said containers. 
5.  The rental and delivery fee shall be payable upon scheduling of the use of the container and prior to delivery. 
6.  Residents of the City of Miami, excluding commercial customers, shall be allowed to dispose of yard waste (including grass clippings, tree limbs and other brush) free of charge every day, during regular operation hours, at the solid waste facility. The resident is responsible for all transportation and labor. Commercial customers shall be allowed to dispose of grass clippings and leaves free of charge every day, during regular operation hours, at the solid waste facility. Commercial customers shall be billed as set forth above for all other yard waste. 
7.  No private solid waste hauler or contractor is permitted to dispose of their solid waste at the city's solid waste facility without first securing permission from the city manager. The decision to allow disposal shall be based on the city's ability to dispose of the waste generated in a cost effective and profitable manner. In no case shall the city dispose of any waste from a private source if it is calculated that it is losing money on the disposal. 
(Ord. No. 1324, § 1, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 1327, § 1, 6-6-94; Ord. No. 1332, § 1, 3-20-95; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 7-19-99; Ord. No. 1403, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 1409, § 1, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 1472, § 1, 12-1-03; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 8-1-04; Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1501, § 1, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1502, § 1, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1516, § 1, 7-2-07; Ord. No. 1552, § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 1555, § 1, 1-18-10; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 8-18-2015) 
Sec. 24-83. - Number of collections; determination. 
    The number of weekly collections of refuse shall be determined by the city special utilities authority as necessary in the best interest of the public health and adequate sanitation requirements of the various classes. 
(Ord. No. 1324, § 1, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-84. - Various classes, specific rates, qualifications. 
    The city special utility authority shall determine, on an individual basis, the qualifications of various classes, and the specific rates to be applied to individual customers based on the number of collections and amount of refuse collected by each individual customer. 
(Ord. No. 1324, § 1, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-85. - Rates when service divided. 
    If any person desires a division of refuse service, by having one (1) class or classes of refuse collected by the city and the remainder by a licensed collector, the charges for service rendered by the city shall be the same as provided for in this division for combined service; provided that, the city special utilities authority may adjust such charges if it sees fit after an examination of all the facts. 
(Ord. No. 1324, § 1, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-86. - Billing; responsibility for payment. 
    The service charges provided for in this division shall be billed by the solid waste department, through the department of public utilities and collected from the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee in whose name the water or electric account is carried. Such charges shall be paid by the tenant or occupant of the property, provided that, where the water or light account is in the name of the landlord, the landlord shall be agent for the city and responsible for the collection of such charges from the tenant. Where the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee has no water, electric or power account with the city billing for refuse collection charges shall be rendered to the person receiving the service. 
(Ord. No. 1324, § 1, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-87. - Private hauling. 
    No private hauler shall be permitted to collect solid waste anywhere in the city without first securing permission from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-88. - Placement of commercial dumpsters. 
    All commercial dumpsters shall be placed in a location suitable for collection by the city. The city shall have the final decision on the location of disposal containers. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 24-89. - Temporary discontinuation of residential trash service. 
    Residential trash service and the attendant charge applied to the monthly utility bill shall be temporarily discontinued if all of the following are applicable: 
(1)  The residential customer's utility account is in good standing; 
(2)  Residence is vacant for a period of ninety (90) days or longer; 
(3)  The residential customer submits a request to the solid waste department in writing ten (10) days prior to the requested date of discontinuation. 
    To resume service, the residential customer shall contact the solid waste department and request trash service. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 4-21-03) 
Sec. 24-90. - Placement of poly carts. 
    Residential sanitation carts (poly carts) must be placed as close as possible to the curb on the day of pickup, except for those customers having physically handicapping conditions. Sanitation collectors will leave the carts at the same location upon emptying the container. Carts shall not be left at the curb on days other than pickup days. 
(Ord. No. 1471, § 1, 10-20-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1471, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 2003, provided for the inclusion of a new section 24-89. Inasmuch as Ord. No. 1460 had previously enacted § 24-89, the provisions of Ord. No. 1471 have been included as § 24-90 at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 24-91. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24-92. - Classification. 
    For the purposes of this article, refuse substances are hereby classified into the following classes of refuse: 
(1)  Class (1): HOUSEHOLD: Garbage, which includes waste from the preparation, cooking and consumption of food, market refuse, and waste from the handling, storage and sale of produce, paper, cartons, boxes, and other similar substances. 
(2)  Class (2): CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION: Lumber, sheetrock, carpeting, shingles, appliances and furniture. 
(3)  Class (3): YARD WASTE: Dirt, leaves, tree limbs, and grass clippings. 
(Code 1964, § 21-1; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1537, adopted Oct. 6, 2008, inadvertently re-used existing Code section designations. To correct this scrivener's error, Ord. No. 1618, § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 2013, recodified former Code §§ 24-166-24-176, 24-196 as §§ 24-92-24-103. 
Formerly § 24-166. 
Sec. 24-93. - Containers-Required; use; size; maintenance. 
(a)  Commercial. Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any building, house, or structure, where refuse accumulates, within the city and classified as a "commercial sanitation customer," shall provide and maintain receptacles of sufficient number and size for containing such refuse and shall prepare, as herein provided, for collection and disposal of household (Class 1) refuse as defined by section 24-92. Receptacles shall be maintained in such a condition (usable caster wheels, etc.), as to not impair normal methods of sanitation collection. 
(b)  Residential. Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any building, house or structure other than multifamily units within the city and classified as a "residential sanitation customer," will use a ninety-gallon sanitation cart provided by the city for containing household refuse, class (1) as defined by section 24-166. Contents for collection shall not exceed a weight of more than seventy-five (75) pounds. Garbage must be drained of liquid substance and sacked or wrapped in paper before the parcel is placed in the garbage container. The sanitation cart shall be maintained in as sanitary a condition as possible in view of the use to which is put, and shall be thoroughly cleansed as needed by washing, scalding or otherwise. If destroyed, damaged beyond a usable condition or lost, the city will replace the sanitation cart for the customer at a cost equal to the city's cost for the container. 
(c)  Multiunit residential. Apartment buildings or other multiunit residential structures within the city with four or more units must have a two-yard container on site. The property owner shall provide the container. It will be used for collection and disposal of all refuse of class (1). It shall be the responsibility of the owner or manager of multiunit residential complexes to maintain receptacles in as sanitary a condition as possible in view of the use to which it is put. Receptacles shall be maintained in such a condition (usable caster wheels, etc.), as to not impair normal methods of sanitation collection. 
(d)  City-furnished containers for residential sanitation service shall be identified by serial number for each customer address and recorded in utility customer accounts. Replacement of containers, other than for normal conditions of wear and tear, shall be at the customer's expense. 
(Code 1964, § 21-2; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-167. See editor's note following § 24-92. 
Sec. 24-94. - Same-To be kept covered. 
    The lids or covers of all refuse containers required by this article shall at all times be kept secure and fastened so that flies and other insects will not have access to the contents thereof. Lids or covers shall only be removed or opened while the containers are being filled or emptied. 
(Code 1964, § 21-3; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-168. See editor's note following § 24-92. 
Sec. 24-95. - Same-Placement for collection. 
(a)  Commercial. Refuse containers must be placed at a location where the collectors can conveniently have access to the same, but not objectionably located. In the event of dispute as to the proper location, determination shall be made by the properly authorized agents of the city. 
(b)  Residential. Residential sanitation carts must be placed as close as possible to the curb on the day of pickup, except for those customers having physically handicapping conditions. Sanitation collectors will leave the carts at the same location upon emptying the container. Carts should not be left at the curb on days other than pickup days because of the likelihood of theft or damage occurring. 
(c)  Multiunit residential. Refuse containers must be placed at a location where the collectors can conveniently have access to the same, but not objectionably located. In the event of dispute as to the proper located in, determination shall be made by the properly authorized agents of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 21-4; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-169. See editor's note following § 24-92. 
Sec. 24-96. - Same-Unauthorized removal of contents, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized refuse collector acting under contract with the city, a refuse collector or employed by the city to remove the contents of any refuse can or receptacle for any purpose whatsoever, or to mix therewith any ingredient, article, substance, grain or other thing for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Code 1964, § 21-5; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-170. See editor's note following § 24-92. 
Sec. 24-97. - Preparation and placement of bundles, bales or leaves for collection. 
(a)  Refuse which cannot be placed in containers as required by this article, such as limbs, brush and grass clippings, shall be baled, bundled and securely fastened and placed for collection beside the refuse containers located in accord with section 24-95. Such bales or bundles shall not exceed four (4) feet in length or fifty (50) pounds in weight. 
(b)  Leaves must be packaged in containers not to exceed four (4) feet in height or length nor fifty (50) pounds in weight. Plastic bags are acceptable. 
(c)  Refuse which cannot be placed in containers as required by this article and which cannot be baled as described in subsections (a) and (b) will not be collected by sanitation packer trucks. Items such as old furniture, refrigerators, stoves, hot water heaters and other similar appliances will be disposed of privately or shall be collected through a supplementary service, subject to the policies as may from time to time be established by the Miami Special Utility Authority. 
(Code 1964, § 21-6; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-171. See editor's note following § 24-92. 
Sec. 24-98. - Unauthorized collection and removal. 
    No person, except duly authorized agents and employees of the city or persons acting under contract with the city, shall collect refuse or empty cans or receptacles containing household (Class 1) refuse on the streets, alleys and public thoroughfares of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 21-7; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-172. See editor's note following § 24-92. 
Sec. 24-99. - Regulations of use of the City Transfer Facility. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any materials at the City Transfer Facility except during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on Saturday. No person may use the City Transfer Facility without paying the service charges therefore. 
(Code 1964, § 21-9; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-173. See editor's note following § 24-92. 
Sec. 24-100. - Littering-Generally. 
(a)  Any person who deliberately places, throws, drops, deposits or discards any garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, refuse, debris or other deleterious substance on any public property or on any private property of another without consent shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any full-time peace officer in this state upon investigation of the disposal of any substance in violation of this section which contains three (3) or more items bearing a common address in a form which tends to identify the latest owner of the items shall create a rebuttable presumption that all competent persons residing at such address committed the unlawful act. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12-35, 21-8; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Formerly §§ 24-174, 24-175. See editor's note following § 24-92. 
Sec. 24-101. - Same-From vehicles. 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for any act of throwing, dropping, depositing, or otherwise placing any litter from his vehicle upon highways, roads, or public property unless any other person in the vehicle admits to or is identified as having committed said act. Any person who admits to or is identified as having committed said act shall be liable for the act. 
(b)  As used in this section, litter means any flaming or glowing substances except those which by law may be placed upon highway rights-of-way, any substance which may cause a fire, any bottles, cans, trash, garbage, or debris of any kind. As used in this section, litter shall not include trash, garbage, or debris placed beside a public road for collection by a garbage or collection agency, or deposited upon or within public property designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions as an appropriate place for such deposits if the person making the deposit is authorized to use the property for such purpose. 
(Code 1964, §§ 12-35, 21-8; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Formerly §§ 24-174, 24-175. See editor's note following § 24-92. 
Sec. 24-102. - Private refuse collectors. 
(a)  This section shall not apply to persons collecting and disposing of refuse under a contract with the city, provided for in sections 24-200 and 24-201. 
(b)  All equipment used by refuse collectors shall be maintained in a state of repair comparable to the equipment used by the city for the same purposes. 
(c)  The disposal of all refuse collected by collectors shall be at the disposal facility operated by the city, or at a location approved by the City Manager or his designee. Nothing herein shall, however, prevent the delivery of salvage materials to salvage dealers. 
(d)  Each refuse collector shall pay a charge as set by the Miami City Council for each ton of refuse deposited or dumped at any sanitary fill operated by the city. 
(Code 1964, §§ 21-49-21-52; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-176. See editor's note following § 24-92. 
Sec. 24-103. - Services to be rendered. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of this division, the city shall collect and remove approved waste which is properly deposited in waste containers provided by or approved by the city. Waste shall be collected on approved dates provided that they are properly situated on the curbside or other approved location not served by a private collector. 
(Code 1964, § 21-19; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-196. See editor's note following § 24-92. 
Sec. 24-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADDITIONAL FEES FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES 

Sec. 24-105. - Parks and Recreation Assessment. 
    An assessment of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per month will be established and added to the utility billing statement of every utility customer, except seasonal water meters, to commence with the billing statement following adoption. This assessment will be in addition to any and all other charges currently billed to the account by the utility billing department. The purpose of this additional assessment is to provide supplemental funding for municipal parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 1658, § 1(24-200), 8-16-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1658, § 1, adopted August 16, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as Div. 4, § 24-200. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Div. 4, § 24-105. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and properties director, § 2-58 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-106. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with waste water treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the waste water treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall be prohibited except those that meet the criteria for domestic waste water. BOD concentration shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) mg/l; SS shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. 
(c)  A significant industrial user shall be defined as any industrial user of the city's waste water collection and/or treatment system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average workday, 
(2)  Has a flow greater than five percent (5%) of the flow in the city's waste water treatment system, 
(3)  Has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the act or Oklahoma Statutes and rules, or 
(4)  Is found by the city, Oklahoma State Health Department or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the waste water treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system. Significant industrial users shall be regulated by separate pretreatment ordinance. 
(d)  Any new connections from inflow sources into the sanitary sewer portions of the sewer system shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1964, § 13-39(1)) 
Sec. 24-107. - New sewers and connections. 
(a)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the BOCA Code and other applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(b)  All new sanitary sewage works shall be designated and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the state department of health regulations. 
(c)  When a public sewer becomes available (within three hundred (300) feet); the building sewer shall be connected to such sewer within sixty (60) days. 
(Code 1964, § 13-39(2)) 
Sec. 24-108. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a), the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to terminate service to any customer who fails to pay bills when due or discharges any prohibited wastes into the sewer system. 
(Code 1964, § 13-39(3)) 
Sec. 24-109. - Septic receiving. 
(a)  Abbreviations: The following abbreviations, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings: 
    BOD shall mean Biochemical Oxygen Demand. 
    CFR shall mean Code of Federal Regulations. 
    COD shall mean Chemical Oxygen Demand. 
    DEQ shall mean the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
    EPA shall mean United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    gpd shall mean gallons per day. 
    mg/l shall mean milligrams per liter. 
    NPDES shall mean National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    O.S. shall mean Oklahoma Statutes. 
    POTW shall mean Publicly Owned Treatment Works. 
    SIC shall mean Standard Industrial Classification. 
    TSS shall mean Total Suspended Solids. 
(b)  Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Background level concentrations shall mean concentrations of pollutants, expressed in mg/l, assumed to be present in a POTW influent due to natural background sources, nonpoint sources, and discharges from users determined to be not significant, as established during the CTT's development of technically based local limits and as approved by the Approval Authority. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    Central treatment trust (CTT) shall mean a public trust having the State of Oklahoma as beneficiary which holds a permit issued under the NPDES Act, pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C., Section 1251 et seq. and which receives waste water streams from third parties into a central waste water treatment system owned and operated by the public trust, and treats the commingled waste streams in the central waste water treatment system before discharging the resulting effluent pursuant to an NPDES permit into navigable water of the United States of America located in this state. 
    Environmental Protection Agency shall mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Grab sample shall mean a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
    Loading capacity shall mean the amount of loading of a pollutant that a POTW can receive without risk of pass through or interference. 
    Maximum allowable headworks loadings shall mean the loading capacity of the POTW for pollutants, expressed in lbs/day, minus allocations for background level concentrations and a safety factor. 
    Municipality shall mean a city, town, county, district, association, or other public body created by or under State law. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of the hydrogen ions measured in grams per liter of solution and expressed in Standard Units (SU). 
    Pollutant shall mean dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) shall mean a treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292) which is owned by the CTT. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    Septic tank waste shall mean any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Sewage shall mean human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Suspended solids shall mean the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Treatment plant shall mean that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
    User shall mean a source of indirect discharge. 
    Wastewater shall mean liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    Wastewater treatment plant shall mean that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(c)  Prohibited discharge standards: In addition to the prohibitions contained in OAC 252:623-1-7(a), the following additional prohibitions apply: 
(1)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the CTT's NPDES permit; 
(2)  Sludges, screenings, or other residuals from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(3)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(4)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations; 
(5)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the DEQ in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; for purposes of this paragraph toxicity means the endpoint of the acute biomonitoring test requirement as specified in the CTT's NPDES permit; 
(7)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; and 
(8)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l. 
(d)  Hauled wastewater: 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the CTT, and at such times as are established by the CTT. Such waste shall not violate any requirements established by the DEQ. The DEQ may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(b)  The DEQ shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The DEQ may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The DEQ also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this Chapter. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the CTT. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the CTT. The CTT may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The DEQ may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide to the DEQ a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA wastes. 
The City of Miami may enter into written contracts to accept Septic Tank Waste upon acceptable and approved required maximum allowable headworks loading for the Wastewater Treatment Plant's loading capacity and all other paper work. 
The City of Miami has the right to terminate any contract at their discretion for any breach in the permit rules, i.e. late payments, lack of cleanliness, dumping of anything other than sewage and/or limits greater than the acceptable pretreatment requirements. 
(e)  Local limits: 
(a)  Specific pollutant limits for publicly owned treatment works are established to prevent pass through and interference, to provide for sludge quality, and to protect worker health and safety from environmental risks. No person shall discharge wastewater in excess of concentrations established based on the Maximum Allowable Headworks Loadings and allocated in the permit. 
The City of Miami may accept discharge of hauled septage waste during regular business hours upon the issuance of Septage Discharge Permit. Discharge shall only occur at the designated receiving point(s) as described in the required permitting documents issued by the City of Miami. 
The rate for dumping or discharging septic waste originating from inside or outside the corporate limits of the City of Miami shall be ten (10) cents per gallon with a minimum fee of $50.00 if sewage load is less than 500 gallons. All contracts will require payment due thirty (30) days after the date of septic receiving invoice date. 
No septic waste shall be discharged in the sanitary sewer system of the City except as where provided in this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Secs. 24-110-24-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 24-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
    Administrator shall mean the chief administrative officer of a state or interstate water pollution control agency with an NPDES permit program approved pursuant to Section 402(b) of the act and an approved state pretreatment program. 
    Approval authority shall mean the environmental protection agency regional administrator and/or the state commissioner of health if a state pretreatment program has been approved by the EPA regional administrator. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user shall mean: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. The authorized representative must be designated in writing prior to or accompanying the report for which the designation applies. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Building sewer shall mean a sewer conveying waste water from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
    Categorical standard shall mean the national categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. 
    Cooling water shall mean the water discharged from any use as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Control authority shall mean the city. 
    Direct discharge shall mean the discharge of treated or untreated waste water directly to the waters of the state. 
    Environmental protection agency or EPA shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
    Grab sample shall mean a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste shall mean any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge shall mean the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the act (33 U.S.C. 1317) into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
    Industrial user shall mean a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
    Interference shall mean a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes, or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefor is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations). Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard shall mean any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the act and 40 CFR, section 403.5. 
    New source shall mean any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section provided that the building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or the building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or the building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or the production or waste water generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
    National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit shall mean a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
    Pass through shall mean a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in standard units. 
    Pollution shall mean the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
    Pollutant shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes discharged into water. 
    Public utility board shall mean the public utility board of the city. 
    Pretreatment or treatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in waste water to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration shall be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR, section 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) shall mean a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey waste water to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this section, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey waste waters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    POTW treatment plant shall mean that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to waste water. 
    Shall is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
    Significant industrial user shall mean any industrial user of the city's waste water disposal system who (1) is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N; and (2) any other industrial user that: discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process waste water to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown waste water); contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the control authority as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)). 
    Significant noncompliance shall mean an industrial user whose violation meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of waste water discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all measurements taken for the same pollutant during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1); 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant taken during a six-month period equal to or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standards or requirements including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1), multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of the POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under section 24-130 of this division to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a waste water discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within forty-five (45) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug discharge shall be any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) shall mean a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Stormwater shall mean any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Suspended solids shall mean the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, waste water or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Superintendent shall mean the superintendent of the city department of public utilities, who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this division or his duly authorized representative. 
    Toxic pollutant shall mean any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection agency under the provision of CWA, section 307(a) or other acts. 
    User shall mean any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of waste water into the city's POTW. 
    Waste water shall mean the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any ground, surface and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Waters of the state shall mean all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
    Waste water discharge permit shall mean the permit provided in section 24-146. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(1.2); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93; Ord. No. 1512, § 1, 6-18-07) 
Sec. 24-127. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this division, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand. CFR - Code of Federal Regulations. COD - Chemical oxygen demand. CWA - Clean Water Act, as amended. EPA - Environmental protection agency. l - Liter. mg - Milligrams. mg/l - Milligrams per liter. NPDES - National pollutant discharge elimination system. POTW - Publicly owned treatment works. SIC - Standard industrial classification. SIU - Significant industrial user SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq. USC - United States Code. TSS - Total suspended solids.  
(Code 1964, § 13-40(1.3); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-128. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This division sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the waste water collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977, and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR, Part 403). 
(b)  The objectives of this section are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal waste water system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal waste water system which will pass through the system inadequately treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim waste waters and sludges from the system; and 
(4)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal pretreatment program. 
(c)  This section provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal waste water system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(d)  This section shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW's. Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(1.1)) 
Sec. 24-129. - Delegation of authority. 
    It is the intent of the board of commissioners and it is hereby deemed that the necessary powers for the administration of the city's industrial pretreatment program be vested in the public utility board. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(1.4)) 
Sec. 24-130. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the waste water disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this division. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(2.5)) 
Sec. 24-131. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated, or is violating this division, waste water contribution permit or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the city may serve upon such a user a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. 
(b)  Show cause hearing. The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the public utilities board why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the public utilities board regarding the violation, and the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the public utilities board why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(1)  The public utilities board may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the department of public works to: 
a.  Issue in the name of the public utilities board notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings. 
b.  Take the evidence. 
c.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the public utilities board for action thereon. 
(2)  At any hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(3)  After the public utilities board has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(c)  Cease and desist orders. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this division or any permit or order issued hereunder, the superintendent may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
(1)  Comply forthwith; 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
(d)  Emergency suspensions. 
(1)  The superintendent may suspend the waste water treatment service and/or waste water permit of an industrial user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the environment. 
(2)  Any user notified of a suspension of the waste water treatment service and/or the waste water permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in section 24-146(h) are initiated against the user. 
(3)  An industrial user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the superintendent prior to the date of the hearing described in subsection (d)(2) above. 
(e)  Administrative fines. Notwithstanding any other section of this division, any user who is found to have violated any provision of this division or permits and orders issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the superintendent shall have such other collection remedies as he has to collect other service charges. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall constitute a lien against the individual user's property. Industrial users desiring to dispute such fines must file a request for the superintendent to reconsider the fine within ten (10) days of being notified of the fine. Where the superintendent believes a request has merit, he shall convene a hearing on the matter within fifteen (15) days of receiving the request from the industrial user. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(5.3), (5.4); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-132. - Civil penalties. 
    Any user who is found to have violated an order of the public utilities board or who wilfully or negligently fails to comply with any provision of this division, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this division or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(6.1); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-133. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's waste water disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable and/or injunctive relief in the appropriate municipal, state or federal courts. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(5.5); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-134. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
    Affirmative defenses to violations of federal, state, or local discharge standards are "upset," as defined and conditioned in 40 CFR 403.16, and "bypass," as defined and conditioned in 40 CFR 403.17. 
(Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-135. - Annual list of violations. 
    The superintendent shall annually provide a list of user violations to the public utility board. The public utility board shall comply with 40 CFR, section 403.8(f)(2)(VII) with regard to public notice. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(4.8)) 
Sec. 24-136. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(2.4)) 
Sec. 24-137. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division or waste water contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as specified in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(6.2)) 
Sec. 24-138. - Waste water discharges. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW any waste water without a city permit except as authorized by the superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(4.1)) 
Sec. 24-139. - General discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or waste water which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naptha, benzene, toluene, zylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the waste water treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: Grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any waste water having a pH less than 5.0 or waste water having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
(4)  Any waste water containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singularly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any waste water treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the act. 
(5)  Any pollutant in a quantity which either singularly or by interaction with other wastes may cause acute worker health and safety problems, create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the act, any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any waste water with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  Any waste water having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case waste water with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds forty (40) degrees Celsius (one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit). 
(10)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation. 
(11)  Any waste water containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any waste water which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(13)  Any waste water containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(14)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the superintendent. 
(b)  When the superintendent determines that a user is contributing to the POTW, any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the superintendent shall: 
(1)  Advise the user of the impact of the contribution to the POTW; and 
(2)  Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the POTW. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(2.1); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-140. - Local discharge limitations. 
    In addition to the prohibitions of section 24-139, no user shall discharge any waste water containing toxic pollutants that exceed specific local limitations, to the extent that the local limitations are more stringent than state or federal requirements or limitations. Specific local limitations shall be developed for all SIUs and other users, as appropriate, by the control authority by allocating between users the total allowable industrial pollutant loads as determined by plant headworks calculations. Toxic pollutants for which specific local limitations shall be developed are zinc, molybdenum, selenium, and cyanide as well as conventional pollutants BOD, ammonia, and TSS. Local limits shall be developed specific to each SIU and other users, as appropriate, for the pollutants specified herein. The control authority shall prepare a local limits document that presents a detailed description of the headworks calculation and the pollutant load allocation. The local limits document shall be reviewed at a frequency required by 40 CFR 122.21(j)(4). Local discharge limitations for a new user(s) shall be developed by the control authority by allocating to the new user(s) a portion of the unallocated total allowable industrial pollutant loads. 
(Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 6-18-07) 
Sec. 24-141. - Effect of federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this section for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this section. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, section 403.12. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(2.2); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-142. - Modifications of federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Where the city's waste water treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. Consistent removal shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the waste water treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent as demonstrated in ninety-five percent (95%) of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7(c)(2) of (Title 400 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403)-"General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution" promulgated pursuant to the act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(2.3); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-143. - Excessive discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(2.6); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-144. - Accidental discharges. 
    Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan by the date listed in their permit. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this section, shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this section. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(1)  Written notice. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
(2)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(2.7); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-145. - Fees. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's waste disposal system for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Charges and fees. The city may adopt additional fees or change the fee schedule as set forth hereinafter: 
(1)  The fee for an annual monitoring activity shall be $100.00 plus the actual laboratory fee for the required analysis. 
(2)  The fee for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction plans shall be $25.00. 
(3)  The fee for permit application processing and permit shall be $100.00. 
(4)  The fee for filing appeals shall be $150.00. 
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(3); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-146. - Waste water contribution permits. 
(a)  General permits. All significant users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a waste water discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a waste water contribution permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this section. 
(b)  Permit application. Users required to obtain a waste water discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a fee of $100.00. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this section (October 18, 1993), or one hundred eighty (180) days after a final administrative decision has been made upon a category determination submission under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall apply for a waste water discharge permit. In addition, the user shall be required to submit a baseline monitoring report which contains the information listed in the following subsections (1) through (14). Where reports containing this information already have been submitted to the superintendent, the user may not be required to submit this information again. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of a discharge, new sources, or sources that become significant industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, shall be required to submit with an application for waste water discharge permit, a report which lists the information in subsections (1) through (8) and (11) through (14). New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in subsections (3) through (5), (8), (11) through (13). 
(1)  Name, address, and location (if different from the address). 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended. 
(3)  Waste water constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, BOD, total suspended solids, pH, and the pollutants mentioned in section 24-140, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended. 
(4)  Time and duration of contributions. 
(5)  Average daily and three-minute peak waste water flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any. In the case of a user subject to a federal or state categorical pretreatment standard, measured average daily and maximum daily flow rates shall be submitted, in gallons per day, for all regulated process streams and other streams as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment standards. 
(9)  A statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(10)  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g. hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, etc.). 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection a., above, shall exceed nine (9) months. 
c.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent. 
1.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
2.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
3.  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
4.  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
5.  The city will evaluate the data furnished by the users and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a waste water contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(c)  Permit modifications. Within six (6) months of the promulgation of a federal categorical standard, the waste water discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard with the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a federal categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a waste water discharge permit, as required by subsection 24-146(b), the user shall apply for a waste water discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing waste water discharge permit shall submit to the superintendent within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard information required by subsections (b)(8) through (b)(10) above. 
(d)  Permit conditions. Waste water discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits will contain the following: 
(1)  Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR Part 403, or local, state, or federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
(2)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(3)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR, Part 403, or local, state, or federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
(5)  Compliance schedules. 
(6)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see section 24-147). 
(7)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to waste water discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access thereto. 
(8)  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of waste water constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the waste water constituents being introduced into the waste water treatment system. 
(9)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges. 
(10)  Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the POTW to be necessary. POTWs must evaluate at least once the SIU's need for a slug control plan or other action to control slug discharges. 
(11)  Statement of duration. 
(12)  Statement of nontransferability without prior notification to the POTW and provision of a copy of the waste water discharge permit to the new owner or operator. 
(13)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines. 
(14)  Other conditions as deemed necessary by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
(e)  Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for five (5) years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  Permit transfer. Waste water discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A waste water discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without prior notification to the POTW and provision of a copy of the waste water discharge permit to the new owner or operator. 
(g)  Suspension of permit. The city may suspend the waste water treatment service and/or a waste water contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
(1)  Any person notified of a suspension of the waste water treatment service and/or the waste water contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. 
(2)  In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. 
(3)  The city shall reinstate the waste water contribution permit and/or the waste water treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. 
(4)  A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
(h)  Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following conditions of this division, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the waste water constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or waste water constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit; 
(5)  Failure to provide the superintendent with prior notification of a new or substantially changed discharge; 
(6)  Refusal to retain records, data, and information collected in accordance with permit conditions, this division, or applicable state or federal regulations for a minimum of three (3) years, or until the resolution of any pending litigation. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(4.2), (5.1), (5.2); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93; Ord. No. 1514, § 1, 6-18-07) 
Sec. 24-147. - Surveys, questionnaires, etc. 
    The superintendent may require users to submit certain reports, surveys, or questionnaires, other than those specifically described in this division, in order to identify SIUs. All users, when presented with these reports, surveys, or questionnaires, shall complete and return the document(s), and supply all requested information, within the time specified by the control authority. 
(Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-148. - Reporting requirements for permittee. 
(a)  Compliance date report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of waste water into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(b)  Periodic compliance report. 
(1)  Unless required more frequently in a waste water discharge permit issued by the city, all significant users (SIUs) shall submit to the superintendent during the months of June and December a periodic compliance report. The report shall contain the results of a sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow rate and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standard. The frequency of sampling and analysis shall be as prescribed in subsection (3) below. The reporting frequency for any industry may be altered by the superintendent upon consideration of such factors as actual flow rates and pollutant concentrations, seasonal production schedules, etc. 
(2)  The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the semi-annual self-monitoring report shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. 
(3)  All significant industrial users (SIUs) shall sample and analyze their waste water discharge at the frequency stipulated in their waste water discharge permit. Monitoring shall consist of sampling the discharge and determining the nature and concentration of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standard. Upon promulgation of a federal categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial category containing more stringent monitoring requirements, the requirements of this section shall immediately be superseded. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the more stringent requirements. 
(4)  Grab samples shall be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, and sulfide. For all other pollutants, twenty-four-hour composite samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority, the samples must be representative of the discharge and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented in the industrial user file for that facility or facilities. In such case, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through as minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the wastewater being discharged. 
(5)  All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to Section 304(h) of the act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutants in question, or where the administrator determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutants in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the superintendent or other parties, approved by the administrator. 
(6)  Periodic compliance reports shall contain the results of all sampling and analysis performed by the user during the period covered by the report. 
(7)  The periodic compliance reports shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis as described in subsections (4) and (5) above, performed during the period covered by the report, which data is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting periods. 
(c)  Notice of potential problems. All SIUs shall notify the superintendent immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings. 
(d)  Notice of violation with repeat sampling. If sampling and analysis performed by the user indicates a violation of permit limits, the user shall notify the superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Where the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the user, the city must perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat analysis. Resampling is not required if: (i) the city performs sampling at the user at the frequency of at least once per month, or (ii) the city performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the city receives the results of this sampling. 
(e)  Notification of changed discharge. All SIUs shall promptly notify the superintendent in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(4.3); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93; Ord. No. 1515, § 1, 6-18-07) 
Sec. 24-149. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  The city shall require to be provided at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow sampling and flow measurement of the user's discharge to the POTW. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  The sampling facility shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(4.4); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-150. - Inspection and sampling; analytical requirements. 
(a)  The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this division is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where waste water is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative(s), including federal and state employees, ready access at any time to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, and reproduction of records required by this division, or the performance of any of their duties. The control authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, control authority personnel will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. The city shall make a minimum of one (1) inspection and sampling visit per year to each SIU. 
(b)  All analyses conducted for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this division shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to Section 304(h) of the act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. Where 40 CFR, Part 136, does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutants in question, or where the administrator determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutants in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the superintendent or other parties, approved by the administrator. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(4.5); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 24-150.1 - Signatory requirements for industrial users. 
    All reports, applications, and other documents required by the provisions of this division shall include the certification statement set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii), and shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1318, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 1993, set out provisions intended to add § 24-151. However, since § 24-151 already existed, these provisions, at the editor's discretion, have been set out as § 24-150.1. 
Sec. 24-150.2. - Pretreatment. 
    Users shall provide necessary waste water treatment as required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat waste water to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(4.6); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1318, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 1993, set out provisions intended to renumber the existing § 24-149 as § 24-152. However, since § 24-152 already existed, these provisions, at the editor's discretion, have been renumbered as § 24-150.2. 
Sec. 24-150.3. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit, and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Waste water constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40(4.7); Ord. No. 1318, § 2, 10-18-93) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1318, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 1993, set out provisions intended to renumber the existing § 24-150 as § 24-153. However, since § 24-153 already existed, these provisions, at the editor's discretion, have been renumbered as § 24-150.3. 
DIVISION 3. - INFILTRATION AND INFLOW 

Sec. 24-151. - Purpose, intent. 
    To adopt regulations and establish a program for the elimination of private sector infiltration and inflow sources into the sanitary sewer system, provide penalties for failure to eliminate private sector infiltration and inflow, the governing body expressly finding that the excessive inflow and infiltration of stormwater from any source, private or public, into the sanitary sewer system is a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizenry because such infiltration overloads the capacity of both sanitary sewer lines and the waste water treatment facility and may cause the city to violate federal and state standards for waste water treatment. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 24-152. - Definitions. 
    The definitions set forth in this section shall be applicable to this division and shall not supersede, amend or alter other codes or enactments of the city. 
    Access. Entry into or upon any real estate or structure including any part thereof. 
    Accessible. Capable of being reached without excavation. 
    Administration. The city's department of public utilities is hereby designed as the department responsible for administering the provisions of this division. 
    Domestic waste water. Liquid and water borne waste derived principally from dwellings, business buildings, institutions and the like; free from industrial wastes, and of such character as to permit sanitary disposal without special treatment into the public sewer or by means of a private sewer disposal system. 
    Infiltration. Water, as herein defined, entering the sanitary sewer system, including private sewer service connections, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow. 
    Inflow. Water discharged into the sanitary sewer system, including service connections, from such means as, but not limited to, roof downspouts or leaders; cellar, yard, and area drains; sump pumps; foundation drains; cleanouts; cooling water discharge; drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers; cross connections from storm sewers; combined sewers; catch basins; stormwaters; surface runoff; street washwaters; or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. 
    Industrial wastes. Liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from domestic. 
    Lessee. A person, firm or corporation having the responsibility, pursuant to a written agreement with the owner, to maintain, repair or replace sanitary sewer lines and/or discharges which cause infiltration or inflow as herein defined. 
    Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, estate, governmental agency, or any other legal entity and/or assigns. 
    Sanitary sewer system. All lines, pipes, tanks, conduits, structures or other devices designed for the collection, transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of sewage, whether owned by the city or other persons, and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Schedule of compliance. A schedule of remedial measures and times including an enforceable sequence of actions or operations leading to compliance with this division. 
    Sewage. A combination of domestic or industrial waste water which may include chemical, house wastes, laundry wastes, human excreta, animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution, and other solids in suspension or solution, and which is discharged from a dwelling, building, or other structure and permitted to enter the sanitary sewer system for the purpose of treatment and disposal. 
    Waste water treatment facility. The system or facility for treating, neutralizing, stabilizing, or disposing of sewage, which system or facility has limited capacity to receive sewage. The term "waste water treatment facility" also includes appurtenances such as interceptors, collection lines, outfall and outlet sewers, pumping stations, and related equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 24-153. - Prohibited connections. 
    No person shall henceforth make connection of roof downspout or leaders, interior or exterior foundation drains, cleanouts, sump pumps, cellar, yard, and area drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs or swampy areas, or other sources of surface, storm or groundwater to a structure sewer or structure drain which is connected, either directly, or indirectly, to the sanitary sewer system, unless specifically authorized by City Manager. Provided, however, that these connections connected directly into the sanitation sewer system will be exempt from the provisions of this division if the connect was made prior to 1964. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 24-154. - Disconnect order. 
    The general manager of the department of public utilities or his designated agent may issue an order directing the owner or the lessee of the real estate or structure to disconnect all private infiltration or inflow waters from the sanitary sewer system. The order shall be effective not less than sixty (60) days from its date of issuance. The order may state a deadline for compliance but such deadline shall, in no event, be more than six (6) months after issuance of the order. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 24-155. - Termination of service. 
(a)  The city, department of public utilities, may order the termination of sanitary sewer service and/or water service to any real estate or structure if the owner or lessee has refused to allow access and entry or has failed or refused to comply with the disconnect order requiring that the private infiltration or inflow waters be prohibited from entering the sanitary sewer system. The termination shall be in effect thirty (30) days after the service upon the owner or lessee. Service of the order shall be in person or by restricted delivery mail. 
(b)  Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the termination order, the owner or lessee may request a hearing by filing a written request therefore with the department of public utilities. The filing of such request shall act as a stay of the termination order. After the hearing, the general manager of the department of public utilities may affirm, set aside or modify the terms of the order. The decision of the general manager of the department entered after such a review hearing may be appealed denovo to the city's public utility board, upon the filing of a written appeal with the general manager within ten (10) days after the decision and the public utility may affirm, set aside or modify the order as issued or as modified at its next regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 24-156. - Reconnection of service. 
    Sanitary sewer service disconnected under the provisions of section 24-154 of this division shall not be reconnected until sources of infiltration or inflow have been disconnected. The cost of disconnection and reconnection shall be the burden and responsibility of the owner or lessee. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 24-157. - Abatement of nuisance. 
    In addition to or in lieu of termination of service and/or prosecution in municipal court, the department of public utilities may maintain a civil action by injunction, in the name of the governing body of the city, to abate and temporarily or permanently enjoin the continuation of the private infiltration and/or as a nuisance, in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 24-158. - Access and entry. 
(a)  Access: Representatives of the department of public utilities shall have the right to make an inspection of any parcel of real estate and/or structure for the purpose of determining compliance with this division. Inspections shall be done at a reasonable hour of the day. 
(b)  Notice: If the structure or real estate to be inspected is occupied, the representative shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If the structure or real estate is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the structure or real estate and request entry. 
(c)  Search warrants: If, after proper request, entry or access is refused, the department of public utilities may compel such access by application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant in compliance with the provisions of Section 15 of the Oklahoma Bill of Rights and the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 24-159. - Procedure. 
(a)  Upon confirmation by the department of public utilities that a private infiltration or inflow source exists, the department shall issue a disconnect order to the owner and, if known, the lessee as set forth in section 24-153 hereof. 
(b)  The owner or lessee shall comply with the order by performing the work or having the work done by a licensed plumbing or sewer contractor. 
(c)  All work shall be done in a workmanlike manner and shall be performed in compliance with adopted codes and regulations. 
(d)  After completion of the work the department of public utilities shall reinspect the premises to verify compliance with the disconnect order and also confirm that there are no other private infiltration or inflow sources on the property. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 24-160. - Penalties. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, a person violating any of the provisions of this division or obstructing its enforcement shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in municipal court, shall be fined a sum of not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 24-161. - Severability. 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection of this division shall be adjudged invalid for any reason whatsoever by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect, repeal or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection thereof found to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 24-162. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    This division shall not be construed or interpreted as imposing upon the city or its officials or employees (1) any liability or responsibility for damages to any property; or (2) any representation or warranty that any system, installation or portion thereof that is constructed or repaired under order and inspections required by this division will function properly. In addition, neither the city nor any of its officials and employees charged with the enforcement of this division, if acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of their duties, shall be personally liable for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of performing or not performing any act required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 24-163. - Optional abatement procedure. 
    If property owner is unable or refuses to comply with section 24-153 (repair or disconnection of infiltration and inflow source), the city may, at its discretion, contract with a plumbing contractor the city's choice to make the required repair/replacement/disconnection to remove the infiltration and inflow source. The cost of such action will be filed as a lien on the property. A charge of not less than $25.00 per month will be added to the utility bill of the property owner or utility user of that address until paid in full. Lien release will be issued on receipt of total cost. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 7-6-93) 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1537, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2008, repealed Ch. 24, Art. IV, §§ 24-164-24-173, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 24, Art. IV, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1411, adopted Oct. 2, 2000; Ord. No. 1484, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 2004; Ord. No. 1488, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 2005 and Ord. No. 1494, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2005. 

Sec. 24-164. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean: 
    Accelerated erosion. Erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
    Applicant. A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a permit. 
    Authorized enforcement agency. The City of Miami or its designated representative. 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Building. Temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property. 
    Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Clearing. Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
    Construction activity. Activities include but are not limited to clearing, grubbing, grading, regarding, landfilling, excavating, berming, and diking of land, and includes land disturbance activities for the purpose of constructing a structure at some time. 
    Construction site. A site where construction activities occur. 
    Contaminated site. Property or lands that, for reasons of public health and safety, are unsafe for development as a result of past human activities, particularly those activities that have left a chemical or radioactive residue. Also, a site which has been identified as a former industrial or waste disposal site, where the presence of toxic chemicals and/or gas pose an unreasonable risk of injury to health, property, and/or the environment. 
    Contamination. The introduction of materials including, but not limited to pesticides, herbicides, septic leaks, or other toxic substances into a natural system. 
    Contractor. Any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, realtor, or corporation engaged in the business of accepting orders or contracts, either as a general contractor or subcontractor, for site development or construction of industrial, institutional, commercial and/or residential dwellings. 
    Detention. The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
    Detention facility. A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
    Developer. A person who undertakes land disturbance activities. 
    Development. A change in the use of any land, building, or structure for any purpose, and shall include the carrying out of building, engineering construction or other operation in, on, over or under land, or the construction, addition or alteration of any land, building or structure. 
    Discharge. To cause or allow to throw, drain, release, dump, spill, empty, emit, or pour any liquids, pollutants or other materials into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    Drainage easement. A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
    Drainage way. Any channel, ditch, swale or structure that conveys surface runoff throughout a site. 
    Dry weather. A period of at least seventy-two (72) hours in which there has been no measurable rainfall. 
    Dry weather field screening. Inspection and/or testing of outfalls conducted during dry weather to evaluate outfalls for pollutants. 
    EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Erosion. The mobilization of soil or paving material as a result of loss of vegetative cover, scouring by runoff, or associated with slope instability. 
    Erosion control. A measure that mitigates or prevents erosion. 
    Grading. Excavation, moving or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
    Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit discharge. Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the stormwater drainage system, except as exempted in section 24-171 of this chapter. 
    Illicit connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the stormwater discharge system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, industrial waste, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the stormwater discharge system and any connections to the stormwater discharge system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or, any drain or conveyance connected from an industrial, institutional, commercial or industrial land use to the stormwater drainage system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Impervious surface. Those surfaces including but not limited to concrete, asphalt, brick, metal, or any other material that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways). 
    Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
    Industrial stormwater permit. A national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
    Infiltration. The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
    Infiltration facility. Any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade. 
    Land disturbance activity. Activities include but are not limited to clearing, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade watercourse. Any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. 
    Landowner. The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
    Maintenance agreement. A legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, creeks, natural channels, manmade channels, or storm drains) that are owned or operated by the city and are designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Nonpoint source pollution. Pollution discharged over a wide land area, not from one specific location. These are forms of diffuse pollution caused by sediment, nutrients, organic and toxic substances originating from land-use activities, which are carried to lakes, rivers and streams by surface runoff. 
    Nonstormwater discharge. Any discharge to the stormwater drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    ODEQ. The Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
    OKR10 permit. The Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality General Permit OKR10 for stormwater discharges from construction activities within the State of Oklahoma. 
    OPDES. Oklahoma Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    Outfall. The place where a sewer, drain, or stream discharges; the outlet or structure through which reclaimed water or treated effluent is finally discharged to a receiving water body. 
    Permittee. Owner of the land or an agent of the landowner to whom a permit is issued. 
    Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Phasing. Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next. 
    Plat. A map showing the location, boundaries and ownership of individual properties, planned and developed as a single project. 
    Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects; floatables; pesticides, insecticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage; fecal coliform; pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; sediment, wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure and/or altering premises; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pond. A small body of standing water, naturally or artificially formed. 
    Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved. 
    Public utility. A private business organization, or government organization, subject to governmental regulation, that provides an essential commodity or service, such as water, electricity, transportation, or communication, to the public. 
    Recharge. The replenishment of underground water reserves. 
    Redevelopment. Any construction, alteration or improvement in areas where existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional or residential. 
    Right-of-way. An area of land that is legally described for the provision of public access. 
    Riparian habitat. Areas adjacent to rivers and streams with a differing density, diversity, and productivity of plant and animal species relative to nearby uplands. 
    Sediment. The particles (such as sand, silt, clay, and gravel) and organic particulates transported by storm runoff and streamflow. Also, solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below water level. 
    Sediment and erosion control permit. A permit designed to review, evaluate, modify, or any other action necessary to ensure sediment and erosion control related to a construction site. 
    Sediment and erosion control plan. A set of plans indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a construction site. 
    Sediment control. Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving a site. 
    Site Plan. A scale drawing showing the relationship between the lot lines and their uses, buildings or structures, existing or proposed on a lot, including such details as parking areas, access points, landscaped areas, building areas, setbacks from lot lines, building heights, floor areas, densities, septic tank tile fields, utility lines and currents, or a special or particular use. 
    Slope. The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal expressed in percentage or degrees. 
    Stabilization. The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
    Start of construction. The first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
    Stop work order. An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
    Stormwater drainage system. Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, roads, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater management. The use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates. 
    Stormwater retrofit. A stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
    Stormwater runoff. Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
    Structure. Anything constructed which requires location on the ground or attachment to something located on the ground but not including pavements, curbs, walks or open air surfaced areas or moving vehicles. 
    Summary abatement. Action taken by the City of Miami or its agents to abate a violation without prior notice to the property owner or other interested parties. 
    SWP3. A stormwater pollution prevention plan developed in compliance with ODEQ permit requirements. 
    Unstable slopes. Slopes which are or may be subject to erosion, mass movement, slumping, landslides, mudflows or rock falls. Also, slope or land which has a potential to collapse or slide if development occurs on, or adjacent to, such an area. 
    Variance. A relaxation of the terms of an ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility or activity. 
    Watercourse. A natural or artificial channel or conduit through which water flows. 
    Waterway. A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain. 
    Watershed. The land area that drains water, sediment, dissolved materials and other matter to a common receiving body or outlet such as a stream, river or lake. The term is not restricted to surface water runoff and includes interactions with subsurface water. 
    Zoning. Categorizing the use or activity of land, buildings, structures or activities permitted in delineated areas. 
    Zoning code. A set of local government regulations and requirements that govern the use, placement, spacing and size of buildings and lots (as well as other types of land uses) within specific areas designated as zones primarily dedicated to certain land use types or patterns within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-165. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate nonstormwater discharges to the City of Miami stormwater drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) and the Oklahoma Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (OPDES) permit requirements. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants in stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(2)  To control the introduction to the municipal separate storm sewer system of spills, dumping, or the disposal of materials other than stormwater; 
(3)  To prohibit illicit connections and illicit discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with this chapter; 
(5)  To establish procedures for enforcement of this chapter; 
(6)  To establish abatement and remediation procedures for this chapter; and 
(7)  To establish penalties for noncompliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-166. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all water entering the stormwater drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. The stormwater system service charge shall not be imposed on the following types of property: 
(1)  City-owned highways, streets, rights-of-way, parks, and open space, and leased uses on city-owned properties. 
(2)  Railroad rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-167. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The stormwater manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-168. - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-169. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, and/or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-170. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater or the stormwater drainage system, said person shall notify the city. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the city in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-171. - Illicit discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal stormwater drainage system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any residence or business to allow drainage of a polluting substance or to allow drainage of water which may become a hazard onto any street, alley or sidewalk. A polluting substance is one so defined under 82 O.S. § 926.1. 
(c)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this section unless the stormwater manager determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing contamination of surface water, stormwater or groundwater; causes overload or damage to the municipal separate storm sewer system or has the potential to endanger public health and safety; or is causing the city to violate its NPDES or OPDES permit for stormwater discharges: 
(1)  Waterline flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air-conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washing, noncommercial or charity washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land, flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated), fire hydrant flushings, residential and street washing without detergents, firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the stormwater manager as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  Dye testing (using nontoxic dye) is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal or written notification to the stormwater manager prior to the time of the test; and 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the stormwater drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-172. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(a)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the stormwater drainage system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(b)  A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the person allows sewage to be conveyed to the MS4, or allows such a discharge to continue. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-173. - Construction activities. 
(a)  General performance standards. Any person subject to a construction activity NPDES and/or OPDES stormwater discharge permit in city shall comply with all provisions of such permit(s). Proof of compliance with said permit(s) may be required in a form acceptable to the stormwater manager prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. All construction activities including but not limited to the development, excavation, clearing, grading, regrading, paving, landfilling, berming, and diking of land shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize erosion and prevent the discharge of pollutants, including but not limited to rock, sand, soil, discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste into the city municipal separate stormwater system. Persons conducting the construction shall implement and maintain adequate structural: and/or nonstructural BMPs for controlling erosion and preventing the discharge of pollutants to the MS4. 
(b)  Responsible person. The, person with overall responsibility of the construction, such as the general contractor, shall be jointly responsible with the person at whose direction the construction is being conducted for compliance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Recordkeeping. The person or persons responsible shall retain, and make available to the stormwater manager, for inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained under this section or order issued hereunder. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years after expiration of the applicable permit. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this section, or where the person or persons responsible have been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the stormwater manager. 
(d)  Permitting purpose. The purpose of permitting is to obtain and review proposed sediment and erosion control plans for any construction activities. 
(e)  Sediment and erosion control permit. 
(1)  Applicability. Unless specifically exempted, a sediment and erosion control permit, as defined and regulated by this section, shall be obtained from the stormwater manager for any construction activities causing land disturbance. The sediment and erosion control permit must be obtained prior to commencement of any construction activities including, but not limited to any development, excavation, clearing, grading, regrading, landfilling, berming, and diking of land. 
(2)  Exemptions. A sediment and erosion control permit shall not be required for the following: customary and incidental routine grounds maintenance, landscaping, and home gardening; construction activities related to bona fide agricultural, ranching, and farming operations which constitute the principal use of a tract of ground in the city and are under the jurisdiction of the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture. Food, and Forestry; construction activities occurring at oil and gas exploration and production related industries and pipeline operations that are under the jurisdiction of the Oklahoma Corporation Commission; and construction activities occurring on Indian Country lands (as defined in 18 USC Section 1151). 
(3)  Application for sediment and erosion control permit. For each sediment and erosion control permit a written application from the owner of the site, or his/her authorized representative, shall be provided to the stormwater manager in the form and with the content prescribed in this section, and shall be accompanied by a copy of a sediment and erosion control plan with the content prescribed in this section, and the required sediment and erosion control permit fee. The permit application shall include the following information: 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of the legal owner of the property for which the sediment and erosion control permit is requested; 
b.  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, if different from the property owner; 
c.  Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of any and all contractors, subcontractors or persons actually doing the land disturbing or land filling activities; 
d.  Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the person(s) responsible for the preparation of any required vicinity map; 
e.  Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the person(s) responsible for preparation of the sediment and erosion control plan and any required reports; 
f.  Legal description of the site and the address of the site (if a valid address has been assigned and/or accepted by the City of Miami); 
g.  Size of the construction site, measured in acres; 
h.  Proposed start date of the project; 
i.  Proposed completion date of the project; 
j.  Date of the application; and 
k.  Signature(s) of the owner(s) of the site or an authorized representative. 
(4)  Sediment and erosion control plan requirements. These plans shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed construction activities on water resources, and the best management practices and other measures proposed to minimize soil erosion and prevent off-site sedimentation. All sediment and erosion control measures must be properly selected, installed, and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and good engineering practices. All construction activities including but not limited to the development, excavation, clearing, grading, regarding, landfilling, berming, and diking of land shall be performed in strict accordance with the approved plan. 
a.  For construction sites less than one (1) acre that are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one (1) acre or more, the following information shall be included in any plan: 
i.  A project narrative describing the nature of the construction activity; 
ii.  A description of any surrounding watercourses, water bodies and other significant geographical features; 
iii.  Legal description of the site and the address of the site (if a valid address has been assigned and/or accepted by the City of Miami); 
iv.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and/or developer of the property where the land disturbing activity is proposed; 
v.  A description of, and specifications for, sediment and erosion control measures to minimize on-site erosion and prevent off-site sedimentation during the construction process, including provisions to preserve topsoil and limit disturbance. Minimum control measures must include the proper installation and maintenance of silt screen around the perimeter of the construction site. The applicant may propose the use of any sediment and erosion control measures in a plan provided such measures are proven to be as or more effective than the measures contained in this section. 
vi.  A chronological schedule describing when the sediment and erosion control measures will be implemented during the construction process; 
vii.  A description of temporary and permanent stabilization measures. The plan shall ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable and that disturbed portions of site are stabilized. Stabilization practices may include but are not limited to the establishment of temporary vegetation, establishment of permanent vegetation, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation, and other appropriate measures. Use of impervious surfaces for stabilization should be avoided. Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased, but in no case more than fourteen (14) days after the construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased except: 
a.  Where the initiation of stabilization measures by the fourteenth (14th) day after construction activity temporarily or permanently ceased is precluded by adverse climatological conditions (i.e., snow, ice, heavy rains, or drought) stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable; and 
b.  Where construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily ceased, and earth disturbing activities will be resumed within twenty-one (21) days, temporary stabilization measures do not have to be initiated on that portion of the site; and 
c.  The stormwater manager may require any additional information or data deemed appropriate and/or may impose such conditions thereto as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section or the preservation of public health and safety. 
b.  For construction sites greater than or equal to one (1) acre and for construction sites that are less than one (1) acre if the construction site is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one (1) acre or more, sediment and erosion control plans shall be prepared in accordance with good engineering practices. In addition the following information shall be included in any plan: 
i.  A project narrative describing the nature of the construction activity; 
ii.  An attached vicinity map showing the location of the site in relationship to the surrounding area's watercourses, water bodies and other significant geographical features, roads and other significant structures, and showing suitable contours for the topography. An indication of the scale used (this map shall be at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch = one hundred (100) feet) and an arrow indicating north shall be included on the map; 
iii.  Legal description of the site and the address of the site (if a valid address has been assigned and/or accepted by the City of Miami); 
iv.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and/or developer of the property where the land disturbing activity is proposed; 
v.  A chronological schedule and description of construction activities that disturb soils of the site (e.g., clearing, grubbing, excavation, grading, utilities and infrastructure installation); 
vi.  A description of, and specifications for, sediment and erosion control measures to minimize on-site erosion and prevent off-site sedimentation during the construction process, including provisions to preserve topsoil and limit disturbance. Minimum control measures include the proper installation and maintenance of silt screen appropriately installed at the construction site; the proper installation and maintenance of straw bales around all storm sewer inlets; the proper installation and maintenance of straw bales to minimize erosion on all slopes greater than three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical (3:1) where land disturbing activity is planned; and stabilized gravel construction site entrances/exits to prevent tracking or flowing of sediment onto public rights-of-way. The applicant may propose the use of any sediment and erosion control measures in a plan provided such measures are proven to be as or more effective than the measures contained in this section. 
vii.  A chronological schedule describing when the sediment and erosion control measures will be implemented during the construction process; 
viii.  A description of temporary and permanent stabilization measures. The plan shall ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable and, that disturbed portions of site are stabilized. Stabilization practices may include but are not limited to the establishment of temporary vegetation, establishment of permanent vegetation, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation, and other appropriate measures. Use of impervious surfaces for stabilization should be avoided. Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased, but in no case more than fourteen (14) days after the construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased except: 
a.  Where the initiation of stabilization measures by the fourteenth (14th) day after construction activity temporarily or permanently ceased is precluded by adverse climatological conditions (i.e., snow, ice, heavy rains, or drought) stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable; and 
b.  Where construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily ceased, and earth disturbing activities will be resumed within twenty-one (21) days, temporary stabilization measures do not have to be initiated on that portion of the site; 
ix.  A description of measures that will be installed during the construction process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed; 
x.  A copy of all required state and federal stormwater discharge permits (NPDES filed with EPA; OPDES filed with ODEQ) for the construction site shall be provided to the stormwater manager. If an OKR10 permit is required by ODEQ for stormwater discharges from a construction site, then the following documents shall be provided to the Environmental Administrator: a copy of the notice of intent submitted to ODEQ for the OKR10 permit, a copy of all stormwater pollution prevention plans developed for the construction site, and a copy of the authorization to discharge stormwater issued by ODEQ; and 
xi.  The stormwater manager may require any additional information or data deemed appropriate and/or may impose such conditions thereto as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section or the preservation of public health and safety. 
(5)  Permit application review. The stormwater manager shall review each application for a sediment and erosion control permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this section. Within fifteen (15) business days after receiving a complete application, the stormwater manager shall: 
a.  Approve the permit application; 
b.  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this section, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
c.  Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for disapproval. 
(6)  Permit disapproval. If the stormwater manager determines that the sediment and erosion control plan does not meet the requirements of this section, then a sediment and erosion control permit shall not be issued. The sediment and erosion control plan must be resubmitted and must be approved by the stormwater manager before the land disturbance activity begins. 
(7)  Conditions of approval. In granting any sediment and erosion control permit pursuant to this section, the stormwater manager may impose such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a nuisance or unreasonable hazard to persons or to a public or private property. Such conditions shall include (even if not specifically written in the permit), but need not be limited to: 
a.  The granting (or securing from others) and the recording in county land records of easements for drainage facilities, including the acceptance of their discharge on the property of others, and for the maintenance of slopes or erosion control facilities; 
b.  Adequate control of dust by watering, or other control methods acceptable to the stormwater manager, and in conformance with applicable air pollution ordinances; 
c.  Improvements of any existing grading ground surface or drainage condition on the site (not to exceed the area as proposed for work or development in the application) to meet the standards required under this section. 
d.  Sediment traps and basins located within a densely populated area or in the proximity of an elementary school, playground or other area where small children may congregate without adult supervision may, be requested to install additional safety related devices. 
(8)  Permit authorization. The issuance of a sediment and erosion control permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work described in the permit, or shown on the approved sediment and erosion control plan and specifications, all in strict compliance with the requirements of this section, unless each and every modification or waiver is specifically listed and given specific approval by the environmental administrator. 
(9)  Permit duration. The permittee shall fully perform and complete all of the work required in the sequence shown on the plans within the time limit specified in the permit. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for the period during which the proposed land disturbing or filling activities and soil storage takes place or is scheduled to take place, whichever is shorter, but in no event shall such a permit be valid for more than one (1) year after cessation of construction activity. 
(10)  Responsibility of permittee. The permittee shall maintain a copy of the sediment and erosion control permit, approved plans and reports required under the sediment and erosion control permit on the work site and available for public inspection during all working hours. The permittee shall, at all times, be in conformity with the approved sediment and erosion control plan and also conform to the following: 
a.  General. Not withstanding other conditions or provisions of the sediment and erosion control permit, or the minimum standards set forth in this section, the permittee is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent property. No person shall grade on land in any manner, or so close to the property line as to endanger or damage any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or any other public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking, erosion, sedimentation or other damage or personal injury which might result; and 
b.  Public ways. The permittee shall be responsible for the prompt removal of, and the correction of damages resulting from any soil, miscellaneous debris or other materials washed, spilled, tracked, dumped or otherwise deposited on public streets, highways, sidewalks or other public thoroughfare, incident to the construction activity, or during transit to and from the construction site. 
(11)  Liability. The permittee is responsible for safely and legally completing all phases of the project, including proper disposal of all debris associated with the project in an approved disposal site. Neither the issuance of a sediment and erosion control permit under the provisions of this section, nor the compliance with the provisions hereto or with any condition imposed by the city, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the city for damages to persons or property. 
(12)  Action upon noncompliance. 
a.  In the event work does not conform to the sediment and erosion control permit or to the plans and specifications or to any conditions imposed by the City of Miami, notice to comply shall be given to the permittee in writing. The notice shall set forth a notification and compliance period of at least fifteen (15) days for the permittee to comply with the requirements of the notice, except that when an imminent hazard exists the stormwater manager may require that corrective work begin immediately. The notification and compliance period will begin on the day the notice is mailed to the permittee or the day the notice is posted on the property that is not conforming to the permit requirements, except that when an imminent hazard exists the stormwater manager may order an immediate summary abatement action to abate the violation. At the time of mailing of notice, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. Said notice shall further advise that, should the permittee fail to comply with the requirements of the notice by the established deadline, the work necessary to achieve compliance may be done by the City of Miami or a designated contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the permittee. Issuance of a notice to comply shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other enforcement action. 
b.  If the city finds any existing conditions not as stated in the application or approved plans, the stormwater manager may issue a stop-work order requiring that all construction activities halt when a construction site is in violation of this section. The stop-work order may apply to all construction activity on the subject property which may be directly or indirectly related to site drainage and which is being performed pursuant to any permits, licenses, franchises or contracts issued or approved by the city. The stop-work order may order a work stoppage on all construction activity on buildings or structures and appurtenances thereto, including but not limited to building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, street work, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, and all utilities including but not limited to gas, electric, telephone and cable television. The stormwater manager may also suspend or revoke any sediment and erosion control, site preparation, grading, erosion control, earth change, construction, or any other permit when any part of this section is violated. 
c.  The violation of any provision of this section, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or thirty (30) days in jail, or both, plus court costs as set by the city. Each day or any portion of a day during which any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
d.  Other actions described in the penalties and administrative remedies section of this chapter may be taken by the city, including but not limited to suspension of MS4 access, water supply severance, injunctive relief, abatement, remediation, and restoration of lands. The permittee shall be responsible for the costs incurred by the city. Failure to pay will result in the city seeking recovery of costs and damages pursuant to the conditions set forth in this chapter. 
(13)  Changes to plans. All proposals to modify the approved sediment and erosion control plans must be submitted in writing to the stormwater manager. No grading or any type of work in connection with any proposed modification shall be initiated without prior written approval of the stormwater manager. 
(14)  Inspection and supervision. The city shall conduct construction site inspections upon receiving a complaint of violation of this section and as needed to evaluate compliance with this section. The permittee shall notify the stormwater manager when there are any departures from the approved sediment and erosion control plan and at the following stages: 
a.  Upon completion of installation of perimeter sediment and erosion controls; 
b.  At least twenty-four (24) hours but not more than seventy-two (72) hours (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) prior to commencing initial grading or land disturbing activities; 
c.  When construction and land disturbing activities are halted for a period of thirty (30) days or more; 
d.  At least twenty-four (24) hours but not more than seventy-two (72) hours (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) prior to when construction or land disturbing activities shall recommence after being halted for a period of thirty (30) days or more; 
e.  Upon submitting a notice of termination to ODEQ in compliance with any OKR10 permit requirements; and 
f.  Upon completion of final grading, permanent drainage and erosion control facilities including established ground covers and planting, and all other work of the permit. 
(15)  Maintenance during and after construction. For any property on which grading or other work has been done pursuant to a sediment and erosion control permit granted under the provisions of this section, the permittee or owner or an agent of the owner shall inspect all sediment and erosion control measures and other protective measures identified in the sediment and erosion control plan at least once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of a storm event of five-tenths (0.5) inches or greater and shall maintain and repair all sediment and erosion control measures, graded surfaces and erosion control facilities, drainage structures or means and other protective devices, plantings, and ground cover installed while construction is active. After construction is complete, the owner or their agent shall continue to regularly inspect the vegetation until adequate turf establishment or other suitable vegetative cover is established. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-174. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  The stormwater manager shall be permitted to enter facilities, premises, watercourses and waterways subject to regulation under this chapter for the purpose of observing, measuring, sampling, testing and inspecting as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(b)  Facility operators shall allow the stormwater manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES or OPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. Any permits, pollution prevention plans, or other documents regarding a facility's stormwater discharge shall be made available to the stormwater manager when requested. 
(c)  The stormwater manager shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(d)  The stormwater manager has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the stormwater manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the stormwater manager access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter. 
(g)  If the stormwater manager has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-175. - Penalties and administrative remedies. 
(a)  Notice of violation. 
(1)  Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the stormwater manager may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of fines, abatement and remediation costs; and 
f.  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(2)  The notice of violation shall set forth a notification and compliance period of at least fifteen (15) days for the violator to comply with the requirements of the notice or submit in writing to the stormwater manager an explanation of the violation and a satisfactory plan for the correction and prevention of the violation, except that when an imminent hazard exists the stormwater manager may require that corrective work begin immediately. The notification and compliance period will begin on the day the notice is mailed to the violator or the day the notice is posted on the property having the violation, except that when an imminent hazard exists the stormwater manager may order an immediate summary abatement action to abate the violation. At the time of mailing of notice, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to comply with the requirements of the notice by the established deadline, the work necessary to achieve compliance may be done by the city or a designated contractor and the costs thereof shall be charged to the violator. Submission of a satisfactory plan for the correction and prevention of the violation in no way relieves the person of liability for any violation(s) occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Issuance of a notice of violation shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other enforcement action. 
(b)  Penalty. 
(1)  Penalties for violations of permit conditions. Penalties for this ordinance are set by the current penalties as set forth by the ODEQ Phase II Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System currently in effect for the city. Any changes to these penalties in the state-issued permit for the city will be considered current for this chapter. 
a.  Permit violations are subject to the fines and penalties according to 27A O.S. § 2-6-206. 
b.  Administrative penalties may be assessed up to $10,000.00 per day per violation for each day during which the violations continue with a $125,000.00 per violation maximum. 
c.  Civil penalties may be assessed up to $10,000.00 per day per violation. 
d.  Criminal penalties may range from the minimum of $2,500.00 to the maximum of $2,000,000.00 with a maximum jail time of thirty (30) years in the state penitentiary. 
e.  Penalties for permit fraud are subject to a maximum of $20,000.00 and a maximum of four (4) years in prison. 
(c)  Abatement, remediation and restoration. 
(1)  Prior to commencement by the city of any abatement, restoration, remediation, or other ordered work, the city shall file a notice of lien with the county clerk describing the property and stating that the city claims a lien on the property for the abatement, restoration, or remediation costs and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner, except that when an imminent hazard exists the stormwater manager may file a notice of lien as soon as practicable after the initiation of any summary abatement action. 
(2)  If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements and within the time period set forth in the notice of violation, then agents of the city or a designated contractor are authorized to enter upon the subject property to perform the required abatement, restoration, remediation, or other ordered work. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the authorized enforcement agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(d)  Demand for payment, liens, and certified statements of cost. After abatement, restoration, or remediation of a violation has occurred, the stormwater manager shall determine the actual cost of the abatement, restoration, or remediation and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith, including, but not limited to sampling and field testing costs, laboratory costs, and the cost of the notice and mailing. The city shall forward by mail to the property owner a statement of the actual cost and demanding payment. At the time of mailing of notice, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of the statement, the city shall forward a certified statement of the amount of cost to the county treasurer of the county in which the property is located, and the same shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. The cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the cost is certified to the county treasurer and shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. At any time prior to the collection as provided herein the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon. 
(e)  Suspension of MS4 access. 
(1)  The stormwater manager may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of Oklahoma. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the stormwater manager may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of Oklahoma, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this chapter, without the prior approval of the stormwater manager. 
(f)  Utility severance. Whenever a person or industry has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter or orders issued hereunder, the stormwater manager may authorize the utility services, as in electric, water, sewer or all, to be severed. Service will only recommence, at the violator's expense, after the violator has satisfactorily demonstrated an ability to comply, and actual compliance. 
(g)  Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement, processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. The stormwater manager may authorize summary abatement actions to protect public health, safety, and welfare. Authorization of a summary abatement action shall grant agents of the city or a designated contractor the right to enter upon the subject property to perform the required summary abatement work. 
(i)  Injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the city may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(j)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-176. - Stormwater management fee. 
(a)  In order to provide revenue to fund the costs associated with a stormwater management program, there is hereby established a stormwater management fee. 
(b)  All revenues collected from the stormwater management fee shall be deposited to the stormwater management fund. 
(c)  The stormwater management fund shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Costs of development, administration, and implementation of the stormwater management program including operation costs, capital expenses, salaries and consulting fees; 
(2)  Public education and outreach; 
(3)  Stormwater pollution prevention activities; 
(4)  Illicit discharge detection and elimination; 
(5)  Inspection, monitoring, surveillance, and enforcement activities; 
(6)  Abatement, remediation, and restoration activities; 
(7)  Field sampling and testing equipment, supplies, and services; 
(8)  Laboratory testing equipment, supplies, and services; 
(9)  Engineering and GIS equipment, supplies, and services; 
(10)  Storm sewer system development, upgrades, and repairs; 
(11)  Retrofitting developed areas for pollution control; 
(12)  The acquisition by gift, purchase, or condemnation of real and personal property, and interests therein, necessary to construct, operate, and maintain the municipal storm sewer system; and 
(13)  Other equipment, supplies, and activities which are reasonably required. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 24-177. - Sediment/erosion control permit fee. 
    Sediment and erosion control permit fees: 
(1)  Less than one (1) acre ..... $50.00 
(2)  One (1) acre and greater ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 24-178. - Stormwater management fees. 
    The fees referenced in section 24-176 are as follows: 
    Two dollars per month per individual water meter per single-family residential structure up to one (1) ESU for the real property upon which the structure is situated. An additional $2.00 fee shall be billed for any portion of the next whole ESU for the affected property. 
    In the event a residential structure contains more than one (1) residential dwelling place, then $2.00 per month per individual water meter per residential structure, up to one ESU. An additional $2.00 fee shall be billed for any portion of the next whole ESU for the affected property. 
    Two dollars per month for each industrial property structure and for each commercial property structure, up to one (1) ESU. An additional $2.00 fee shall be billed for any portion of the next whole ESU for each such structure. 
    ESU means equivalency service unit. An ESU is forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet, or one (1) acre, of impervious surface. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Chapter 25 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate persons furnishing public transportation, Art. III, § 6. 
Cross reference- Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12; traffic, ch. 23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 25-1-25-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of taxicabs, 11 O.S. § 22-118. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor bus shall mean a motor vehicle designated and constructed for the general transportation of passengers for hire and possessing a manufacturer's rated seating capacity of ten (10) or more passengers. 
    Passenger shall mean any person riding or being transported in a taxicab, with or without payment of fare, excluding the driver thereof and agents, servants, or employees or the operator riding in such a taxicab as part of their employment. 
    Taxicab shall mean a motor vehicle of any kind, character or description, which is being used as a taxicab, cab, car for hire or livery car, engaged in the carrying of passengers for hire on the streets of the city. Such term shall include motor vehicles being used for any such purpose, though having no passenger for hire at a particular moment. Such term shall not mean or include motor vehicles owned by undertakers and used exclusively for funeral services, or motor vehicles owned by others, while being used for service for hire at funerals or weddings, nor shall it include motor buses. 
(Code 1964, § 25-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 25-27. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to have a regular inspection of taxicabs made at such times as he sees fit, but in any event, at least once each twelve (12) months, and if any taxicab does not comply with the terms of this article or the requirements of the state law, the same shall be taken out of service. 
(Code 1964, § 25-2) 
Sec. 25-28. - Parking on streets. 
    No person shall establish a taxicab parking place or stand on the streets of the city, nor shall any taxicab be parked upon the streets for the purpose of soliciting passengers. 
(Code 1964, § 25-3) 
Sec. 25-29. - Enforcement. 
    The terms and conditions of this article shall be enforced by the chief of police and the police department. 
(Code 1964, § 25-4) 
Secs. 25-30-25-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE 

Sec. 25-46. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct a taxicab business within the city unless he has an unrevoked license so to do. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab within the city unless such license has first been obtained by the owner or operator of the business. 
(Code 1964, § 25-14) 
Sec. 25-47. - Application generally. 
(a)  Application for a license under this division shall be filed with the city clerk, addressed to the mayor and board of commissioners, and setting forth the following facts: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; if a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers, directors, and stockholders thereof. 
(2)  The address of the principal place of business of the applicant. 
(3)  The type and seating capacity of each vehicle to be used as a taxicab, according to the manufacturer's rating, and the number of doors thereof. 
(4)  The length of time such taxicabs have been in use and the make and serial, engine and body numbers thereof. 
(5)  The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business. 
(6)  Where proposed stands and garages are to be located. 
(7)  The experience, if any, the applicant has had in such business. 
(b)  The state certificate of title for each taxicab to be used by the applicant shall be exhibited in making such application. 
(Code 1964, § 25-15) 
Sec. 25-48. - Insurance required of applicant. 
(a)  No license shall be issued under this division until the applicant has filed with the mayor and board of commissioners proof of financial responsibility. 
(b)  As used in this section, proof of financial responsibility shall mean a certificate of any insurance carrier authorized to do business in the state certifying that there is in effect a policy of liability insurance insuring the owner and operator of the taxicab business, his agents and employees while in the performance of their duties against loss from any liability imposed by law for damages including damages for care and loss of services because of bodily injury to or death of any person and injury to or destruction of property caused by accident and arising out of the ownership, use or operation of such taxicab or taxicabs, subject to minimum limits, exclusive of interest and cost, with respect to each such motor vehicle as follows: 
(1)  Ten thousand dollars because of bodily injury to or death of one (1) person in any one (1) accident and, subject to such limit for one (1) person; 
(2)  Twenty thousand dollars because of bodily injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident; and 
(3)  Ten thousand dollars because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one (1) accident. 
(c)  Proof may be evidenced by the bond of an insurance carrier duly authorized to do business within the state, or a bond with at least two (2) individual sureties each owning real estate within this state, and together having equities equal in value to at least twice the amount of such bond, which real estate shall be conditioned for payment of the amounts specified in this section. Such bond shall be filed with the state department of public safety and shall not be cancelable except after ten (10) days' written notice to the commissioner of the state department of public safety. 
(d)  Proof of financial responsibility may be evidenced by the certificate of the state treasurer that the person named therein has deposited with him $30,000.00 in cash or securities such as may legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds of a market value of $30,000.00. 
(e)  If the proof of insurance is a certificate of insurance, the policy the certificate evidences shall be noncancellable without ten (10) days' notice to the mayor and board of commissioners and to the licensee. Cancellation of proof of financial responsibility shall operate to terminate the license of the operator to whom it is issued as of the date when such cancellation becomes effective, without notice to the mayor and board of commissioners, but such license may be reinstated if the operator within thirty (30) days, files with the mayor and board of commissioners additional proof of financial responsibility and if during such period of time when such license was revoked, such licensee has not engaged in the taxicab business within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 25-16) 
State Law reference- Proof of financial responsibility, 47 O.S. § 8-104. 
Sec. 25-49. - Hearing on application; determination of public convenience and necessity. 
(a)  The mayor and board of commissioners shall conduct a hearing on each application for a license under this division not later than twenty (20) days after the same is filed, and the applicant and all the then holders of taxicab licenses shall be notified of such hearing by mail at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. The mayor and board of commissioners shall determine whether or not public convenience and necessity require the issuance of the license. In making such determination, the mayor and board of commissioners shall take into consideration the following: 
(1)  Whether the demands of public convenience and necessity require the proposed or additional taxicab service within the city. 
(2)  The financial responsibility of the applicant and the likelihood of the proposed service being permanent, responsible and satisfactory. 
(3)  The number, kind, type and condition of the equipment to be used. 
(4)  The number of taxicabs now operating in the city and the increased traffic congestion and demand for increased parking space upon the streets of the city which may result, and whether the safe use of the streets to the public, both vehicular and pedestrian will be preserved. 
(5)  Such other relevant facts as the mayor and board of commissioners may deem advisable and necessary. 
(b)  The hearing required by this section shall not be necessary for the renewal of any license. 
(Code 1964, § 25-17) 
Sec. 25-50. - Fee. 
    Each operator of a taxicab business shall pay an annual license fee of $10.00 which shall be paid at the time the license is issued. In addition thereto, each such operator shall pay a taxicab license of $5.00 for every taxicab placed in service by him under his license as an annual fee for such taxicab. Such taxicab license shall be paid at the time the license is issued. 
(Code 1964, § 25-18) 
Sec. 25-51. - Issuance or refusal. 
(a)  After the hearing provided for in section 25-49, the mayor and board of commissioners shall have the authority to refuse the license applied for or to order its issuance. 
(b)  Such license shall be issued by the city clerk upon the order of the mayor and board of commissioners. 
(Code 1964, § 25-19) 
Sec. 25-52. - Display. 
    The original or a copy of a license issued under this division shall be displayed, at all times, in the interior of each taxicab covered thereby. 
(Code 1964, § 25-20) 
Sec. 25-53. - Number to be painted on vehicle. 
    The number of the license issued under this division shall be painted on both sides and the rear of each taxicab operated under such license. Such numbers shall not be less than six (6) inches in height. 
(Code 1964, § 25-21) 
Sec. 25-54. - Assignment or transfer. 
    A taxicab license issued under this division shall not be assignable or transferable unless the taxicab to which it applies is completely out of service and/or replaced with another vehicle. 
(Code 1964, § 25-22) 
Sec. 25-55. - Expiration. 
    Each license issued under this division shall expire on June thirtieth next following its issuance. 
(Code 1964, § 25-23) 
Sec. 25-56. - Responsibility of licensee for acts of drivers, employees or agents. 
    Each person licensed under this division to operate a taxicab business shall be responsible for the act or omission of any driver, servant, agent or employee who is driving or in control of a taxicab under such license. 
(Code 1964, § 25-24) 
Sec. 25-57. - Revocation. 
    The mayor and board of commissioners shall have the power and authority to revoke any license issued under this division whenever it appears that such revocation would be in the best interests of the public. Before such revocation, the mayor and board of commissioners shall conduct a public hearing thereon. The licensee shall be notified of such hearing by mail at least five (5) days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(Code 1964, § 25-25) 
Secs. 25-58-25-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 25-76. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab within the city without first obtaining a permit so to do. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person owning or operating a taxicab business in the city to permit or allow any taxicab to be driven by a person who does not have such a permit. 
(Code 1964, § 25-35) 
Sec. 25-77. - Application. 
    Application for a permit required by this division shall be filed with the chief of police on forms provided by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 25-36) 
Sec. 25-78. - Applicant to be licensed by state. 
    No permit required by this division shall be issued unless the applicant has a valid driver license issued by the state. 
(Code 1964, § 25-37; Ord. No. 1578, § 1, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 25-79. - Applicant to furnish picture and fingerprints. 
    Each applicant for a permit under this division shall furnish his picture and fingerprints in a form prescribed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 25-38) 
Sec. 25-80. - Issuance. 
    Drivers' permits required by this division shall be issued by the chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 25-39) 
Sec. 25-81. - Display. 
    The original or a copy of the driver's permit issued under this division shall be displayed upon the interior of the taxicab driven by the holder of the permit. 
(Code 1964, § 25-40) 
Chapter 26 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Airport zoning ordinance, § 5-51 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; planning and development, ch. 18; subdivisions, ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Zoning ordinances authorized, 11 O.S. § 43-101. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this chapter; words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "used" includes arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
    Accessory or accessory use shall mean a use that is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and, (except in the case of off-street parking space) located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is related. An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Residential accommodations for servants. 
(2)  Residential accommodations for caretakers, or proprietors, on the same zoning lot with any use listed in Use Group 7 and Use Groups 17 through 20, inclusive. 
(3)  Keeping of dogs and cats, but only for personal enjoyment or household use and not for any commercial purpose. 
(4)  Swimming pool for the use of the occupants of: 
a.  Residents or their guests, 
b.  Members of a club and their guests, and 
c.  Guests of a hotel or motel. 
(5)  Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room, or similar accessory building or other structure. 
(6)  Home occupations (see definition of home occupations in this section). 
(7)  Incinerators incidental to a principal use. 
(8)  Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a commercial use or manufacturing use. 
(9)  Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations in sections 26-431 through 26-437. 
    Agent of owner shall mean any person who can show certified written proof that he is acting for the property owner. 
    Alley shall mean a public or private way not more than thirty (30) feet wide affording only secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Automobile wrecking shall mean the dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts. 
    Basement shall mean a story whose floor is more than twelve (12) inches, but not more than one-half of its story height below the average level of the adjoining ground (as distinguished from a cellar, which is a story more than one-half below such level). A basement, when used as a dwelling, shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement and as a half story for purposes of side yard determination. 
    Billboard. See "Sign, advertising." 
    Board of adjustment or board shall mean the board of adjustment of the city. 
    Boarding or lodging home shall mean a dwelling or part thereof where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation for two (2) or more persons not transients. 
    Building shall mean any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property. When such a structure is divided into separate parts by one (1) or more walls unpierced by doors, windows, or similar openings and extending from the ground up, each part is deemed a separate building, except as regards minimum side yard requirements as herein provided. 
    Buildable width or buildable depth shall mean the width or depth respectively of that part of the lot not included within the open spaces herein required. 
    Building, height of, shall mean the vertical distance from the average contact ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip, or gambrel roofs. 
    Building, principal, shall mean a building in which is conducted the principal use of the building site on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building on the building site on which the same is located. 
    Building inspector shall mean the building inspector of the City of Miami. 
    Cellar shall mean a story the floor of which is more than one-half of its story height below the average contact ground level at the exterior walls of the building. A cellar shall be counted as a story, for the purpose of height regulations, only if used for dwelling purposes other than by a janitor or caretaker employed on the premises. 
    City attorney, city engineer shall mean the officials of the City of Miami bearing these titles. 
    City commission shall mean the board of commissioners of the City of Miami. 
    Comprehensive plan shall mean the Miami Area Comprehensive Plan. 
    Court shall mean an open, unoccupied, and obstructed space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings. 
    Coverage, lot or site, shall mean the percentage of the lot or site area covered by the building or buildings on the lot. 
    Distance between structures shall mean the shortest horizontal distance measured between the vertical walls of two (2) structures as herein defined perpendicular to an axis, all points along which are midway between such walls. 
    Department store shall mean a store or group of shops under unified management selling a variety of merchandise groups, normally including clothing, appliances, hardware, furniture, etc. 
    Development shall mean any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Discontinuance of a nonconforming open use of land or sign shall mean the discontinuance of the activity and removal of all nonconforming above-surface improvements, equipment, signs, goods and materials. The requirement of removal shall not apply to contents of a dump or landfill. 
    District shall mean a portion of the territory of the City of Miami within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    District, component, shall mean a district which, together with other component districts, forms a district group. 
    District, group, shall mean two (2) or more districts grouped together and treated as a single district. For example, an R district or a residence district is a district group consisting of the RS, RM and RT districts. 
    Dwelling shall mean any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one (1) or more persons, but not including a tent, trailer or mobile home. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, shall mean a building or portion thereof designed for or used by two (2) or more families or housekeeping units. 
    Dwelling, single-family, attached, shall mean a building designed for or used by one (1) family or housekeeping unit which has one (1) or two (2) common sidewalls with one (1) or two (2) adjoining single-family units. 
    Dwelling, single-family detached, shall mean a building designed for or used exclusively for residence purposes by one (1) family or housekeeping unit that is surrounded on all sides by yards or other open space on the same zoning lot, and which does not have a common wall with another principal building. 
    Dwelling unit shall mean one (1) room, or a suite of two (2) or more rooms, designed for or used by one (1) family or housekeeping unit for living and sleeping purposes and having only one (1) kitchen or kitchenette. 
    Dwelling group shall mean a group of two (2) or more detached dwellings located on a zoning lot and having any yard or court in common. 
    Eating place shall mean an establishment serving prepared food to the public primarily for consumption on the premises, including cafes, lunch counters and restaurants. 
    Family shall mean a person living alone; or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than four (4) persons not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, motel, hotel, fraternity house or sorority house. 
    Floor area, for determining off-street parking and loading requirements, is defined in section 26-357(c). 
    Frontage shall mean all the property on one (1) side of a thoroughfare between two (2) intersecting thoroughfares (crossing or terminating), or if the street or place be deadended, then all of the property abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street or place and the deadend. 
    Habitable floor shall mean any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used for storage purposes only is not a habitable floor. 
    Home occupation shall mean an accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision, or sale of goods and/or services, subject to conditions set forth in section 26-418. 
    Hotel shall mean a building, or portion thereof, containing rooms occupied primarily by transients who are lodged with or without meals in which provisions are not made for cooking in any individual apartment, and in which are provided such services as are incidental to the use thereof as a temporary residence. 
    Housekeeping unit shall mean a suite of one (1) or more rooms having separate cooking facilities, used as the domicile or home of one (1) family. 
    Incinerator, accessory, shall mean an incinerator, indoor or outdoor, for the burning of refuse produced on the premises, incidental to a use permitted on the premises. 
    Junk yard shall mean a place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawn shops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment when conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, sale of used cars in operating condition or salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing operation. 
    Kennel shall mean any premises, except where accessory to an agricultural use, where five (5) or more dogs, ten (10) weeks in age or older, are kept. 
    Lot shall mean a zoning lot, as defined herein. 
    Lot area shall mean the area of a zoning lot. 
    Lot, back-up or through, shall mean an interior lot whose rear line abuts on a thoroughfare other than an alley. 
    Lot, corner, shall mean a zoning lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or part of the same street forming an angle of more than forty-five (45) degrees and of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. The point of intersection of the street lines is the corner. Any portion of a corner lot that is more than one hundred (100) feet from the point of intersection of the two (2) street lines or the two (2) tangents of the same street shall be considered an interior lot. 
    Lot depth shall mean the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot line of a zoning lot. 
    Lot, interior, shall mean any zoning lot that is not a corner lot. 
    Lot line shall mean a boundary of a zoning lot. 
    Lot line, front, shall mean the street line at the front of a zoning lot. The owner, for the purpose of this chapter, shall have the privilege of selecting any street lot line as the front lot line. 
    Lot line, rear, shall mean the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side, shall mean a lot line that is not a front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a zoning lot from a street other than an alley is an exterior side lot line. 
    Lot width shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a zoning lot. 
    Lot, zoning, shall mean a piece, parcel, or tract of land that meets all of the following requirements at the date of adoption of this chapter, or amendment thereof: 
(1)  Is located within a single block, 
(2)  Has frontage on an improved and accepted public street, 
(3)  Is occupied, utilized or designated by its owner or developer to be occupied, developed, or utilized as a unit under single ownership or control for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open spaces as are required by this chapter. 
A zoning lot may be subsequently divided into two (2) or more zoning lots, provided each such new zoning lot complies fully with this chapter at the time of division. A zoning lot, therefore, may or may not coincide with a lot as shown on official tax maps or on any recorded subdivision or deed. 
    Manufactured home shall mean a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is fourteen (14) body feet or more in width and thirty-six (36) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is five hundred four (504) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling on a permanent foundation, said structure shall conform to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C., § 5401 et seq.), as amended, and applicable codes of the City of Miami. 
    Mean sea level shall mean the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. 
    Mobile home shall mean a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
    Mobile home park shall mean any lot upon which are located one (1) or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling purposes, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for each accommodation, but excluding any lot upon which the only mobile home is one permitted by the board of adjustment under section 26-422(2). 
    Modular home shall mean a transportable, non-vehicular, prefabricated structure, requiring an independent permanent foundation, which is designed and constructed for the movement from a point of fabrication to a permanent foundation or location site, said home being required to meet all applicable codes of the City of Miami. 
    Motel shall mean a building or group of buildings, including either separate units or a row or rows of units which: 
(1)  Contain living or sleeping accommodations primarily for transient occupancy, and 
(2)  Provide one (1) off-street parking space on the same zoning lot for each individual living or sleeping unit. 
    Nonconforming use shall mean any lawful use, whether of a building or other structure or a tract of land, which does not conform to the applicable use regulations for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of a subsequent amendment thereto. No principal use shall, however, be deemed nonconforming because of failure to provide required accessory off-street parking spaces or required accessory off-street loading spaces, nor because of the existence of accessory signs, business entrances or show windows which are themselves nonconforming uses. 
    Nursing home shall mean any premises where more than three (3) persons are lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care. 
    Open porch shall mean a roofed space attached to a building on one (1) side and open on three (3) remaining sides. 
    Open space shall mean the area included in any side, rear or front yard or any other unoccupied space on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices, eaves or porches. 
    Parking space shall mean an area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet, either within a structure or in the open, excluding the area necessary for access under the provisions of this chapter, for the parking of a motor vehicle. When a garage or carport is provided for the sole use of an occupant of a single-family or two-family residence, the driveway leading to the garage or carport may be considered an additional parking space if it is suitable for the purpose. 
    Planned unit development (PUD) shall mean a land development project comprehensively planned as an entity via a unitary site plan which permits flexibility in building siting, mixtures of housing types and land uses, usable open spaces, and the preservation of significant natural features. 
(1)  A residential PUD is limited to: 
a.  Dwelling units without regard to dwelling type or whether unit ownership will be on the basis of fee ownership, cooperative apartments, condominiums, or otherwise; and 
b.  Nonresidential uses of an educational, cultural, or recreational character that are designed and intended to serve the PUD residents. 
(2)  A general PUD contains office or commercial uses exclusively or blends residential uses with office or commercial uses in a unified plan. 
    Planning commission shall mean the city planning commission of the City of Miami, Oklahoma. 
    Public agency shall mean any elected governmental agency or board or any agency or board appointed by an elected governmental body and acting within its delegated authority. 
    Setback shall mean the minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference, such as a thoroughfare right-of-way, to the nearest vertical wall or other element of a building or structure, as defined herein. Location points of measurement on buildings or structures are subject to the exceptions in section 26-382. 
    Sign, accessory. See "accessory" or "accessory use." 
    Sign, area of, shall mean the total area of those surfaces of a sign or sign structure on which the advertising or other information is placed, provided, however, that in the case of two (2) such surfaces placed back-to-back or three (3) such surfaces placed together in the form of a triangle, one (1) such surface (the one (1) having the smallest area, if they differ in area) shall not be counted in determining the area of the sign. 
    Sign shall mean any structure or part thereof, or any device attached to, painted on, or represented on a building or other structure, upon which is displayed or included any letter, work, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, decoration, device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an announcement, direction, advertisement or other attention-directing device. A sign shall not include a similar structure or device located within a building except for illuminated signs within show windows. A sign includes any billboard, but does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation or association of nations, or of any state, city or other political unit, or of any political, charitable, educational, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event. 
    Sign, advertising, shall mean a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment which is entirely or primarily conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the lot on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, bulletin, shall mean an accessory board or sign erected by a church, school, community center, public agency or institution on its own premises for announcement purposes. 
    Sign, business, shall mean an accessory sign which directs attention to a profession, business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered upon the same zoning lot. 
    Sign, flashing, shall mean an illuminated sign on which the artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. Any revolving illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign. 
    Sign, identification, shall mean an accessory sign whose content is limited to the name and/or occupation of the occupant of the premises. 
    Sign, illuminated, shall mean a sign designed to give forth any artificial light. 
    Sign, real estate, shall mean an accessory sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which it is maintained. 
    Stable, commercial, shall mean a stable where four (4) or more horses are boarded or kept. 
    Story shall mean that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, first, shall mean the lowest story or the ground story of any building the floor of which is not more than twelve (12) inches below the average contact ground level at the exterior walls of the building; except that any basement or cellar used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his family, shall be deemed the first story. 
    Story, half, shall mean a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level. A half-story containing a separate family shall be counted as a full story for the purpose of height regulation. 
    Street shall mean any thoroughfare other than an alley. 
    Street line shall mean the line separating the street right-of-way from the abutting property. 
    Structure shall mean anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
    Structural alteration shall mean any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Thoroughfare shall mean any public right-of-way which provides a public means of access to abutting property. 
    Thoroughfare, collector, shall mean any thoroughfare designated as a collector thoroughfare by the planning commission. 
    Thoroughfare, major, shall mean an existing or proposed street or highway identified as a major thoroughfare on the comprehensive plan. 
    Use, conditional, shall mean a use which is permitted in a district, subject to meeting certain conditions set forth herein. 
    Yard, front, shall mean an open space extending the full width of a lot between a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere herein. 
    Yard, rear, shall mean an open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this chapter. 
    Yard, side, shall mean an open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this chapter. 
    Yard, side, exterior, shall mean on a corner lot, a side yard abutting on a street. 
    Yard, side, interior, shall mean a side yard other than an exterior side yard. 
    Zoning lot. See "lot, zoning." 
    Zoning map shall mean the zoning map or maps of the city. 
    Zoning permit, special, shall mean a permit for certain uses issued by the board of adjustment in accordance with sections 26-33 to 26-40. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-15.1), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1405, 12-20-99; Ord. No. 1463, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 26-2. - Purpose. 
    The zoning regulations set forth in this chapter are enacted to implement the land use portion of the comprehensive plan for the city and to promote the health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the city and its citizens and to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-1), 6-18-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 43 O.S. § 43-103. 
Sec. 26-3. - Violation and penalty-Generally. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, or governmental agency who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply with any order or regulation made hereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specification of plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or permit issued hereunder, shall, for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefor shall be fined a sum not more than $100.00, or imprisonment for a term of not more than three (3) months, or be subject to both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day that a violation is permitted to exist shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-13.2.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-4. - Same-Enclosure of outdoor swimming pools. 
    Violation of section 26-438 relating to enclosure of outdoor swimming pools shall be a misdemeanor, punishable under section 1-5 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-13.2.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-5. - Same-Alternative procedure. 
    The city, or any person affected thereby, may institute appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use of any building, structure or land; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the unlawful occupancy of such building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-13.1), 6-18-79) 
State Law reference- Injunctive relief, 11 O.S. § 43-107. 
Sec. 26-6. - Validity. 
    Should any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. The city commission hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-16.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-7. - Repealer. 
(a)  Preceding ordinance. The zoning ordinance (herein called the preceding ordinance) that was enacted by Ordinance No. 833 is repealed with respect to all lands in the city, except as follows: 
(1)  All land in RF or C7 districts under the preceding ordinance shall continue to be subject to the terms of that ordinance for as long as they are in such districts. 
(2)  All obligations and commitments that were established under the preceding ordinance shall continue in effect until terminated or altered by law. 
The preceding ordinance shall be repealed in its entirety when no lands remain in RF or C7 districts and no obligations or commitments established under such ordinance remain in effect. 
(b)  Other ordinances. All ordinances other than the preceding ordinance referred to in subsection (a) above, and all parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-16.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-8. - Unsafe buildings. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.6), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-9-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-26. - Duties of city engineer. 
    The city engineer shall administer, enforce and implement these regulations. He may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the chief executive may direct. If the city engineer shall find that any of the provisions of these regulations are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by these regulations to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.1.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-27. - Duties of building inspector. 
    It shall be the duty of the building inspector or other designated officer to see that this chapter is enforced through the proper legal channels and to refuse to issue any permit for any building or structure or the use of any premises that would violate any of the provisions hereof. Appeal from the decision of the building inspector or other designated official may be made to the board of adjustment, as previously provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-28. - Building permits-Required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to commence the construction or the excavation for the construction of any building or structure, including accessory buildings, demolition, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building, including accessory buildings within the territorial jurisdiction of this chapter, until the building inspector has issued a the appropriate permit for such work. No such permit shall be issued for any building where such construction, moving, alteration, demolition, or use thereof would be known to be in violation of any provision of this chapter or of federal, state or local law, statute or regulation. 
B.  If work is started prior to the issuance of any required permit, then the City shall issue a stop-work order and require compliance with this Section. A penalty fee shall be charged in addition to the regular permit fee. The penalty fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) or three times (3×) the cost of the regular fee, whichever is greater. The payment of such penalty fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with all the requirements of this code, nor shall such payment exempt the person from further penalty prescribed by ordinance. 
C.  Furthermore, failure to comply with the terms of this ordinance is a public offense subject to prosecution in the municipal court and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as provided in Code Section 1-5. The Building Inspector shall prepare a sworn complaint and the same shall be presented to the Miami Police Department and the City Prosecutor for further action. No fine or deferral fee shall be determined unless and until the defendant first makes his or her personal appearance in open court before the Municipal Judge at a regular docket of the Municipal Court. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.2.1), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1641, § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 26-29. - Same-Application. 
    There shall be submitted with each application for a building permit two (2) copies of a layout or plot plan drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, if any, and the size and location of the building or structure to be constructed, altered, or moved. The applicant shall also state the existing or intended use of each such building or part of building and supply such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots that may be necessary to determine compliance with and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. One (1) copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the building inspector after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. The second copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the building inspector. The application for a building permit shall be made by the owner of the property concerned or a certified agent thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.2.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-30. - Same-Application fee. 
    The application fee for a building permit shall be as prescribed in the building code for the city. No part of the building permit fee shall be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.2.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-31. - Same-Action on applications. 
    No building permit shall be issued by the city engineer except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, unless he receives a written order from the board of adjustment in the form of an administrative review, conditional use permit, variance or finding, as provided by these regulations. One (1) copy of the permit and attachments shall be returned to the applicant by the city engineer after he shall have marked such documents either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such documents. The city engineer shall retain such copies as needed for his office. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.2.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-32. - Same-Expiration. 
    If the work described in a building permit has not begun within the prescribed time set forth in the building code, the permit shall expire and be cancelled by the building inspector, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.2.5), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-33. - Special zoning permit-When required. 
    In addition to the required building permit and zoning clearance permit, a special zoning permit shall be required for certain uses listed in the tables of permitted uses, when reference is made to this section in the "special conditions" column opposite the named use, before a building permit may be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.4.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-34. - Same-Application. 
    Application for a special zoning permit shall be made by the property owner, or certified agent thereof, to the board of adjustment on a form prescribed for this purpose by the city. Special zoning permits, revocable, conditional, or valid for a term period may be issued for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this chapter. Granting of a special zoning permit does not exempt the applicant from complying with requirements of any other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.4.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-35. - Same-Accompanying data. 
    The applicant for a special zoning permit shall submit maps and drawings necessary to demonstrate that conditions set forth herein are fulfilled. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.4.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-36. - Same-Board of adjustment action. 
    In considering an application for a special zoning permit, the board of adjustment shall give due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures. The board of adjustment may deny an application for a special zoning permit and, in granting a special zoning permit, the board of adjustment may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to location, construction, maintenance and operations, in addition to those expressly stipulated in this chapter for the particular use, as it may deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.4.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-37. - Same-Public hearing. 
    Upon filing of the application for a special zoning permit, the board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on such application. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.4.5), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-38. - Same-Notice of public hearing. 
    The board of adjustment shall give notice of public hearings as required by statute (11 O.S. § 44-108) and this article. Cost of the notice shall be paid by applicant. Failure of owners to receive notice of hearing shall in no way affect the validity of the action taken. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.4.6), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-39. - Same-Conditions for issuance. 
    If the board of adjustment finds: 
(1)  That the proposed structure or use conforms to the requirements and intent of this article, 
(2)  That any additional conditions stipulated by the board of adjustment as deemed necessary in the public interest have been met, and 
(3)  That such use will not under the circumstances of the particular case constitute a nuisance or be detrimental to the public welfare of the community, 
the board of adjustment shall issue a special zoning permit therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.4.7), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1661, § 1(B.), adopted Oct. 18, 2016, repealed § 26-40, which pertained to special zoning permit-Fee and derived from Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.4.8), adopted June 18, 1979. 
Sec. 26-41. - Zoning clearance permit. 
(a)  Generally. No land within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be occupied or used or nonstructural improvements placed thereon, and no building shall be erected, altered or extended, and no use of land or building shall be changed until a zoning clearance permit shall have been issued by the building inspector, stating that the building or proposed use complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Fee. The application fee for a zoning clearance permit shall be $5.00. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.5), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-42. - Construction of business structures in planned unit developments. 
    In any PUD whose plan includes dwelling units, no structure designed or intended to be used, in whole or in part, for business purposes shall be constructed prior to the issuance of occupancy permits for at least one-third ( 1/3 ) of the dwelling units proposed in the final development plan. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.6), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-43-26-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Amendments, 11 O.S. § 43-104 et seq. 

Sec. 26-61. - Generally. 
    This chapter may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts or by changing any other provision thereof, whenever the public necessity, convenience, and general welfare require such amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.1.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-62. - Planned unit developments.. 
    The provisions of article VII, division 2, part B govern approval of a planned unit development and establishment of a planned unit development district (PUD and PUD district). 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-63. - Application. 
(a)  Who may initiate action. Amendment may be initiated by the city commission, the city planning commission, or by application of one (1) or more owners of property affected by the proposed amendment. 
(b)  Application fee. Each application by a property owner shall be accompanied by a fee of $40.00, no part of which shall be returnable to the applicant. 
(c)  Accompanying data. An application for an amendment shall be accompanied by drawings and any data necessary to demonstrate that the proposed amendment is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan and that the public necessity, convenience, and general welfare require the adoption of the proposed amendment. An accurate legal description and map of the land and existing buildings shall be submitted with the application. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.1.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-64. - Public hearings before planning commission. 
(a)  Required. Upon filing of the application for an amendment under this division, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on such application, as provided for herein. 
(b)  Notice. The planning commission shall give fifteen (15) days notice of a public hearing on a proposed map amendment by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. In addition, twenty (20) days' notice of public hearing shall be given by mailing written notice to all owners of property within a three-hundred-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the property. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  Date, time, and place of public hearing. 
(2)  Legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location of the property. 
(3)  Present zoning district classification of the property and the proposed zoning district classification, provided that: 
a.  Notice of a proposed RM1 rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the planning commission and city commission to consider and act upon RM2, RS5, RS6, RS8, or combination thereof in the disposition of the application, and, in like manner, notice of any R district, including RT, shall confer jurisdiction to consider any less dense R district, except RT. 
b.  Notice of a proposed C5 rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the planning commission and city commission to consider and act upon C4, C3, C1, or combination thereof in the disposition of the application. 
c.  Notice of a proposed M3 rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the planning commission and city commission to consider and act upon M2, M1 or combinations thereof in the disposition of the application. 
d.  Specific notice of a proposed PUD or RT district shall be required to confer jurisdiction on the planning commission and city commission to consider such PUD or RT district. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.1.3), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1198, § 4, 9-20-82) 
State Law reference- Notice of public hearing, 11 O.S. §§ 43-105, 43-106. 
Sec. 26-65. - Costs of public hearing notices. 
    Costs of notices of public hearings where the proposed amendment is initiated by the planning commission or the city commission shall be paid by the city. Costs of notices of public hearings for all applications by others shall be paid by the applicant. The applicant shall be responsible for preparing or obtaining an accurate list of owners of property and for mailing timely notices to them, as required under section 26-65. Written notice may consist of a copy of the published notice. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.1.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-66. - Action by planning commission at conclusion of hearing. 
    At the conclusion of the public hearing the planning commission shall, by a majority vote of the entire planning commission, certify its recommendations to the city commission on applications where the recommendation is favorable. Such recommendations shall be by resolution and shall be accompanied by a report of findings and a summary of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.1.5), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-67. - Action by city commission-On planning commission recommendation. 
(a)  After receipt of a zoning amendment recommendation from the planning commission, the city commission shall hold a public hearing on the application, notice of which shall have been given as provided in section 26-64. 
(b)  After public hearing, the city commission shall approve, approve with modification, or deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.1.6a), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-68. - Same-Action by city commission in conflict with planning commission recommendation. 
    If the city commission proposes to adopt an amendment to the zoning ordinance in a form altered from such amendment as recommended by the planning commission or an amendment where denial has been recommended by the planning commission, the city commission shall refer such matter back to the planning commission for report and recommendation before adoption. If the planning commission has not held a public hearing on such proposed amendment, it shall do so under the procedure set forth in section 26-64. The failure of the planning commission to report within thirty (30) days after reference shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.1.6b), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-69. - Same-Vote under protest. 
    Protests against proposed changes shall be filed at least three (3) days before the date of the public hearing before the city commission. If protests are filed by: 
(1)  The owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots included in a proposed change, or 
(2)  The owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the area of the lots within a three-hundred-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the territory included in a proposed change; 
then the proposed change or amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three (3) of the members of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.1.6c), 6-18-79) 
State Law reference- Protests, 11 O.S. § 43-106. 
Sec. 26-70. - Effect of denial of application. 
    In case an application for amendment to the zoning map is denied, such application shall not be eligible for reconsideration for one (1) year subsequent to such denial. A new application affecting or including all or part of the same property must be substantially different from the application denied, in the opinion of the planning commission, to be eligible for consideration within less than one (1) year of the denial of the original application. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.1.7), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-71-26-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, VARIANCES, APPEALS, ETC.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, etc., § 2-141 et seq. 
State Law reference- Board of adjustment, 11 O.S. § 44-101 et seq. 

Sec. 26-86. - Created; appointment. 
    There is hereby created a city Board of Adjustment consisting of five (5) members. Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Three members shall constitute a quorum. 
A.  The appointed members of the City Planning Commission shall serve ex officio as the members of the Board(s) of Adjustment established by the Code of Ordinances, and with concurrent terms. 
B.  The officers of the City Planning Commission each shall serve ex officio as the officers of the Board(s) of Adjustment, and with concurrent terms. 
C.  Joint meetings of the Board of Adjustment and the City Planning Commission are authorized for the efficient disposition of those matters subject to their respective jurisdictions. In the case of a joint meeting, the clerk shall designate on each substantive agenda item whether the particular subject matter is subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment or the City Planning Commission. Further, the clerk shall accurately indicate on the minutes of each joint meeting that the appropriate public body provided consideration, discussion, motion(s), and disposition of each agenda item. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.3.1), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1642, § 1(B.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 26-87. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1642, § 1(C.), adopted July 7, 2015, repealed § 26-87, which pertained to replacement of members and derived from Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.3.2), adopted June 18, 1979. 
Sec. 26-88. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1642, § 1(D.), adopted July 7, 2015, repealed § 26-88, which pertained to organization and derived from Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.3.3), adopted June 18, 1979. 
Sec. 26-89. - Powers and duties. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by Oklahoma state law, including without limitation those provided by Title 11, Article XLIV of the Oklahoma State Statutes as provided and amended from time to time by the Oklahoma State Legislature as well as those prescribed by Ordinance. The concurring vote of at least three (3) members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination being appealed from, to decide in favor of the applicant, to establish policy, rules or administrative procedure, or to decide any substantive matter which may properly come before it. 
A.  The Board shall not have the power to grant relief in violation of any lawful plat restriction, deed restriction or restrictive covenant of which they have actual knowledge. This provision provides a specific limitation upon the powers and duties of the Board and shall not otherwise impose a municipal governmental duty to enforce the same. The members of the Board may rely in good faith upon the opinion of the City Attorney with regard to the lawfulness of any specific plat restriction, deed restriction or restrictive covenant. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.3.4), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1642, § 1(E.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 26-90. - Procedure. 
A.  Generally. The board shall act in strict accordance with the procedure specified by law and by this chapter. 
B.  Appeals. Appeals to the board can be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, or board of the city affected by any decision of the building inspector or other administrative officer. All appeals and applications made to the board shall be made in writing, on forms prescribed by the City Manager or his or her designee, within ten (10) days after the decision has been rendered by the building inspector or other administrative officer. Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of the ordinance involved and shall exactly set forth (1) the interpretation that is claimed, (2) the use for which the permit is sought, or (3) the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case may be. The appeal or application shall be filed with the officer from whom appeal is taken and with the board. The officer from whom appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. If the appellant shall fail to fully complete and submit the appeal or application forms within the terms of the instructions provided thereon, then the Board may decline to hear the matter or summarily deny any such appeal or application. 
C.  Public hearing and notice. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the public hearing of an appeal, give public notice of the time and place thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide same within a reasonable time. Notice shall be given as required by 11 O.S. section 44-108. Public hearings may be adjourned from time to time, and, if the adjournment is made, no further notice of such adjourned meeting need be published. At a public hearing any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
D.  Decisions and records. 
1.  Appeals. In exercising its appellate powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions set forth in the statutes of the state governing the board, revise or reform, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom appeal is taken. 
2.  Applications for special exceptions or variances. In exercising its powers to consider applications for special exceptions to a zoning ordinance and/or a variance from a zoning ordinance, the board may, in the furtherance of the public interest, impose additional terms, conditions, restrictions and limitations on the relief granted. 
3.  No decision in favor of an applicant shall take effect unless and until the same is memorialized in a written document, which shall include an endorsement of the City Attorney indicating whether, in his or her professional opinion, the relief granted by the Board is lawful. The document shall be signed by the chairperson, and attested by the City Clerk. 
4.  If a decision in favor of an applicant would alter or change the lawful use of real property, then no such decision shall take effect unless and until the document of the board is recorded with the County Clerk at the expense of the applicant. . 
E.  Fee. The fee for any appeal or application to the board shall be $100.00, no part of which shall be refundable. The appellant or applicant shall be responsible for all costs and expenses associated with the appeal or application, including but not limited to the costs and expenses associated with mailing and other notice of the proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.3.5), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1642, § 1(F.), 7-7-2015; Ord. No. 1661, § 1(A.), 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 26-91. - Effect of appeal. 
    An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order that may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, and on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.3.6), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-92. - Appeals to district court. 
    Appeals from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the board of adjustment may be taken to the district court by any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department or agency of the city by filing with the city clerk and with the clerk of the board of adjustment, within ten (10) days after the action of the board, notice of appeal. Upon filing of the notice, the board shall forthwith transmit to the court clerk of Ottawa County the original or certified copies of all papers constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision, or ruling of the board. The same shall be heard and tried de novo in the district court, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-12.3.7), 6-18-79) 
State Law reference- Appeals to district court, 11 O.S. § 44-110. 
Secs. 26-93-26-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 26-111. - Continuing existing nonconforming uses. 
    Except as hereinafter specified, any use, building or structure existing on June 18, 1979, may be continued, even though such use, building or structure may not conform with provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located; provided, however, that this section does not apply to any use, building or structure established in violation of any zoning ordinance previously in effect in the city, unless such use, building or structure now conforms with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.1.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-112. - Limitations. 
(a)  No nonconforming use of a building or land shall be changed, extended, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered, unless: 
(1)  Such change is required by law or order, or 
(2)  The use thereof is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building or land is located, or 
(3)  Authority is granted by the board of adjustment to extend a nonconforming use, or 
(4)  Authority is granted by the board of adjustment to enlarge or complete a building devoted to a nonconforming use upon a lot occupied by such building, where such extension is necessary and incidental to the existing use of such building, or 
(5)  Authority has been granted by the board of adjustment to extend a nonconforming use throughout those parts of a building that was manifestly designed or arranged for such use prior to the date when such use or building became nonconforming, if no structural alterations, except those required by law, are made therein. 
(b)  Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.1.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-113. - Cessation of use of building or land. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter specified, a lawful nonconforming use of a building, structure or land that has been voluntarily discontinued for a period of six (6) calendar months shall not thereafter be resumed. 
(b)  Non-conforming agricultural animal uses. All existing non-conforming agricultural animal uses existing on August 25, 2003, may be continued until: 
(1)  Said use is discontinued for a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive months, or; 
(2)  Said use constitutes a public nuisance. 
Any decision regarding non-conforming agricultural animal uses may be appealed to the board of adjustments, pursuant to the appeal procedure as found in the zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.1.3), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1465, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 26-114. - Discontinuance of open use of land. 
    A nonconforming agricultural, commercial or industrial open use of land shall be discontinued within three (3) years from the effective date of this chapter. Any such nonconforming use of land that becomes nonconforming by reason of any subsequent amendment to this chapter shall also be discontinued within three (3) years from the date of such amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.1.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-115. - Discontinuance of nonconforming signs. 
    All nonconforming signs, billboards or commercial advertising structures shall be discontinued within three (3) years from the effective date of this chapter, except that nonconforming signs specifically describing the business or nature of a lawful nonconforming building, structure, or use on the same premises may be maintained during the lawful lifetime of the building, structure, or use. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.1.5), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-116. - Construction approved prior to ordinance. 
    Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any development, building, structure or part thereof, where official approvals and required building permits have been granted before June 18, 1979, or any amendment thereof, the construction of which, conforming with such plans, shall have been started prior to the effective date of this chapter and completion thereof carried on in a normal manner within the subsequent six-month period, and not discontinued until completion, except for reasons beyond the builder's control. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.1.6), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-117. - Replacement of damaged or destroyed nonconforming uses. 
    Any nonconforming building or structure damaged more than sixty percent (60%) of its then replacement or market value, as established by the county assessor for tax purposes, exclusive of foundations, by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot or other calamity or act of God, shall not be restored or reconstructed and used as before such happening; but if less than sixty percent (60%) damaged above the foundation it may be restored, reconstructed or used as before, provided that restoration or reconstruction be completed within twelve (12) months of such happening. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.1.7), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-118. - Repairs to nonconforming uses, limitation. 
    Such repairs and maintenance work as are required to keep it in sound condition may be made to a nonconforming building or structure, provided that no structural alterations shall be made, except such as are required by law or ordinance. Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter, the total structural repairs and alterations that may be made in a nonconforming building or structure shall not, during its life subsequent to the date of its becoming a nonconforming use, exceed fifty percent (50%) of its then replacement or market value as established by the county assessor for tax purposes, unless such building or structure is changed to a conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.1.8), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-119-26-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Districts and district regulations authorized, 11 O.S. § 43-102. 

Sec. 26-136. - Enumeration. 
    Fifteen (15) zoning districts and one (1) supplemental district are hereby established for the city and are designated as follows: 
(1)  Residential districts. 
a.  RS Single-family residence districts: 
1.  RS8 Single-family residence district (eight thousand (8,000) square foot minimum lot area per dwelling unit). 
2.  RS6 Single-family residence district (six thousand (6,000) square foot minimum lot area per dwelling unit). 
3.  RS5 Single-family residence district (five thousand (5,000) square foot minimum lot area per dwelling unit). 
b.  RM Multiple-family residence districts: 
1.  RM2 Multiple-family residence district (two thousand five hundred (2,500) square foot minimum lot area per dwelling unit). 
2.  RM1 Multiple-family residence district (one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square foot minimum lot area per dwelling unit). 
c.  RT Mobile homes residential district (two thousand (2,000) square foot minimum lot area per dwelling unit). 
d.  RA Residence-agriculture district (five (5) acres minimum lot area per dwelling unit). 
(2)  Commercial districts. 
a.  C1 Off-street parking district. 
b.  C2 Professional offices district. 
c.  C3 Neighborhood shopping district. 
d.  C4 Central commercial district. 
e.  C5 General commercial district. 
(3)  Industrial districts. 
a.  M1 Limited industrial district. 
b.  M2 General industrial district. 
c.  M3 Intensive industrial district. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-2.1), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1198, § 2, 9-20-82) 
Sec. 26-137. - Combined zoning districts. 
    Elsewhere in these regulations, including the table showing permitted uses by districts and district regulations, certain districts are grouped and represented as a single district. The combined districts and the component districts of which they are composed are as follows: 
Combined Districts Component Districts RS Single-family residential RS8 RS6 RS5 RM Multiple-family residential RM2 RM1  
Wherever in these regulations there is a reference to any of the districts described above as a "combined district," the reference is to all the component districts which together constitute the combined district. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-2.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-138. - Supplemental districts established. 
    There are hereby established the following supplemental districts together with the symbol by which each shall be designated: 
PUD Planned Unit Development 
Provisions relating to the district are included in article VII, division 2. Definitions relating to each of the above supplemental districts have been incorporated in section 26-1. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-2.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-139. - Zoning districts map. 
    The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled Miami, Oklahoma: Zoning Map, dated April, 1979, which is a part of this chapter and which is on file in the office of the city clerk. The map and all notations, references, data and other information shown thereon shall be and are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-3.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-140. - Zoning districts boundaries. 
    Unless otherwise indicated on the zoning maps, the zoning district boundaries are lot lines, the centerlines of streets or alleys or specified distance therefrom, railroad right-of-way lines, or property lines, as they existed at the time of the enactment of Ordinance No. 833. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-3.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-141. - Location of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the zoning districts or when the street or property existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the zoning district map, the board of adjustment, upon written application or upon its own motion, shall determine the location of such boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-3.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-142. - Extension of zoning jurisdiction. 
    All territory that may hereafter be included within the zoning jurisdiction of the city shall be governed by and subject to the requirement of the RS8 Single-family residence district until such time as the zoning district map shall have been amended to include such territory in other districts. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-3.4), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-143-26-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Districts and district regulations authorized, 11 O.S. § 43-102. 

Sec. 26-161. - General purposes. 
    The regulations for the residential districts are designed: 
(1)  To protect the residential character of the included areas by excluding commercial and industrial activities, 
(2)  To encourage a suitable environment for family life by permitting such neighborhood facilities as churches, schools and playgrounds, 
(3)  To permit certain appropriate institutions to be located in residential neighborhoods, 
(4)  To preserve openness of the areas and avoid overcrowding by requiring certain minimum yards, open spaces and site areas and 
(5)  To make available a variety of dwelling types and densities in a variety of locations to serve a wide range of individual requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-4.1.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-162. - RS Single-family residence districts. 
(a)  Purpose. RS districts are designed for those areas where the land is presently being used, or where development appears desirable, for single-family dwellings. In addition to the general purposes applying to residential districts, the regulations for the RS districts are designed to encourage the provision of single-family, detached residences in districts of three (3) permitted densities. 
(b)  RS district regulations. Zoning district regulations for the RS districts are set forth in section 26-166. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the RS districts are set forth in section 26-167. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-4.1.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-163. - RM Multiple-family residence districts. 
(a)  Purpose. RM districts are designed to provide areas for medium and high population density. RM districts will consist mainly of: 
(1)  Areas containing multifamily dwellings (including two-family dwellings) with some single-family dwellings, 
(2)  Areas that contain single-family and two-family dwellings, are centrally located, and are appropriate to ultimate multifamily development, and 
(3)  Open areas where future multifamily development appears desirable. 
In addition to the general purposes applying to RM, RS, and RT districts, the regulations for the RM districts are designed to encourage the provision of multiple-family accommodations in districts of two (2) permitted densities. 
(b)  RM district regulations. Zoning district regulations for RM districts are set forth in section 26-166. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the RM districts are set forth in section 26-167. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-4.1.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-164. - RT Mobile homes residence district. 
(a)  Purpose. The RT district is designed for areas now occupied by mobile homes (house trailers) or mobile home parks, and for open areas where mobile home development appears desirable. The district is intended to permit and encourage the development of properly planned and improved mobile home parks in appropriate locations in a residential environment. 
(b)  RT district regulations. Zoning district regulations for the RT district are set forth in section 26-166. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the RT district are set forth in section 26-167. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-4.1.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-165. - RA Residence-agriculture district. 
(a)  Purpose. The RA district is designed to provide for suburban residential and agricultural use where a need for greater density of development does not exist and where water mains, sewers, schools and other public facilities cannot be economically provided. 
(b)  RA district regulations. Zoning district regulations for the RA district are set forth in section 26-166. 
(c)  RA district permitted uses. Uses permitted in the RA district are set forth in section 26-167. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-4.1.5), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-166. - Residential district regulations. 
    No lot or yard shall be established in any residential district that does not meet the minimum requirements set forth in the following table. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged in any residential district that will cause the maximum lot coverage or the maximum height regulations to be exceeded for such district as set forth in the following table. No lot or yard shall be reduced in dimension or area below the following requirements: 
Zoning Districts Lot Area, 
Minimum 
(square feet unless otherwise noted) Lot Width at Front Building Line, Minimum (feet) Lot Coverage Maximum 
(percent) Yards, Minimum (feet) Maximum Height a. Front Rear Side Single Frontage Lot Double Frontage Lot Interior Exterior 
(Corner Lot) Stories Feet Per Lot Per Dwelling Unit interior lots exterior lots backing up to abutting side yard backing up to abutting rear yard RA Res-Agr 5 acres 5 acres 300 10 10 25 50 25 25 25 25 21/2 35 Single-Family RS8 8,000 8,000 80 30 35 25 35 25 10 25 15 21/2 35 RS6 6,000 6,000 60 30 35 25 30 25 5 25 10 21/2 35 RS5 5,000 5,000 50 30 35 25 25 25 5 25 10 21/2 35 Multi-Family RM2 5,000 2,500 50 35 40 25 20 25 5 25 10 31/2 45 RM1 5,000 1,250 50 40 45 25 20 25 5 25 10 31/2 45 RT (Residence Mobile Homes) 5,000 2,500 50 35 40 25 20 25 5 25 10 31/2 45  
a.  A building or structure may exceed the district maximum height regulations provided there shall be one (1) foot of additional interior side yard required for each two (2) feet of additional height. The interior side yard requirements shall not apply along the common lot lines of single-family attached residences. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-4.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-167. - Permitted uses in residential districts. 
(a)  Uses permitted in the residential districts are shown by means of "use groups" established on the basis of similarity of function as well as compatibility with one another and with adjacent districts. The permitted "use groups" in each zoning district are shown by means of symbols in the permitted use tables. 
(b)  The letter "x" means the use is permitted as a use of right subject to: 
(1)  The providing of off-street parking in the amounts required by reference to the "Parking Group" column, and 
(2)  The providing of off-street loading in accordance with article VIII, division 2. 
(c)  The letter "O" means that the use is permitted subject to the conditions specified in the section or sections whose number appears in the "Special Conditions" column opposite the permitted use, in addition to the off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(d)  No use shall be permitted in any district other than a use shown in the following tables, and no use shall be permitted in any such district unless the letter "x" or letter "O" appears opposite the "use group" within which the named use is listed and in the column headed by the designation of such district and all other requirements set forth herein have been met. 
Zoning Districts Permitted Uses Parking Group a. Special 
Conditions RS RM RT RA O O Use Group 1. Use Group 1 consists of the following types of agricultural uses: A. Agricultural Uses: Animal and poultry husbandry, dairying, and pasturage, but not including the keeping of swine, the feeding of offal or garbage, or retail sales on the premises; all other agricultural uses which (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic generating capacity, and effects on other land uses and (2) are not included in any other use group. A 26-403 B. Accessory Uses. x x x x Use Group 2. Use Group 2 consists of the following types of agricultural uses that are compatible with nearby residential uses: A. Agricultural Uses: Field crops, floriculture, greenhouse, horticulture, nursery, truck gardening, or viticulture, but not including retail sales on the premises; all other agricultural uses that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic generating capacity, and effects on other land uses and (2) are not included in any other use group. B. Accessory Uses. x x x x Use Group 3. Use Group 3 consists of low-density single-family detached residential development: A. Residential Uses: Single-family detached dwelling 2 B. Accessory Uses. x x Use Group 4. Use Group 4 consists of medium and high density multiple-family residential development: A. Residential Uses: Multifamily dwelling, including duplex. 3 Rooming and/or boarding house. 5 Tourist home. 4 B. Accessory Uses. O O O O Use Group 5. Use Group 5 consists of mobile home residences that are not in a mobile home park: 26-422-26-424 A. Residential Uses: 1 Mobile home (house trailer) B. Accessory Uses. O Use Group 6. Use Group 6 consists of mobile home parks: 26-422-26-424 A. Residential Uses: 1 Mobile home park B. Accessory Uses. O O O O Use Group 7. Use Group 7 consists of community facilities and public utilities that: 1. May appropriately be located in residential areas to provide educational, recreational, health, and other essential services, and 2. Do not create significant objectionable influences in residential areas. A. Community Facilities: Art gallery or museum. 12 26-430 Cemetery, columbarium, or mausoleum. 26-407 Church or other place of worship. 8 26-408 Club or lodge, private, except one whose chief activity is carried on as a business. 16 26-409 College or university: dormitory, fraternity house, sorority house. 7 26-411 all other facilities, other than stadium. 16 26-430 Community building, public 15 26-430 Golf course, but not including commercially operated driving range, pitch and putt course or miniature golf course. 23 26-409 Health center, government operated. 14 26-419 Hospital, general, not including animal 6 26-419 Institution for children and the aged, nonprofit. 22 26-419 Library or museum: public or private, open to public without charge. 16 26-430 Monastery, convent or similar institution of religious training. 6 26-425 Nursing home or rest home. 6 26-419 Parish house, nunnery, rectory, etc. 1 Park, playground, or playfield, public. Rehabilitation center for handicapped persons. 22 26-419 Sanitorium. 6 26-419 School, nursery or day care for children. 22 26-427 School, public, parochial, or private, nonprofit: (a) 
Grades nine and below including kindergarten. 22 (b) 
Grades ten and above. Swimming pool, accessory. 26-438 B. Public Utilities: Sewage disposal plant, private. 26-33-26-40 Water filtration plant, pumping station, elevated storage or reservoir. 22 26-33-26-40 C. Newspaper Distribution Station. 26-426 D. Similar Uses: All other uses that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic generating capacity, and effects on other land uses and (2) are not included in any other use group. E. Accessory Uses. O O O O Use Group 8. Use Group 8 consists of uses of a nonresidential nature that need to be located in residential areas on a temporary basis: A. Temporary Uses: Automobile parking lot, for special event. 26-428 Batching plant, asphaltic or portland cement concrete, noncommercial. 26-412 Construction building and/or yard. 26-412 Earth moving and excavation; depositing construction materials, clay, earth, gravel, minerals, rock, sand, or stone on the ground. 26-421 Off-street parking and loading. 26-428 Tract office. 26-439 All other temporary uses that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic generating capacity, and effects on other land uses and (2) are not included in any other use group. B. Accessory Uses. O O O O Use Group 9. Use Group 9 consists of certain types of community facilities that may be located in residential areas that are subject to periodic flood water inundation: A. Public Facilities: Golf course, but not including commercially operated driving range, pitch and putt course, or miniature golf course. 23 26-409 Park, playground, or playfield, public. All other community facilities that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic generating capacity, effects on other land uses, and ability to withstand flooding, and (2) are not included in any other use group. B. Accessory Uses. Use Group 24. Use group 24 consists of the following uses: x x x x A. Facilities of electric cooperatives or public utilities subject to the jurisdiction of the Corporation Commission of the State of Oklahoma or other similar state or federal body, and that use public rights-of-way or easements. O O O O B. Transportation, communication, and utility facilities; other. 26-33-26-40  
a. Parking groups are shown in section 26-357. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-4.3), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 26-168. - Residential planned unit development. 
    Residential planned unit developments are permitted subject to the provisions set forth in article VII, division 2. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-4.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-169. - Manufactured or modular home location. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, new manufactured or modular homes as defined herein are distinct from mobile homes. New manufactured or modular homes may be placed at any location where single-family dwellings are allowed except in areas where mobile homes, trailers and the like are specifically prohibited by restrictive covenants. For the purposes of complying with restrictive covenants, the term trailer includes manufactured homes and modular homes. Previously used manufactured or modular homes shall be restricted to RT districts. 
(Ord. No. 1405, 12-20-99) 
Secs. 26-170-26-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Districts and district regulations authorized, 11 O.S. § 43-102. 

Sec. 26-186. - C1 Off-street parking district. 
(a)  Purpose. This district is designed to consist of: 
(1)  Areas developed for off-street parking purposes in former residential districts to serve adjacent business establishments, and 
(2)  Open areas that are appropriate for off-street parking development intended to serve nonresidential districts located adjacent to residential districts. 
This district is intended to facilitate the providing of off-street parking facilities adjacent to residential areas and to act as a buffer between these residential areas and nearby commercial and industrial areas. 
(b)  C1 district regulations. Zoning district regulations for the C1 district are set forth in section 26-192. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the C1 district are set forth in section 26-193. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-5.1.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-187. - C2 Professional office district. 
(a)  Purpose. This district is designed to accommodate professional offices and medical and dental clinics that can be adjacent to or combined with multifamily residential uses without undue harmful effects to the residential uses. 
(b)  District regulations. Zoning district regulations for the C2 district are set forth in section 26-191. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the C2 district are set forth in section 26-192. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-5.1.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-188. - C3 Neighborhood shopping district. 
(a)  Purpose. This district is designed to provide locations for the conduct of retail trade and personal service enterprises to meet the regular needs of, and for the convenience of, adjacent residential areas. The types of uses authorized in this district are limited to those that serve the everyday needs of the household. Because these facilities are an integral part of the neighborhood, more restrictive requirements for open space and off-street parking are made than are provided in other commercial districts. 
(b)  District regulations. Zoning district regulations for the C3 district are set forth in section 26-191. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the C3 district are set forth in section 26-192. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-5.1.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-189. - C4 Central commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose. This district is designed to be the central business district or the downtown shopping and employment area for the community and surrounding trade area. This district is intended to provide space for retailing of all kinds, professional offices, financial institutions, amusement facilities, transient residential facilities and limited wholesaling and warehousing. 
(b)  District regulations. Zoning district regulations for the C4 district are set forth in section 26-191. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the C4 district are set forth in section 26-192. Off-street parking is not required in the central business district (Third Street South to Third Street North, between the alley west of A Street West and the alley east of A Street East). 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-5.1.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-190. - C5 General commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose. This district is designed to accommodate miscellaneous commercial semi-industrial enterprises serving the consumer public, business, industry and agriculture. This district will provide for commercial uses that do not need to be in shopping centers or the central business district or that are undesirable in such areas. This district is also designed to permit and encourage the grouping, in defined areas along highways, of certain retail activities and services intended primarily to serve, and dependent on, the motoring public. 
(b)  District regulations. Zoning district regulations for the C5 district are set forth in section 26-191. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the C5 district are set forth in section 26-192. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-5.1.5, 28-5.1.6), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1198, § 2, 9-20-82) 
Sec. 26-191. - Commercial district regulations. 
    No lot or yard shall be established in any commercial district that does not meet the minimum requirements set forth in the following table. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged in any commercial district that will cause the maximum lot coverage or the maximum height regulations to be exceeded for such district as set forth in the following table. No lot or yard shall be reduced in dimension or area below the following requirements: 
Zoning Districts Lot Area 
Minimum 
(square feet) Lot Width at Front Building Line (feet) Lot Coverage 
Maximum 
(percent) Yards, Minimum (feet) Height Maximum a. Front Rear Side Interior a. Exterior Interior Lot Exterior Lot Single Frontage Lot Double Frontage Lot When Abutting Property In a Residential District When Abutting Property In a Nonresidential District When Backing Up To Abutting Side Yard When Backing Up To Abutting Rear Yard Stories Feet C1 parking 5,000 50 20 20 25 10 25 5 none Same as required front yard on lot abutting rear lot line of subject lot. 10 21/2 35 C2 professional 
office 5,000 50 30 35 25 30 25 12 none Same as required on lot abutting rear lot line of subject lot. 21/2 35 C3 neighborhood shopping 5,000 50 30 35 25 30 25 12 none 21/2 35 C4 central 3,000 25 100 100 none none none 12 none 61/2 75 C5 general 3,000 25 50 50 25 12 25 12 none 21/2 35  
a.  A building or structure may exceed the district maximum height shown in these regulations provided that each interior side yard is increased by the greater of the following quantities: (1) one (1) foot for each additional two (2) feet of height, or (2) five (5) feet per additional story. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-5.2), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1198, § 1, 9-20-82) 
Sec. 26-192. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Uses permitted in the commercial districts are shown by means of "Use Groups" established on the basis of similarity of function as well as compatibility with one another and with adjacent districts. The permitted "Use Groups" in each zoning district are shown by means of symbols in the permitted use tables. 
(b)  The letter "x" means the use is permitted as a use of right subject to: 
(1)  The providing of off-street parking in the amounts required by reference to the "Parking Group" column, and 
(2)  The providing of off-street loading in accordance with section 26-356. 
(c)  The letter "O" means that the use is permitted subject to the conditions specified in the section whose number appears in the "Special Conditions" column opposite the permitted use, in addition to the off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(d)  No use shall be permitted in any district other than a use shown in the following tables, and no use shall be permitted in any such district unless the letter "x" or letter "O" appears opposite the "Use Group" within which the named use is listed and in the column headed by the designation of such district and all other requirements set forth herein have been met. 
Zoning Districts C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 Permitted Uses Parking Group a. Special 
Conditions x x x x x Use Group 2. (agriculture: field crops), as set forth in section 26-167. O Use Group 4. (multiple-family residences). 1 26-440 x x x x x Use Group 7. (community facilities and utilities: residential), as set forth in section 26-167. x x x x x Use Group 8. (temporary uses), as set forth in section 26-167. O O O O O Use Group 10. Use Group 10 consists of off-street parking areas for customer parking or parking for a fee: A. Off-Street Parking: Off-street parking lot, free or customer. B. Signs: Sign, business, indirectly illuminated, nonflashing, or nonilluminated. 26-431-26-437 C. Accessory Uses. O O O O O Use Group 11. Use Group 11 consists of offices for medical, professional, and governmental purposes, not including retail sales to the public, that are of a nature that may be located adjacent to residential uses without harmful effects to said residential uses: A. Medical and Related Offices: 11 Chiropody, chiropractic, dental, electrology, medical, optical, optometric, osteopathic. B. Professional and Governmental Offices: 13 Accounting, architecture, engineering, governmental, insurance sales and brokerage, law, real estate, and brokerage. C. Other Offices: 13 All other offices that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic-generating capacity, and effects on other land uses, and (2) are not included in any other use group. D. Signs: Sign, business, indirectly illuminated, nonflashing, or nonilluminated. 26-431-26-437 E. Accessory Uses. O O O Use Group 12. Use Group 12 consists of certain types of retail stores and service establishments that: 1. Provide for a wide variety of local consumer transient needs, and 2. Have a small service area and are, therefore, distributed widely throughout the city. A. Retail Stores and Service Establishments: Altering, pressing, and repairing of wearing apparel. 12 Barber or beauty shop. 11 Confectionery store. 12 Drug store. 11 Drycleaning pickup station. 12 Eating place, enclosed, without dancing or entertainment, and not providing service in automobiles. 11 Florist shop, retail. 12 Food store, including bakery (retail only). 11 Garden supplies sales. 13 Gift, novelty, or souvenir sales. 12 Hardware store and small tool rental, but not including sales of lumber or industrial hardware. 12 Hat blocking and repair. 13 Ice vending establishment. Laundry pickup station. 12 Laundry self-service. 11 Liquor, wine, and beer sales for consumption off the premises. 11 Newsstand. 11 Notions and novelty store. 12 Nursery stock, retail sales. 13 Variety store. 12 Post office. 12 Other uses that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic-generating capacity, and effects on other land uses, and (2) are not included in any other use group. B. Signs: Signs, business, illuminated, nonflashing, or nonilluminated. 26-431-26-437 C. Accessory Uses. O O Use Group 13. Use Group 13 consists primarily of consumer and nonconsumer type retail and wholesale stores and service establishments that serve a wide area, including the entire city and surrounding trade area, and are, therefor, appropriate within or adjacent to the central business district. A. Shopping-Type Consumer Retail Stores: Antique sales. 13 Appliance sales and service. 13 Art supply store. 12 Bicycle rental, repair, and sales. 13 Boat and marine rental, repair, and sales. 15 Book sales. 12 Camera or photographic supplies sales. 12 Clothing or costume rental and sales. 15 Department store. 12 Dry goods store. 12 Floor covering sales. 13 Furniture and home furnishings, retail sales, rental, repair, and custom upholstering. 13 Furrier shop, custom, including incidental storage and conditioning of furs. 13 Glass sales and cutting shop. 13 Hobby supply store. 5 Interior decorating shop. 13 Jewelry sales and repair. 12 Leather goods sales and repair. 12 Mail order agency. 12 Motorcycle sales, and service. 13 Music, musical instrument, and phonograph record store. 13 Optical goods, retail sales. 13 Orthopedic or medical appliance store. 12 Paint and wallpaper sales. 13 Pawn shop. 12 Pet shop. 12 Photographic equipment and supplies, sales. 12 Sewing machine sales and repair. 12 Shoe sales and repair. 12 Sporting goods sales. 12 Other shopping-type retail stores that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic-generating capacity, and effects on other land uses, and (2) are not included in any other use group. B. Consumer Services: Automobile parking lot, or parking garage, commercial. Automobile rental. Bank; savings and loan; trust company. 12 Beer sales, for consumption on the premises. 11 Bowling alley. 10 Bus passenger station. 15 Caterer. 14 Club or lodge, whose chief activity is carried on as a business. 16 26-409 Dry cleaning plant, including carpet cleaning 12 Eating place, enclosed, with dancing or entertainment. 11 Food locker plant; for consumer use. 15 Funeral home, mortuary, or undertaking establishment. 7 Loan office. 12 Locksmith, key shop. 13 Photographic processing. 15 Photograph studio. 12 Physical culture and health services (commercial gymnasium, reducing salon, masseur, public baths). 12 Picture framing. 12 Radio or television broadcasting studio. 12 Reading room. 12 School, commercial or trade, when not involving any danger of fire or explosion, nor of offensive odor, noise, dust, glare, heat, vibration, or other objectionable noise. 16 Skating rink, commercial. 12 Studio for professional work or for the teaching of any form of fine arts, photography, music, drama, etc. 13 Swimming pool, commercial (parking requirement includes pool area). 11 26-438 Taxidermist. 15 Theater, enclosed or indoor, commercial 9 26-429, 26-430 Veterinarian, office only. 14 26-403 Other consumer services that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic-generating capacity, and effects on other land uses, and (2) are not included in any other use group. C. Business Services: Barber and beauty equipment and specialties sales. 15 Blueprinting and similar reproduction processes. 12 Business machines rental, repair, sales. 13 Carting, crating, express hauling, moving, and storage. 17 Garage or parking for commercial or public utility vehicles Laboratory: medical or dental 16 Letter shop. 13 Office equipment and supplies, retail sales, service, rental, and repair. 13 Photostating. 12 Recording studio. 16 Secretarial service. 13 Surgical and dental supplies sales. 12 Telephone answering service. 12 Other business services that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic-generating capacity, and effects on other land uses, and (2) are not included in any other use group. D. Manufacturing: Baked goods, candy, delicatessen foods, and ice cream, all for retail sales on the premises only. 15 Clothing: custom manufacturing or altering for retail, including custom dressmaking, millinery, or tailoring. 15 E. Accessory Uses. O Use Group 14. Use Group 14 consists of automobile service establishments limited to the incidental repair and servicing of automobiles and trucks up to three-fourths ton manufacturer's rated capacity, and eating establishments providing service in automobiles: (See also Use Group 15.) A. Automotive Service Establishments: Automobile service stations, including customary minor incidental service and the sale of minor incidental parts and accessories, but not including body repair, motor repair, painting, or the sale of diesel fuel. B. Eating Establishments Providing Service in Automobiles. C. Signs: Sign, business, illuminated, flashing. 26-431-26-437 D. Accessory Uses. O Use Group 15. Use Group 15 consists primarily of automotive service establishments and nonconsumer retail and wholesale goods and services not appropriate for the central business district, including certain goods and services for agricultural, industrial, commercial, or institutional use: A. Automotive Service Establishments, Other: Automobile accessory and supply store, including tire, battery, glass, muffler, seat covers, and upholstery sales and installations. Automobile, bus or truck body work or painting. 22 Automobile laundry. 26-404 Automobile sales (new and used) and service. 14 Automobile and truck repair or service. 15 Bus sales, service, and repair, not including body work or painting. 22 Tire recapping shop. 16 Truck rental. Truck sales. 16 Truck service station, including truckers' dormitory and retail sale of diesel fuel or other fuel intended primarily for trucks. 16 Vulcanizing shop. 16 B. Retail and Wholesale Goods and Services: Aircraft sales, rental, service. 17 Ambulance service. 21 Amusement park, commercial. 12 Auction room; auctioneer. 12 Baseball park, commercial. 7 Blacksmith shop. 15 Building materials and lumber yard, retail and wholesale (parking requirements do not apply to lumber sheds). 13 Carnival or circus. 15 Cold storage plant. 17 Contractor or construction offices and shops, air-conditioning, building, cement, electrical, heating, masonry, painting, plumbing, refrigeration, roofing, and ventilation. 15 Exterminator, pest. 15 Farm equipment sales, service, repairs. 15 Feed and fertilizer sales. 15 Freight depot, railroad or truck. 17 Golf driving range, commercial (parking requirements apply to tee area only). 18 26-416 Golf "pitch and putt" courses; miniature golf course. 18 Hardware, industrial sales. 15 Laundry plant. 17 Linen supply, diaper service, or uniform supply. 17 Machine tools: sales, service, rental, repair. 15 Mobile homes, sales and service. 19 Monument sales, including incidental processing. 17 Plumbing fixture sales. 12 Secondhand store. 12 Trailer sales, or rental (other than mobile home) 20 Transit vehicle storage and servicing. 17 Truck terminal or depot. 22 Warehousing establishment. 17 Wholesale establishment, including storage. 12 Other retail and wholesale sales and services that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic-generating capacity, and effects on other land uses, and (2) are not included in any other use group. C. Signs: Sign, business, illuminated, flashing. 26-431-26-437 D. Accessory Uses. O O Use Group 16. Use Group 16 consists of commercial advertising signs: A. Signs: Advertising signs. 26-431-26-437 B. Accessory Uses. x x Use Group 17. Use Group 17 consists of residential facilities used primarily for transient occupancy: A. Transient Residential Facilities: Hotel. 5 Motel. 4 Tourist Home. 4 B. Accessory Uses. O O Use Group 18. Use Group 18 consists of community facilities and public utilities that: 1. Do not need to be located in residential areas to serve their function, and 2. May create objectionable influences in residential areas. A. Community Facilities: Auditorium, area coliseum, theater, or similar facility. 7 Institution, nonresidential. 14 Stadium. 7 B. Public Utilities: State garage, yard, or similar facility. C. Accessory Uses. x x Use Group 19. Use Group 19 consists primarily of manufacturing uses that are of a low nuisance nature that are not harmful to nearby residential and commercial areas: A. Manufacturing Uses: Advertising displays. 16 Art needle work, hand weaving, or tapestries. 16 Bakery products: limited to 7,500 square feet of floor area per establishment. 16 Beverages, nonalcoholic. 16 Books, hand binding or tooling. 16 Bottling works, all beverages. 16 Carpentry, custom woodworking, or custom furniture making shops. 16 Clocks or similar products. 16 Custom ceramic products. 16 Custom hair products. 16 Jewelry manufacturing from precious metals. 16 Medical, dental, drafting instruments, optical goods, or similar precision instruments. 16 Printing or publishing, including engraving or photoengraving. 16 Sign painting shops. 16 Watch making. 16 B. Accessory Uses. Use Group 24. Use Group 24 consists of the following uses: x x x x x 1. Facilities of electric cooperatives or public utilities subject to the jurisdiction of the Corporation Commission of the State of Oklahoma or other similar state or federal body and that use public rights-of-way or easements. O O O O O 2. Transportation, communication, and utility facilities: other. 26-33-26-40  
a.  Parking groups are shown in section 26-357. For off-street parking requirements in the central business district, see section 26-139. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-5.3), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1198, § 4, 9-20-82) 
Sec. 26-193. - General planned unit development. 
    General planned unit developments are permitted subject to the provisions set forth in article VII, division 2. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-5.4), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-194-26-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Districts and district regulations authorized, 11 O.S. § 43-102. 

Sec. 26-211. - M1 Limited industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose. This district is designed to: 
(1)  Provide an industrial park type environment exclusively for, and conducive to, the development and protection of modern administrative facilities, research institutions, and manufacturing plants, all of a nonnuisance type, and 
(2)  Protect nearby residential and commercial areas. 
(b)  District regulations. Zoning district regulations for the M1 district are set forth in section 26-214. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the M1 district are set forth in section 26-215. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-6.1.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-212. - M2 General industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose. This district is designed to accommodate a wide range of manufacturing, wholesale, and other industrial activities of medium intensity. The M2 district regulations are intended to permit such activities, subject to limitations that will protect nearby residential and commercial districts and will ensure that permitted uses are compatible with one another. 
(b)  District regulations. Zoning district regulations for the M2 district are set forth in section 26-214. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the M2 district are set forth in section 26-215. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-6.1.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-213. - M3 Intensive industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose. This district is designed to accommodate the manufacturing and industrial activities that involve more objectionable influences and hazards. The M3 district regulations are designed to encourage the use of this district by such industries, subject to the minimum regulations necessary for the mutual protection of the permitted uses. 
(b)  District regulations. Zoning district regulations for the M3 district are set forth in section 26-214. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the M3 district are set forth in section 26-215. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-6.1.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-214. - Industrial district regulations. 
    No lot or yard shall be established in any industrial district that does not meet the minimum requirements set forth in the following table. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged in any industrial district that will cause the maximum lot coverage or the maximum height regulations to be exceeded for such district as set forth in the following table. No lot or yard shall be reduced in dimension or area below the following requirements: 
Zoning Districts Lot Area, Minimum (square feet) Lot Width At Front Building Line, Minimum (feet) Lot 
Coverage, 
Maximum 
(percent) Yards, Minimum (feet) Height, 
Maximum a. When Abutting a Street 
Right-of-Way b. When Abutting Other 
Property Lines a. When Across Street from a Residential District When Across Street from a Nonresidential District When Abutting Property in a Residential District When Abutting Property in a Nonresidential District Stories Feet Minor Thoro. Major Thoro. M1 limited industrial 20,000 100 40 75 75 75 30 12 21/2 35 M2 general industrial 5,000 50 50 75 10 75 12 12 21/2 35 M3 intensive industrial 20,000 100 60 75 10 75 60 12 61/2 75  
a.  A building or structure may exceed the district maximum height regulations, provided there shall be one (1) foot of additional interior side yard required for each two (2) feet of additional height. (See also section 26-383, Height limit exceptions.) 
b.  In the M1 district there shall be no exterior storage of industrial supplies, goods, equipment, or trucks within twenty (20) feet from any street line. In the M2 and M3 districts there shall be no exterior storage of industrial supplies, goods, equipment, or trucks within twenty (20) feet from any street line when across the street from any residential district or when abutting any street designated as a major thoroughfare on the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-6.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-215. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Uses permitted in the industrial districts are shown by means of "Use Groups" on the basis of similarity of function, as well as compatibility with one another and with adjacent districts. The permitted "Use Groups" in each zoning district are shown by means of symbols in the permitted use tables. 
(b)  The letter "x" means the use is permitted as a use of right subject to the providing of off-street parking in the amounts required by reference to the "Parking Group" column and the providing of off-street loading in accordance with article VIII, division 2. 
(c)  The letter "O" means that the use is permitted subject to the conditions specified in the section whose number appears in the "Special Conditions" column opposite the permitted use in addition to the off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(d)  No use shall be permitted in any district other than a use shown in the following tables, and no use shall be permitted in any such district unless the letter "x" or letter "O" appears opposite the "Use Group" within which the named use is listed and in the column headed by the designation of such district and all other requirements set forth herein have been met. 
Zoning Districts M1 M2 M3 Permitted Uses Parking 
Group a. Special 
Conditions O O O Use Group 1. (Agriculture: animal husbandry), as set forth in section 26-167, subject to the "Special Conditions" reference set forth therein. x x x Use Group 2. (Agriculture: field crops), as set forth in section 26-167. O O O Use Group 7. (Community facilities and utilities: Residential), as set forth in section 26-167, subject to "Special Conditions" reference set forth therein. O O O Use Group 8. (Temporary uses), as set forth in section 26-167, subject to "Special Conditions" reference set forth therein. O O O Use Group 10. (Off-street parking), as set forth in section 26-192, subject to "Special Conditions" reference set forth therein. O O O Use Group 11. (Business, professional, and governmental offices), as set forth in section 26-192, subject to "Special Conditions" reference set forth therein. x x Use Group 14. (Automobile service establishments), as set forth in section 26-192. O O Use Group 15. (Automobile service establishments: other), as set forth in section 26-192, subject to "Special Conditions" reference set forth therein. O O Use Group 16. (Advertising signs), as set forth in section 26-192, subject to "Special Conditions" reference set forth therein. x x Use Group 18. (Community facilities and utilities: nonresidential), as set forth in section 26-192. x x x Use Group 19. (Low nuisance type manufacturing uses), as set forth in section 26-192. x x x Use Group 21. Use Group 21 consists of research or testing laboratories that are not harmful to nearby residential and commercial areas: A.
Laboratory, Research or Testing. 16 B.
Accessory Uses. O O Use Group 22. Use Group 22 consists primarily of nonmanufacturing and manufacturing uses that have a medium range of nuisance ratings with respect to the emission of smoke, noise, glare, vibration, and other objectionable elements: A.
Nonmanufacturing Uses: Airport, aircraft and landing strip. 26-402 Animal hospital, kennel, pound, or shelter. 14 26-403 Automobile, bus, truck dismantling, salvage, or wrecking. 22 26-420 Automobile, go-cart, miniature auto racing or driving tracks. 15 26-405 Bag cleaning. 16 Batching, or mixing plant, asphaltic or portland cement concrete, mortar, or plaster. Construction equipment sales, service, rental, or repair. Contractor's yard. Drycleaning plant, including carpet cleaning. 12 Dump, public or private. 26-33-26-40 Extraction of clay, gravel, sand; quarrying of rock or stone. 26-421 Gases, flammable, storage of. 22 26-415 Grain elevator. 22 Hatchery. 22 Ice plant. 22 Incinerator, public. 26-33-26-40 Junk yard; including salvage yard and auto wrecking, assembling of iron, rags, and similar materials. 17 26-420 Liquids, flammable: storage of. 22 Livestock: auction sales, pens with barns, loading and unloading and shipping facilities. 11 26-403 Oil well supplies and machinery sales. 22 Petroleum storage, wholesale. 22 Pipe storage. 22 School, commercial or trade, when not involving any danger of fire or explosion or of offensive noise, vibration, dust, odor, glare, heat, or other objectionable elements. 15 Stable, commercial. 12 26-403 Theater, drive-in. 26-429 Veterinarian: animals kept or boarded on the premises in outdoor kennels. 14 26-403 Well drilling contractor's yard or shop. Other nonmanufacturing uses that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic-generating capacity, and effects on other land uses, and (2) are not included in any other use group. B.
Manufacturing Uses: Air-conditioning equipment. 16 Aircraft, including parts. 16 Apparel or other textile products from textiles or other materials, including hat bodies, or similar products. 16 Automobiles, trucks, or trailer body repair. 16 Automobiles, trucks, or trailers, including parts, or rebuilding of engines. 16 Bakery products, unlimited floor area. 16 Boats, building or repair. 16 Books, binding, other than hand binding. 16 Brooms or brushes. 16 Cameras or other photographic equipment, except film. 16 Canvas or canvas products. 16 Carpets. 16 Chemicals, compounding or packaging. Cosmetics or toiletries. Dairy products. Electrical appliances, including lighting fixtures, irons, fans, toasters, electric toys, or similar appliances. Electrical equipment assembly, including home radio, or television receivers, home movie equipment, or similar products, but not including electrical machinery. Electrical supplies, including wire or cable assembly, switches, lamps, insulation, dry cell batteries, or similar supplies. Food products, except slaughtering of meat, or manufacture of vinegar or pickles. Fur goods, not including tanning or dyeing. Glass products from previously manufactured glass. Hair, felt, or feather products, except washing, curing, or dyeing. Hat bodies. Heating equipment. Hosiery. Ice, dry or natural. Ink or inked ribbon. Jute, hemp, sisal, or oakum products. Leather products, including shoes, machine belting, or similar products. Luggage. Machines, business, including typewriter, accounting machines, calculators, card-counting equipment, or similar products. Machinery, miscellaneous, including washing machines, firearms, refrigerators, air conditioning, commercial motion picture equipment, or similar products. Machine tools, including metal lathes, metal presses, metal stamping machines, woodworking machines, or similar products. Mattresses, including rebuilding or renovating. Metal finishing, plating, grinding, sharpening, polishing, cleaning, rust-proofing, heat treatment, or similar processes. Metal stamping or extrusion, including costume jewelry, pins and needles, razor blades, bottle caps, buttons, kitchen utensils, or similar products. Motion picture production. Motorcycles, including parts. Musical instruments, including pianos or organs. Novelty products. Orthopedic or medical appliances, including artificial limbs, braces, supports, stretchers, or similar appliances. Paper products, including envelopes, stationery, bags, boxes, shipping containers, bulk goods, tubes, wallpaper printing, or similar products. Pecan shelling. Perfumes or perfumed soaps, compounding or packaging only. Pharmaceutical products. Plastic products, including tableware, phonograph records, or similar products. Poultry or rabbit packing or slaughtering. Rubber products, such as washers, gloves, footwear, bathing caps, atomizers, or similar products, but excluding all rubber or synthetic processing. Scenery construction. Shoddy. Silverware, plate or sterling. Soap or detergents, packaging only. Sporting or athletic equipment, including balls, baskets, cues, gloves, bats, racquets, rods, or similar products. Statuary, mannequins, figurines, or religious or church art goods, excluding foundry operations. Steel products, miscellaneous fabrication or assembly, including steel cabinets, doors, fencing, metal furniture, or similar products. Textiles, spinning, weaving, manufacturing, dyeing, printing, knit goods, yarn, thread, or cordage. Tobacco, including curing, or tobacco products. Tools or hardware, including bolts, nuts, screws, doorknobs, drills, hand tools, or cutlery, hinges, house hardware, locks, nonferrous metal castings, plumbing appliances, or similar products. Toys. Umbrellas. Upholstering, bulk, excluding upholstering shops dealing directly with consumers. Vehicles, children's, including bicycles, scooters, wagons, baby carriages, or similar vehicles. Venetian blinds, window shades, or awnings. Wax products. Wood products, including furniture, boxes, crates, baskets, pencils, cooperage, or similar products. Other manufacturing uses that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic-generating capacity, and effects on other land uses, and (2) are not included in any other use group. C.
Accessory Uses x Use Group 23. Use Group 23 consists primarily of manufacturing uses that either involve considerable danger of fire, explosion, or other hazards to public health or safety, or cannot economically be designed to eliminate these hazards: A.
Manufacturing Uses: Asphalt or asphalt products. 16 Beverages, alcoholic, including beer and ale. 16 Brick, tile, or clay. 16 Carbon black or lamp black. Cement, lime, or plaster-of-paris. Charcoal or fuel briquettes. Chemicals, including acids, acetylene, aniline, dyes, ammonia, bleaching compounds, carbide, caustic soda, cellulose, chlorine, carbon black or bone black, cleaning or polishing preparations, creosote, exterminating agents, hydrogen or oxygen, industrial alcohol, potash, plastic materials, or synthetic resins, or rayon yarns. Coal, coke, or tar products, including gas. Cotton, ginning or processing. Creosoting or similar process. Distillation of bones or wood. Excelsior or packing materials. Explosives or fireworks. Fat rendering. Fertilizers. Film, photographic. Foundries, ferrous or nonferrous. Gas or gas products. Gelatin, glue, or size. Glass or large glass products, including structural or plate glass or similar products. Grain, milling or processing. Graphite or graphite products. Gypsum. Hair, felt, or feathers, (bulk processing, washing, curing, or dyeing). Incineration or reduction of garbage, offal, or dead animals. Intersections, fungicides, disinfectants, or related industrial or household chemical compounds. Leather or fur tanning, curing, finishing, or dyeing. Linoleum or oil cloth. Machinery, heavy, including agricultural construction, oilfield, or mining, including repairs. Matches. Meat products, including slaughtering of meat. Metal alloys or foil, miscellaneous, including solder, pewter, brass, bronze, or tin, lead or gold foil, or similar products. Metal casting or foundry products, heavy, including ornamental iron work, or similar products. Metal or metal ores, reduction, refining, smelting or alloying. Metal or metal products, treatment or processing, including enameling, japanning, lacquering, galvanizing, or similar processes. Monument works, with no limitation on processing. Paint, enamel, lacquer, turpentine, or varnish. Petroleum or petroleum products, refining, including gasoline or other petroleum products with a closed cup flash point of less than 105° F. Plastic, raw. Porcelain products, including bathroom or kitchen equipment or similar products. Radioactive waste handling. Railroad equipment, including railroad cars and locomotives. Rubber, natural or synthetic, including tires, tubes, or similar products. Slaughtering or packing animals or poultry. Soaps or detergents. Solvent extracting. Steel, structural products, including bars, girders, rails, wire rope, or similar products. Stone processing or stone products, including abrasives, asbestos, stone screening, stone cutting, stone works, sand or lime products, or similar processes or products. Sugar refining. Tar or tar products. Textile bleaching. Vinegar, pickles, or similar products. Wood or lumber processing, including sawmills or planing mills, excelsior, plywood, or veneer, wood-preserving treatment, or similar products or processes. Wood pulp or fiber, reduction or processing, including paper mill operations. Wool scouring or pulling. Other manufacturing uses that (1) are similar to the listed uses in function, traffic-generating capacity, and effects on other land uses, and (2) are not included in any other use group. B.
Accessory Uses. Use Group 24. Use Group 24 consists of the following uses: O x A. 
Extraction of oil or natural gas. 26-33-26-40 x x x B. 
Facilities of electric cooperatives or public utilities subject to the jurisdiction of the Corporation Commission of the State of Oklahoma or other similar state or federal body and that use public rights-of-way or easements. O x x C. 
Transportation, communication, and utility facilities: other. 26-33-26-40  
a.  Parking groups are shown in section 26-357. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-6.3), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-216-26-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SUPPLEMENTAL OR SPECIAL DISTRICTS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Districts and district regulations authorized, 11 O.S. § 43-102. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-231-26-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 26-281. - Purpose. 
    To promote the use of more flexible land use regulations and to facilitate use of the most advantageous techniques of land development, the city commission is authorized to establish planned unit development (PUD) districts, in which the zoning regulations are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance referred to hereinafter as this chapter, and the comprehensive plan of the city, referred to hereinafter as "the comprehensive plan," but in which such regulations differ in one (1) or more respects from the zoning regulations that are applicable in any of the districts that are established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-8.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-282. - General provisions. 
    The city commission may by ordinance approve the establishment of a planned unit development district on any parcel or tract of land comprising an area of not less than one and one-half (11/2) acres and which is suitable to be planned and developed or redeveloped as a unit and in a manner consistent with the intent and purpose of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-8.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-283. - Types. 
    A planned unit development district may be established for a residential planned unit development or for a general planned unit development. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-8.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-284. - Office and commercial uses. 
    Office and commercial structures and uses in planned unit development districts shall comply with the limitations and conditions of use standards applicable to the C2 and C3 districts and with the off-street parking requirements in section 26-357. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-8.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-285. - Standards and criteria-All planned unit developments. 
(a)  Introduction. A development plan that is not inconsistent with the standards set out in this section or with such general policies or specific rules and regulations for planned unit development districts as may be adopted from time to time by the city commission and placed on public record in the office of the city clerk shall prima facie be deemed to have qualified for preliminary approval. No such policies, rules, or regulations shall be revised or added to so as to be applicable to a specific proposal for a planned unit development after an application for preliminary approval of a specific development plan has been filed. 
(b)  Standards. A development plan shall not be inconsistent with the following general standards for use of land, and the use, type, bulk, design and location of the buildings, the density or intensity of use, the common open space, the public facilities and the development by geographic divisions of the site: 
(1)  The planned unit development can be substantially completed within the period of time specified in the schedule of development submitted by the developer. 
(2)  The planned unit development will not substantially injure or damage the use, value or enjoyment of surrounding property nor hinder or prevent the development of surrounding property in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  The site will be accessible from public roads that are adequate to carry the traffic that will be imposed upon them by the proposed development, and the streets and driveways on the site of the proposed development will be adequate to serve the residents or occupants of the proposed development. Traffic-control signs will be provided without expense to the city when the city commission determines that such signs are required to prevent traffic hazards or congestion in adjacent streets. 
(4)  The development will not impose an undue burden on public services or facilities, such as fire and police protection. 
(5)  The entire tract or parcel of land to be occupied by the planned unit development shall be held in a single ownership, or if there are two (2) or more landowners, the application for such planned unit development shall be filed jointly by all such landowners. Owners of undivided interests in open or common areas that own dominant estates not in the planned unit development area shall not be necessary applicants. 
(6)  The development plan shall contain such proposed covenants, easements and other provisions relating to the bulk, location and density of residential buildings, nonresidential uses and structures, and public facilities as are necessary for the welfare of the planned unit development and are not inconsistent with the best interests of the city. Such covenants, easements and other provisions, if part of the development plan as finally approved, may be modified, removed or released only with the consent of the city commission after a public hearing before, and recommendations by, the planning commission. All such covenants shall specifically provide for enforcement of such covenants by the landowners within the development. In order that the public interest may be protected, the city shall be made the beneficiary of covenants pertaining to such matters as location of uses, height of structures, setbacks, screening and access. Such covenants shall provide that the city may enforce compliance therewith and shall provide that amendment of such covenants shall require the approval of the city commission and the filing of a written amendment to the covenants, endorsed by the city commission. 
(7)  The planning commission may designate geographic divisions of the entire parcel to be developed as a unit, and shall in such case specify reasonable periods within which development of each such division must be commenced. In the case of residential planned unit developments and general planned unit developments that contain residential buildings, the planning commission may permit in each unit deviations from the number of dwelling units per acre established for the entire planned unit development, provided such deviation shall be adjusted for in other sections of the development so that the number of dwelling units per acre authorized for the entire planned unit development is not exceeded. The period of time established for completion of the entire development and/or the commencement date for each division thereof may be modified from time to time by the planning commission, upon the showing of good cause by the developer, provided that in no case shall any extension of time exceed twelve (12) months. The developer shall provide and record easements and covenants and shall make such other arrangements as may be determined by the planning commission to be reasonably required to assure performance in accordance with the development plan, to protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of the plan before completion, and to ensure that remedial measures will be available to the city if the common open space is permitted to deteriorate or is not maintained in a condition consistent with the best interests of the planned unit development or of the entire city. 
(8)  The location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks, lighting and appurtenant facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding land uses, and any part of a planned unit development not used for structures, parking areas, loading areas or accessways shall be landscaped or otherwise improved. 
(9)  When office or commercial structures or uses in a planned unit development district abut a residential district or residential buildings in the same development, screening shall be provided. In no event shall an office or commercial structure in a planned unit development district be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet to a residential building. 
(10)  Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this chapter, when a shopping center is developed as a planned unit development district, such shopping center shall have four (4) square feet of space devoted to off-street parking for each square foot of floor area in the structures located in the planned shopping center development. Such parking shall comply with section 26-357. 
(11)  The specifications for the width and surfacing of streets and highways, alleys, and ways for public utilities, and for curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, public parks and playgrounds, school grounds, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment established in the subdivision regulations of the city as amended from time to time, may be waived or modified by the planning commission, on the basis of recommendations of the city engineer, where the commission finds that such specifications are not required in the interests of the residents or occupants of the planned unit development and the waiver or modification of such specifications would not be inconsistent with the interests of the city. 
(12)  Any modifications of the zoning or other regulations that would otherwise be applicable to the site may be made, provided that they are warranted by the design of the development plan and the amenities incorporated in it and are not inconsistent with the interest of the public generally. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-8.5.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-286. - Same-Residential planned unit developments and general planned unit developments containing residential buildings. 
(a)  Residential density. The residential density in residential planned unit developments and general planned unit developments containing residential buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any development plan that does not propose a residential density (number of dwelling units per acre) greater than those permitted on the property in the zoning district regulations applicable thereto immediately prior to the approval of the planned unit development district shall prima facie be deemed to have qualified for preliminary approval insofar as residential density is concerned. It is the intent of this section that the aggregate density and intensity of use within the planned unit development remain the same as that which would be permitted if the area were developed conventionally, but that within the planned unit development the permitted number of dwelling units (d.u.'s) may be reallocated irrespective of use district lines or lot lines. The maximum number of permitted dwelling units within a planned unit development shall be computed as follows: the number of dwelling units permitted is equal to the residential area of the PUD divided by the minimum land area per dwelling unit permitted in the applicable use district. 
(2)  Open space, or the respective undivided interest held therein, located within the PUD district, may be considered in determining the number of dwelling units permitted. Residential area of the PUD is the total area of the PUD, including common open space, but excluding all areas occupied by institutional, office, commercial and other nonresidential uses. 
(b)  Common open space. The common open space requirements in residential planned unit developments and general planned unit developments containing residential buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  When common open space is provided in a development plan, the amount and location of such common open space shall be consistent with the declared function of the common open space as set forth in the application for a planned unit development district. The development plan shall include such provisions for the ownership and maintenance of and access to the common open space as are reasonably necessary to ensure its continuity, care, conservation and maintenance. 
(2)  When a planned unit development includes common open space, such space shall never be used for additional residential, commercial or office structures, but such space may be used for siting necessary and appropriate structures and improvements that are complementary to the recreational use and enjoyment of such space by the residents and owners of the PUD. Such structures and improvements may include swimming pools, picnic areas, tennis courts and similar facilities. 
(3)  Common open space shall not be used or counted as part of any required minimum lot area or required yard of any structure outside such space. 
(c)  Ground coverage. The total ground area occupied by structures other than paving, sidewalks, or similar ground surfacing shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the total ground area of the PUD. 
(d)  Building setbacks and separations. Building setbacks and separations between buildings in residential planned unit developments and general planned unit developments containing residential buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Building setbacks from the boundary of the PUD or from streets along the boundary shall be the same as in the zoning districts that immediately preceded the PUD district. 
(2)  The distance between any two (2) principal buildings shall not be less than the sum of the least widths of the interior side yards required for a principal building in the predecessor zoning district that occupied the greatest area in the PUD tract. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-8.5.2), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-287-26-305. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Approval and Establishment Procedure 

Sec. 26-306. - Generally. 
    The procedure set forth in this subdivision is established for securing approval of a planned unit development and establishment of a planned unit development district (PUD and PUD district). 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-307. - Coordination with subdivision regulations. 
(a)  Subdivision review. It is the intent of these regulations that subdivision review under the subdivision regulations be carried out simultaneously with the review of a PUD under these regulations. 
(b)  Format of development plans. The development plans submitted must be submitted in a form that will satisfy the requirements of the subdivision regulations, except as may be specifically modified herein, for preliminary and final plats. 
(c)  Application. The requirements for both these regulations and those of the subdivision regulations shall apply to all PUDs, and all actions of the city commission pertaining to PUDs shall be based on a recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.2.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-308. - Preliminary development plan. 
(a)  Preliminary development plan. A developer seeking the establishment of a PUD district shall prepare and submit to the planning commission a preliminary development plan for such PUD district. 
(b)  Contents. The preliminary development plan shall contain the following documents and information: 
(1)  A survey of the tract that is to be developed showing existing features of the property, including streets, alleys, easements, utility lines, existing land use, general topography and physical features. 
(2)  A site plan showing the location and arrangement of all existing and proposed structures, the proposed traffic circulation pattern within the development, the areas to be developed for parking, the points of ingress and egress, including access streets where required, the relationship of abutting land uses and zoning districts, proposed lots and blocks, if any, and proposed public or common open space, if any, including parks, playgrounds, school sites and recreational facilities. 
(3)  A preliminary plat of subdivision for which approval has been secured pursuant to the applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations relating to subdivision approval. 
(4)  A statement of the anticipated residential density (when applicable), the proposed total gross floor area and the percentage of the development that is to be occupied by structures. 
(5)  When a PUD is to be constructed in stages or units, a schedule for the development of such stages or units shall be submitted. No such stage or unit shall have a residential density that exceeds more than twenty percent (20%) of the proposed residential density of the entire PUD. When a PUD provides for common open space, the total area of common open space provided at any stage of development shall, at a minimum, bear the same relationship to the total open space to be provided in the entire PUD as the stages or units completed or under development bear to the entire PUD. 
(6)  In the case of general PUDs, a statement identifying the principal types of office or commercial uses that are to be included in the proposed development. 
(7)  A statement showing the relationship of the PUD to the comprehensive plan. 
(8)  When a PUD includes provisions for common open space or recreational facilities, a statement describing the provision that is to be made for the care and maintenance of such open space or recreational facilities. If it is proposed that such open space be owned and/or maintained by any entity other than a governmental authority, copies of the proposed legal documents creating the legal entity and bylaws, if applicable, shall be submitted. 
(9)  Copies of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect to property included in the PUD district. 
(c)  Action on preliminary development plan. In the consideration of the preliminary development plan, the following shall be followed: 
(1)  The same procedures as required for the adoption of an original zoning ordinance or the amendment thereto shall be followed by the planning commission and the city commission in the establishment of a PUD district. 
(2)  Protests to the establishment of such PUD district shall be made and handled in the same manner as provided for in conventional rezoning cases. 
(3)  An ordinance approving a PUD and establishing a PUD district shall specify the zoning regulations and restrictions that will, pursuant to the development plan, apply in the PUD district and shall describe the boundaries of such district or set such boundaries out on a map that is incorporated and published as part of such ordinance. Such ordinance shall also specify the conditions and restrictions that have been imposed by the city commission on the PUD, and the extent to which the otherwise applicable district regulations have been varied or modified. When the planning commission has designated geographic divisions of the development that may be developed as a unit, the ordinance shall authorize the planning commission to modify the schedule of development. 
(d)  Status of PUD after approval. After the approval of the preliminary development plan, the following shall be applicable: 
(1)  Each PUD district established by the city commission shall be given a distinctive designation consisting of the letters PUD(R) or PUD(G) plus a number in a consecutive series (1, 2, 3, etc.); a single series of numbers shall serve for both types of PUDs. The designation of the PUD district shall be entered on the ordinance establishing the district and the district shall be delineated on the zoning map. It shall also be referred to in preliminary development plans and final development plans associated with such district. 
(2)  After the adoption of an ordinance approving a preliminary development plan and establishing a PUD district, such ordinance shall be certified by the city clerk and filed in the office of the city clerk. A certified copy shall be mailed to the developer. When approval of a preliminary plan has been granted, the same shall be noted on the zoning map maintained in the office of the city engineer. 
(3)  An application for approval of a final development plan, or all stages thereof, shall be filed within three (3) years. 
(4)  In the event that a development plan is given preliminary approval and thereafter, but prior to approval of a final development plan, the developer shall: 
a.  Choose to abandon such plan and shall so notify the planning commission in writing; or 
b.  Shall fail to file an application, or applications, for approval of a final plan within the required time period, then the preliminary plan shall be deemed to be revoked. When a preliminary plan is revoked, all that portion of the preliminary plan for which final approval has not been given shall be subject to those provisions of the zoning regulations and other local ordinances, that were applicable thereto immediately prior to the approval of the preliminary plan, as they may be amended from time to time. The city commission shall forthwith adopt an ordinance repealing the PUD district for that portion of the development that has not received final approval and reestablishing the zoning and other regulatory provisions that would otherwise be applicable. When a preliminary development plan is revoked, such revocation shall be noted on the zoning map in the office of the city engineer and in the records of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.2.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-309. - Final development plan-Application for approval. 
(a)  An application for approval of a final development plan shall be filed with the planning commission within the time specified herein and shall be in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan as approved. The application shall include: 
(1)  A detailed site plan showing the physical layout and design of all streets, easements, rights-of-way, lots, blocks, common open space, structures, and uses. 
(2)  Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior elevations. 
(3)  Landscaping plans. 
(4)  Copies of any easements and restrictive covenants and proof of recording of the same. 
(5)  Proof of the establishment and activation of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and maintenance of any common open space. 
(6)  Evidence that no lots, parcels, or tracts or dwelling units in such development have been conveyed or leased prior to the recording of any restrictive covenants applicable to such PUD. 
(b)  In accordance with the schedule proposed in the application for approval of the preliminary plan, the developer may elect to file an application for final approval of only a geographic unit or units of the land included in the plan and may delay, within the time limits authorized by the ordinance, application for final approval of other units. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.2.3a), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-310. - Same-Review for compliance. 
(a)  A public hearing by the planning commission on an application for approval of the final development plan, or a unit thereof, shall not be required, provided that the final plan, or the unit thereof submitted for final approval, is in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan theretofore approved. 
(b)  A development plan submitted for final approval shall be deemed to be in substantial compliance with the preliminary plan, as approved, provided that any modification by the developer of the preliminary plan, as approved, does not: 
(1)  Vary the proposed gross residential density or intensity of use by more than five percent (5%); 
(2)  Involve a reduction of the area set aside for common open space; 
(3)  Increase by more than five percent (5%) the floor area proposed for nonresidential use; nor 
(4)  Increase by more than five percent (5%) the total ground area covered by buildings. 
A public hearing shall not be held to consider modifications in the location and design of streets or facilities for water or for disposal of storm water or sanitary sewage. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.2.3b), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-311. - Same-Procedure if in substantial compliance. 
(a)  Although a public hearing shall not be held on an application for approval of a final development plan when said plan as submitted for final approval is in substantial compliance with the preliminary plan, as approved, the burden shall nevertheless be upon the developer to show the planning commission good cause for any variation between the preliminary plan, as approved, and the final plan as submitted. 
(b)  In the event a public hearing is not required for final approval and the application for final approval has been filed, together with all drawings, specifications, and other documents required in support thereof, the planning commission shall, within thirty-five (35) days of such filing, grant such plan final approval; provided, however, that, in the event the final plan as submitted contains variations from the preliminary plan as approved, but remains in substantial compliance with the preliminary plan, as approved, the planning commission may, after a meeting with the developer, refuse to approve the final plan and shall, within thirty-five (35) days from the filing of the application for final approval, advise the developer in writing of such refusal, setting out the reasons why one (1) or more of such variations are not in the public interest. In the event of such refusal, the developer may refile his application for final approval without the variations objected to by the planning commission at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final approval. If the time for applying for final approval shall have expired at the time when the planning commission advised the developer that the variations were not in the public interest, then the developer shall have sixty (60) additional days within which to refile his application for final approval without the variation. If the developer shall fail to refile within such period, he shall be deemed to have refused to accept such requirements, and final approval shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.2.3c), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-312. - Same-Procedure if not in substantial compliance. 
(a)  In the event that the final development plan, as submitted for approval, is not in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan, as approved, the planning commission shall, within thirty-five (35) days of the date the application for approval of the final plan is filed, so notify the developer in writing, setting out the particular ways in which the final plan is not in substantial compliance with the preliminary plan, as approved. The developer may make such changes in the final plan as are necessary to bring it into compliance with the preliminary plan, or he may file a written request with the planning commission that it hold a public hearing on his application for final approval. The developer may take either such alternate action at any time within which he would be entitled to apply for final approval, or within sixty (60) additional days, if the time for applying for final approval shall have expired at the time when the planning commission advised the developer that the final plan was not in substantial compliance. In the event the developer shall fail to take either of these alternate actions within such time, he shall be deemed to have abandoned the plan. 
(b)  In the case of a public hearing requested under subsection (a) above, such hearing shall be held, notice thereof shall be given, and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in section 26-64. Within thirty-five (35) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the planning commission shall by resolution either grant or deny approval of the final plan. The grant or denial of approval of the final plan shall, in cases arising under this section, be in the form and contain the findings required for a recommendation on an application for approval of a preliminary development plan set out in section 26-308. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.2.3d), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-313. - Certification. 
    A final development plan, or any unit thereof, that has been approved by the planning commission shall be so certified without delay by the city clerk and shall be filed of record in the office of the city engineer before any development shall take place in accordance therewith. In the event the planning commission fails to act, either by grant or by denial of final approval within the time prescribed, the final plan shall be deemed to be approved. Pending completion within a reasonable time of the planned unit development, or any unit thereof, that has been finally approved, no modification of the provisions of such plan or unit thereof as finally approved shall be made without the consent of the developer. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.2.3e), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-314. - Abandonment. 
    In the event that a final development plan or unit thereof is approved and thereafter the developer shall: 
(1)  Abandon part or all of such development plan and shall so notify the planning commission in writing, or 
(2)  Shall fail to complete the planned unit development or unit thereof within a reasonable period of time after final approval has been granted, 
then no development or further development shall take place on the property included in the final development plan until after the property has been reclassified by enactment of an amendment to this chapter in the manner prescribed for such amendments in article II, division 2. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.2.3f), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-315. - Amendment of PUD districts and plans. 
    A planned unit development district ordinance or an approved preliminary or final development plan may be amended by means of the procedures prescribed in this subdivision for the adoption of PUD district ordinances and the approval of preliminary and final development plans. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-14.2.4), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-316-26-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-331. - Rear dwellings. 
    No building in the rear of a principal building on the same lot shall be used for residential purposes, unless it conforms to all the yard and other open space and off-street parking requirements of this chapter. In addition, there must be provided for any such rear dwelling an unoccupied and unobstructed accessway not less than twelve (12) feet wide to a public street for not more than two (2) dwelling units in such location, or one (1) not less than twenty (20) feet wide for three (3) or more dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.3.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-332. - Accessory buildings-Generally. 
    An accessory building may be erected detached from the principal building or, except when a stable, may be erected as an integral part of the principal building, or it may be connected therewith by a breezeway or similar structure. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.4.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-333. - Same-Location. 
    An accessory building attached to the main building shall be made structurally a part and have a common wall with the main building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the main building. Unless so attached, an accessory building in a residential district shall be located on the rear one-half of the lot and at least ten (10) feet from any dwelling existing or under construction on the same lot or any adjacent lot. No accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet to any interior lot line, but such building may be located within five (5) feet of an alley, where such alley abuts on the rear line of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, such accessory building shall not project beyond the front building line required or existing on the adjacent lot. These provisions relating to accessory buildings shall be effective with respect to such buildings, even though other provisions of this chapter require wider or deeper yards for main buildings. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.4.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-334. - Same-Maximum rear yard coverage. 
    Accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the area of the required rear yard. Garden shelters, storage shelters, and covered patios shall be permitted as accessory buildings provided that these uses are not equipped for use as living quarters. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.4.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-335. - Same-Guesthouses. 
    Guesthouse accessory buildings shall be located on the rear half of the building site and shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to the nearest point on the main building. No kitchen or cooking facilities shall be permitted in any guesthouse. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.4.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-336. - Reduction of required area or space. 
    No lot, yard, court, parking area or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such area or dimension less than the minimum required by this chapter; and, if already less than the minimum required by this chapter, such area or dimension shall not be further reduced. However, this section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.5), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-337. - Fallout shelters. 
    Fallout shelters are permitted accessory uses and structures in any district, subject to the yard and lot coverage regulations of the district. Such shelters may be contained in other structures or may be constructed separately. Fallout shelters shall not be used for residential purposes, except in time of emergency, unless the structure meets all city Code requirements applying to residential structures. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.7), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-338-26-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 26-356. - Off-street loading. 
(a)  Requirements. Every building or structure hereafter constructed in any district for commercial or industrial purposes requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise shall provide and maintain on the same lot with such building at least one (1) off-street loading space for the first five thousand (5,000) square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area and one (1) additional such loading space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area so used in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(b)  Size. Each loading space shall be not less than ten (10) feet in width, thirty-five (35) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in height. Where the off-street loading space does not abut on a street, public or private alley or easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive of at least ten (10) feet in width leading to the loading areas required hereunder. 
(c)  Location. Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard or court space, but no such space may be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any residential district, unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless enclosed on all sides abutting the residential district by a wall of not less than eight (8) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.2.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-357. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  Requirement. In all zoning districts, in connection with every industrial, commercial, institutional, recreational, residential or any other use, there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity or any other use is established, off-street parking spaces for automobiles in accordance with the requirements in the "Parking Spaces Required" column in the tables of permitted uses. Parking space used in connection with an existing and continuing use or building on the effective date of this chapter, up to the number required by this chapter, shall be continued and may not be counted as serving a new structure or addition; nor may a parking space be substituted for a loading space or a loading space substituted for a parking space. 
(b)  Size. Each off-street parking space shall have an area at least ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long, exclusive of access drives or aisles. Where the off-street parking space does not abut on a street, public or private alley, or easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive of at least ten (10) feet in width in case of a dwelling and at least twenty (20) feet in all other cases, leading to the parking areas required hereunder. 
(c)  Floor area defined. For the purpose of applying the requirements for off-street loading and parking, the term "floor area," in the cases of offices, merchandising, or service types of uses, shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to be used by tenants or for the service to the public as customers, patrons, clients or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment for display or sale of merchandise. It shall not include areas used principally for nonpublic purposes, such as storage, incidental repair, processing or packaging of merchandise, for offices incidental to the management or maintenance of stores or buildings, for restrooms or utilities, or for fitting or dressing rooms. 
(d)  Lot area defined. For the purpose of applying the requirements for off-street loading and parking, the term "lot area," in the case of: 
(1)  Golf driving range, commercial, shall mean the tee area only. 
(2)  Retail sales of agricultural products raised on the premises, shall mean the lot area used for display and sale of the products only. 
(3)  All other uses, shall mean the area of the portion of the lot actually being used for that purpose. 
(e)  Location. Such off-street parking space may occupy all or any part of any required yard or court space. For any new use, structure, or building, required off-street parking, which because of the size or location of the parcel, cannot be provided on the premises, may be provided on other property not more than four hundred (400) feet distant from the building site. Such parking space shall be deemed to be required parking space associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(f)  Number of off-street parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking spaces required for each use shall be determined by reference to the following table of "Parking Groups." In the following table the figures in the column headed "Parking Group" refer to corresponding figures in the column headed "Parking Group" in the tables of permitted uses for each zoning district. If, for any reason, the classification of any use for the purpose of determining the amount of off-street parking space to be provided by such use is not readily determinable hereunder, the classification of the use shall be fixed by the board of adjustment. 
Number of Off-street Parking Spaces Required by Parking Groups Parking Group Required Parking Spaces 1 1 space for each dwelling unit 2 2 spaces for each dwelling unit 3 3 spaces for each 2 dwelling units 4 1 space for each guestroom 5 1 space for each 2 guestrooms 6 1 space for each 3 beds (excluding bassinets) 7 1 space for each 3 seats 8 1 space for each 4 seats 9 1 space for each 5 seats 10 5 spaces for each alley 11 1 space for each 100 square feet of floor area 12 1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area 13 1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area 14 1 space for each 400 square feet of floor area 15 1 space for each 500 square feet of floor area 16 1 space for each 500 square feet of floor area or 1 space for each 1.5 employees, whichever is larger 17 1 space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area or 1 space for each 1.5 employees, whichever is larger 18 1 space for each 500 square feet of lot area 19 1 space for each 2,000 square feet of lot area 20 1 space for each 5,000 square feet of lot area 21 1 space for each employee 22 1 space for each 1.5 employees 23 50 spaces for each 9 holes  
Where open land is used for manufacturing, storage, or other operations in a manner similar to indoor operations, such open use of land shall be added to floor space in determining the number of off-street parking spaces required. 
(g)  Development and maintenance of parking areas. Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including a commercial parking lot, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Screening and landscaping. Off-street parking areas for more than five (5) vehicles shall be effectively screened on each side that adjoins or is located within twenty (20) feet of any residential district or institutional premises, by a masonry or solid board wall of acceptable design. Such wall shall be not less than four (4) feet or more than six (6) feet in height and shall be maintained in good condition without any advertising thereon. The space between such wall or fence and the side lot line adjoining such premises or the front lot line facing such premises, in any residential district, shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs, or evergreen ground cover and maintained in good condition. The board of adjustment shall establish standards for the construction of such wall. 
(2)  Barriers. Off-street parking areas shall be provided with wheel guards or bumper guards so located that no part of a parked vehicle will extend beyond the parking space. 
(3)  Minimum distances and setbacks. No part of any parking area for more than five (5) vehicles, including the required wall or fence, shall be closer than ten (10) feet to any dwelling, school, hospital, or other institution for human care located on an adjoining lot. If not in a residential district but adjoining such district, the parking area, including the required fence or wall, shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet from the established street right-of-way line within fifty (50) feet of any residential district. 
(4)  Surfacing. Any off-street parking area for five (5) or more vehicles shall be surfaced with a durable and dustless surface, shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area, and shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading and parking and storage of vehicles. The foregoing requirements with respect to surfacing shall not apply to a temporary parking area. 
(5)  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from the adjoining premises in any residential district. 
(6)  Nature of use. In RS, RM and RT districts, off-street parking areas shall be used only by vehicles of up to three-quarter-ton manufacturer's rated capacity. Required off-street parking areas shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. 
(7)  Shelter building. An off-street parking area may have not more than one (1) attendant shelter building conforming to all setback requirements for structures in the district, and which shelter building in the RS, RM and RT districts shall not contain more than fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area. 
(h)  Variance. The board of adjustment may authorize, on appeal, a modification, reduction or waiver of the foregoing requirements only if it should find that in the particular case appealed, the peculiar nature of the residential, business, trade, industrial or other use, the exceptional shape or size of the property, or other exceptional situation or condition not generally applicable to other lots in the same district must justify such action. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-9.2.2), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-358-26-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 26-376. - Generally. 
    The requirements and regulations specified hereinbefore shall be subject to the following exceptions, modifications and interpretations set out in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-11), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-377. - Existing lots of record. 
(a)  May be used as a building site. Any lot or parcel of land in any district that was under separate ownership and of record on June 18, 1979, or the date of amendment thereof, where no adjoining undeveloped land fronting on the same street was under the same ownership on such date, may be used as a building site, even though such lot or parcel fails to meet the minimum requirements for lot area, lot width, or both, that are generally applicable to lots in the district. With respect to such lots, yard dimensions and other requirements not involving lot area or width shall be complied with, subject to subsections (b) and (c) below. 
(b)  Side yard requirements. On any such lot or parcel the side yard requirements of this chapter shall not operate to reduce the net buildable width of such lot below thirty-eight (38) feet, provided, however, that the application of this exception shall not be permitted to reduce: 
(1)  Any interior side yard below ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, or 
(2)  Any exterior side yard below twenty percent (20%) of the width of the lot or eight (8) feet, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Front and rear yard requirements. On any such lot or parcel, no combination of the following requirements shall operate to reduce the net buildable depth of such lot below seventy (70) feet: (1) front and rear yard, (2) front and/or rear building setback, provided, however, that the application of this exception shall not be permitted to reduce: (1) any front yard below ten percent (10%) of the depth of the lot, or (2) any rear yard below fifteen percent (15%) of the depth of the lot, or ten (10) feet, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-11.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-378. - Front yard-Established yard greater than required by the yard provisions of this chapter. 
(a)  In any district where thirty-five percent (35%) or more of the frontage on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is improved with buildings whose front yards do not vary more than eight (8) feet from the average of the front yards of such buildings, no building shall project into the average front yard so established, but this exception shall not be interpreted to require a front yard of more than: 
(1)  Fifty (50) feet in any residential, C1 or C2 district, 
(2)  Forty (40) feet in any C5 district, 
(3)  Ten (10) feet in any C4 district, 
(4)  Seventy (70) feet in any M district. 
(b)  In determining the percentage of frontage in subsection (a) above, the widths of developed lots shall be used; in determining the average front yard, the widths of buildings fronting on the street shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-11.2.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-379. - Same-Established yard less than required by the yard provisions of this chapter. 
    Where a new building is proposed to be erected or an existing building is proposed to be enlarged on a street where the frontage on the same side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with one (1) or more existing buildings that have front yards of lesser depth than required by this chapter, then one (1) of the following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  Where the proposed building is to be located not more than two hundred (200) feet from such existing buildings on both sides, and there are no intervening buildings, then the front yard shall be established by a line drawn between the two (2) nearest front corners of such adjacent buildings on the two (2) sides. 
(2)  Where the proposed building is to be located not more than two hundred (200) feet from one (1) such existing building on one (1) side, then the front yard shall be established by a line drawn from the nearest front corner of the existing building to the established front yard line at a slope of one (1) foot of depth to ten (10) feet of frontage. 
(3)  Where the proposed building is to be located more than two hundred (200) feet from all such existing buildings, then the proposed building shall conform with the front yard established herein for such district. 
(4)  Where the proposed building is to be located between and adjacent to two (2) existing buildings that conform to the front yard requirements of such district, or between such a building and an intersecting street, then the proposed building shall conform to the front yard setback established for such district, regardless of the front yards established by other existing buildings in the same block. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-11.2.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-380. - Where rear yard abuts an alley. 
    In computing the required depth of a rear yard for any building where such yard abuts on an alley, the depth of the lot may be considered as extending to the center of the alley, and the required depth of the rear yard as being measured from the centerline of the alley. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-11.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-381. - Side yard. 
(a)  Variation of distance between residential structures. The distance between residential structures on the same zoning lot may be varied, when authorized by the board of adjustment, where the side wall of a residence is not parallel with the side wall of the adjacent residence or is broken or otherwise irregular. In such case the average distance between residences shall not be less than the otherwise required least distance; provided, however, that such distance shall not be less at any point than one-half of the otherwise required least distance. 
(b)  Reduction in width of one side yard. The width of one (1) side yard may be reduced, when authorized by the board of adjustment, to a width not less than three (3) feet; provided, however, that the sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards on the same zoning lot is not less than the combined required minimum for both side yards. Such reduction may be authorized only when the board finds it to be warranted by the location of existing buildings or conducive to the desirable development of two (2) or more lots. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-11.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-382. - Projections into required yards. 
(a)  Architectural features that may project into yards. Certain architectural features may project into required yards and courts as follows: 
(1)  Cornices, canopies, eaves, or other architectural features may project a distance not exceeding two and one-half (2.5) feet. 
(2)  Fire escapes may project a distance not exceeding four and one-half (4.5) feet. 
(3)  An uncovered stair and necessary landings may project a distance not to exceed three (3) feet, provided such stair and landing shall not extend above the entrance floor of the building except for a railing not exceeding three (3) feet in height. 
(4)  Bay windows, balconies and chimneys may project a distance not exceeding two (2) feet, provided that such features do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-third of the length of the building wall on which they are located. 
(b)  Patios. Patios may be located in side and rear yards, provided that they are not closer than three (3) feet to any adjacent property line. 
(c)  Fences, walls and hedges. Fences, walls, and hedges may be located in required yards as follows: 
(1)  If not exceeding at any point eight (8) feet in height above the elevation of the surface of the ground at such point, they may be located in any required yard or court, provided that on a corner lot, abutting in the rear the side lot line of another lot in an R district, no such fence, wall, or hedge within twenty-five (25) feet of the common lot line shall be closer to the side street lot line than one-half the least depth of the front yard required on such other lot fronting the side street. 
(2)  On any corner lot, no fence, wall, hedge or other structure or planting more than three (3) feet in height above curb level shall be erected, placed, or maintained, within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line joining such street lines at points whose distance from the point of intersection is equal to the sum of the required front and exterior side yards. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-11.5), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-383. - Height limit exceptions. 
    When authorized by the board of adjustment, zoning district height limitations may be exceeded by the following structures: chimneys, church steeples, flag poles, grain elevators, distribution lines, towers and poles, radio and television antennas, water towers and similar structures. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-11.6), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-384. - Fallout shelters. 
(a)  Joint shelters. The board of adjustment may permit, as a special exception, construction of joint shelters by two (2) or more property owners. Where such joint shelters are permitted, the board may waive the side and rear yard requirements on the property directly involved in the construction of the joint shelter to the extent necessary to permit practical and efficient location and construction, provided, however, that side and rear yard requirements shall be met where property involved in the joint proposal abuts or adjoins property not included in the proposal. 
(b)  Uses permitted as special exceptions. The board of adjustment may permit a fallout shelter to be used also for other purposes permissible as special exceptions in the district in which the shelter is located, if the board finds that all general requirements of this chapter concerning such special exceptions are satisfied and in addition establishes that: 
(1)  The use other than as a shelter is compatible with the use as a shelter, 
(2)  The function as a shelter would not be materially impaired by the proposed use, 
(3)  The special exception as to use would have been granted regardless of whether the shelter was involved, and 
(4)  The shelter meets all city Code requirements applying to structures for which the special exception is requested. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-11.7), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-385. - Setback regulations. 
    Wherever any ordinance of the city requires on any identified street a setback different from that required by the yard provisions of this chapter, the former shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-11.8), 6-18-79) 
Secs. 26-386-26-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SPECIAL CONDITIONS FOR CERTAIN USES 

Sec. 26-401. - Scope of article. 
    This article describes the special conditions under which certain uses are permitted in a zoning district when reference is made to one (1) or more of such sections in the "Special Conditions" column in the tables of permitted uses. In all instances where a special zoning permit from the board of adjustment is required as set forth in sections 26-33 to 26-40 and where the meeting of special conditions is required, such permit shall not be granted before the board of adjustment has made a finding to the effect that the proposed use, as described in applications, plans or other documents submitted by the applicant for such permit, will meet such conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-402. - Airports, aircraft landing strips or heliports. 
    Any airport, aircraft landing strip or heliport shall be located no nearer than six hundred (600) feet to any other property in a residential district; shall provide runways or other landing spaces only so located and oriented that aircraft landing and taking off do not normally pass directly over a residential district below two hundred (200) feet; and shall be so located that air or land traffic shall not constitute a nuisance to neighboring uses. Proponents shall also show that adequate measures will be taken to prevent offensive dust, noise, vibrations and bright lights; and that the field in question meets the standards of the Federal Aviation Agency for the particular class of field proposed to be developed. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-403. - Animal husbandry, dairying, and pasturage; animal hospitals; commercial kennels; livestock sales; riding academies; public stables; veterinarians' offices. 
    Animal husbandry, dairying, and pasturage; animal hospital; commercial kennels; livestock sales; riding academy; public stable; veterinarian's office in those districts where permitted, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Animal husbandry, dairying, and pasturage. Animal husbandry, dairying and pasturage, but not including the keeping of swine, shall have a minimum lot area of not less than one (1) acre and shall have not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area for each head of livestock kept on the premises. 
(2)  Animal hospital, pound, or shelter; commercial kennel for cats or dogs; livestock sales or feeding facilities; riding academy; public stable; veterinarian's office with animals on the premises. Any of the above uses shall be located no nearer than two hundred (200) feet to an RS, RM or RT district, and no nearer to a zoning lot line than one hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Nuisances prohibited. Proponents of such uses shall show that adequate measures will be taken to prevent odor, dust, noise, or drainage from becoming a nuisance to uses on other properties. No incineration of animal refuse shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-404. - Automobile laundries. 
    Automobile laundries shall provide space on the zoning lot for not less than ten (10) automobiles per washing lane. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-405. - Automobile, go-cart, miniature auto, racing or driving tracks. 
    Automobile, go-cart, miniature auto, racing or driving tracks shall be located not less than one thousand (1,000) feet from any residential district, unless enclosed by a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet high, but in no case shall a track be located less than five hundred (500) feet from a residential district. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.5), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-406. - Carnivals, circuses or similar temporary amusement enterprises. 
    Carnivals, circuses or similar temporary amusement enterprises shall be required to obtain certificates of occupancy from the city clerk and shall have no facilities located nearer to an RS, RM or RT district than two hundred (200) feet and no nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any occupied residential structure and shall have access drives so located as to minimize traffic hazards. The proponent shall show that adequate measures will be taken to prevent odor, dust, noise, lights, and traffic from becoming a nuisance to uses on other properties. Each certificate of occupancy for such enterprise shall be valid for a period of not more than seven (7) days and shall not be granted for more than three (3) such periods for the same location within any ninety-day period. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.6), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-407. - Cemeteries, columbariums, crematories or mausoleums. 
    Any cemetery, columbarium, crematory or mausoleum shall have its principal entrance on a major thoroughfare, with ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion, and shall provide a wall at least six (6) feet high on all property lines abutting any residential district. The board of adjustment shall establish standards for the construction of such wall. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.7), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-408. - Churches or other places of worship. 
    Any church or other place of worship shall be permitted in the following districts, subject to the indicated site standards: 
District Minimum Site Area 
(acres) Minimum Yards 
(feet) Front Side Rear RS8 2 25 75 75 RS6 2 25 50 50 RS5 2 25 50 50 RM, RT, C2 1 25 25 25  
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.8), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-409. - Clubs or lodges. 
    Any club or lodge, where permitted in residential districts, shall observe the site standards required for churches (section 26-408) and shall be so located that no ingress or egress (other than a service entrance on an alley) is from any street other than a major thoroughfare. No swimming pool, tennis court, or other recreational facility that is accessory to a private club or lodge shall be located nearer to other property in a residential district than one-half (1/2) the required yard, and wherever any such facility is located within any part of a required side or rear yard, adjoining property in a residential district shall be effectively protected by a wall at least six (6) feet high. The board of adjustment shall establish standards for the construction of such wall. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.9), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-410. - Colleges or universities. 
    Any college or university shall be located adjacent to a major thoroughfare and shall observe the site standards required for churches in section 26-408. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.10), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-411. - College dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses. 
    Any college dormitory or fraternity or sorority house in an RM or RT district shall have a site area of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet and side yards of at least ten (10) feet each. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.11), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-412. - Construction facilities, accessory. 
    Any temporary batching plant for asphaltic or portland cement concrete, or temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment shall be permitted in any zoning district upon obtaining a special zoning permit from the board of adjustment after the board of adjustment finds that such batching plant, yard, or building is both incidental to and necessary for construction within two (2) miles of the plant, yard, or building. Each permit for such plant, yard, or building shall specify the location of the proposed facility and the area to be served thereby. Each such permit shall be granted for a period of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, and such permits shall not be granted for the same location for more than four (4) such periods during any thirty-month period. The applicant shall show that adequate measures will be taken to prevent odor, dust, noise, lights, drainage, and traffic from becoming a nuisance to uses on other properties. Ingress to and egress from such facilities shall be only from major thoroughfares, provided, however, that the board of adjustment may approve a location on a minor thoroughfare if the board finds that such location would give rise to less traffic on residential thoroughfares than would a feasible location on a major thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.12), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1320, § 1, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 26-413. - Commercial dance halls. 
    Commercial dance halls shall provide parking with ingress and egress designed so as to minimize traffic congestion, shall be not less than twenty (20) feet from any property line, shall provide a minimum six-foot high solid board or masonry wall separating the entire area from any abutting property in a residential district, and shall show that adequate controls or measures will be taken to prevent offensive noise, light, and vibration. The board of adjustment shall establish standards for the construction of such wall. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.13), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-414. - Dwelling group. 
    The erection of a dwelling group shall be permitted in any residential district, provided such dwelling group conforms to all the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  The area of the zoning lot on which the dwelling group is to be erected shall be at least twenty percent (20%) greater than the aggregate of the minimum lot areas otherwise required for the individual dwellings in the group. 
(2)  Each dwelling in the group shall front either on a street, other permanent public open space, common yard or outer court, not less than fifty (50) feet wide. 
(3)  The distance between principal buildings, other than as specified above, shall not be less than the sum of the least widths of the interior side yards required for a principal building in the district in which the group is located. The distance between a principal building and the nearest lot line shall not be less than required for a principal building in the district in which located. 
(4)  Every dwelling in the dwelling group shall be within sixty (60) feet of an access roadway or drive, having a right-of-way at least thirty (30) feet wide, providing vehicular access from a public street, and within two hundred (200) feet, measured along the route of vehicular access, of a public street. 
(5)  Except as modified in this section, such dwelling group shall conform to all the requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is to be located. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.14), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-415. - Earth moving and excavation; depositing of construction materials on the ground. 
    Earth moving and excavation; depositing of construction materials on the ground shall be subject to regulations set forth in section 26-421. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.15), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-416. - Golf driving ranges. 
    Commercial golf driving ranges shall be located only on major thoroughfares. Lights used to illuminate the premises shall be so directed and shielded as not to be an annoyance to any developed residential property. The golf driving platform shall not be less than two hundred (200) feet from any RS, RM or RT district. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.17), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-417. - Golf courses or country clubs. 
    Golf courses and country clubs shall be subject to regulations set forth in section 26-409. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.18), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-418. - Home occupations. 
    Home occupations, in those districts where permitted, are subject to all of the following conditions: 
(1)  No more than one (1) person other than a member of the immediate family occupying such dwelling shall be employed. 
(2)  The ratio of time the household is used for home occupation and the ratio of household space used for home occupation shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%). 
(3)  In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of sounds, noises or vibrations. 
(4)  An accessory building may be used for a home occupation; but the area used for outdoor storage shall not exceed the gross floor area of the buildings used for the home occupation. 
(5)  The home occupation may increase vehicular traffic flow and parking by no more than one (1) additional vehicle at a time. 
(6)  The home occupation shall not generate traffic, parking, noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district. 
(7)  No commercial vehicle type shall be used in connection with the home occupation or parked on the property. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.19), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-419. - Institutions for human care and similar establishments. 
    This includes health centers, hospitals: general (not including animal); institutions for correctional, detention, penal, or similar purposes; care of insane, feeble-minded, or narcotic patients; institutions for children or the aged; nursing homes or rest homes; rehabilitation centers for handicapped persons; or sanitoriums: all shall meet the following requirements when located in a residential district: 
(1)  Minimum site standards set forth for churches in section 26-408 shall be complied with; 
(2)  The site shall have its main ingress and egress on a major thoroughfare or on a collector street not more than three hundred (300) feet distant (by shortest street route) from a major thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.20), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-420. - Fencing requirements of junkyards, salvage or auto wrecking yards. 
    Junkyards, salvage or auto wrecking yards, or any property used for the storage or processing of used machinery, building materials, plumbing fixtures or appliances, shall be permitted within certain areas of the city, provided that all exterior storage and processing areas within three hundred (300) feet of any major thoroughfare or any residential, commercial or M1 district are screened by a solid wall or fence, constructed from wood, metal, or other manufactured material, no taller than eight (8) feet high so located as to prevent visibility from any major thoroughfare or any residential, commercial or M1 district of such stored materials or materials in process which are on the ground or not more than eight (8) feet above the ground. Prior to construction of such fence, the builder or owner of the property shall appear before the board of adjustments and present their plan and material list for approval. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.21), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1440, § 1, 11-19-01) 
Sec. 26-421. - Mining, quarrying and earth moving. 
    Mining, including extraction of clay, gravel, or sand; quarrying of rock or stone; earth moving and excavation; depositing of construction material, clay, earth, gravel, minerals, rock, sand, or stone, on the ground shall not be construed to be a permitted use in any district, except the M3 district, unless and until a special zoning permit shall first have been secured from the board of adjustment, as provided in sections 26-33 to 26-40 hereof, except for the following defined extractions and deposits: 
(1)  Excavations for the foundation or basement of any building or for a swimming pool for which a building permit has been issued, or deposits on the earth of any building or construction materials to be used in a structure for which a building permit has been issued. 
(2)  Grading of any parcel of land for a permitted use where no bank is left standing and exposed of more than ten (10) feet in vertical height, or when less than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of earth is removed from the premises. 
(3)  Grading in a subdivision that has been approved by the city in accordance with the city subdivision regulations and any amendments thereto. 
(4)  Any extractive operation existing and operating as such on the effective date of this chapter shall conform with the provisions set forth herein within one (1) year of June 18, 1979. 
(5)  Excavation shall be so conducted as to minimize soil erosion. 
The board of adjustment shall have the power to grant special zoning permits, revocable and valid for specified periods of time, to permit mining or extractions from or deposits on the earth of rock, stone, gravel, sand, earth, minerals, or building or construction materials, as set forth in sections 12-33 to 12-40. The building inspector shall make such inspections as he deems necessary or as are required by the board of adjustment to ensure that all work is in accordance with the special zoning permit. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.22), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-422. - Mobile homes, camping and vacation trailers-Parking. 
    Parking of a mobile home in any district for residential purposes shall be prohibited, except as follows: 
(1)  A mobile home may be parked in a mobile home park, as provided by this chapter. 
(2)  In a commercial, residential or industrial district, the city engineer may, on application of the owner of such lot or lots, or on the application of the appropriate city official, permit the parking of a mobile home or mobile homes on a lot or lots, provided the city engineer makes a finding to the effect that the occupant or proposed occupant of the mobile home has suffered a material hardship, or a financial hardship, as a result of flooding. 
a.  The mobile home shall be located not less than five (5) feet from any lot line or residential structure, and 
b.  Any permit granted under this provision shall be for a period not in excess of six (6) months unless approved by the city's board of adjustment. 
c.  Any mobile home permitted under the provisions of this article shall not exceed thirty-two (32) feet in length. 
(3)  A camping or vacation trailer not exceeding thirty-two (32) feet in length may be parked and used as a temporary residence in any lot or lots upon approval of the city engineer, but not for a period to exceed six (6) months. 
(4)  In every instance, the parking of a mobile home shall be in accordance with applicable federal laws and regulations, state laws and regulations and city ordinances and regulations. 
(5)  The city engineer may approve the placement of FEMA owned mobile homes in any zone, in the City of Miami, if the home is providing temporary housing for flood victims. This section of the code expires upon removal of the homes by FEMA, by abandonment of the home by the occupant, or by January 1, 2009, which ever comes first. Any denial of the trailer placement may be appealed to the board of adjustments. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.23.1), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1518, § 1, 7-11-07; Ord. No. 1519, § 1, 8-13-07) 
Sec. 26-423. - Same-Removal of wheels restricted. 
    In any district, the wheels or any similar transporting devices of any mobile home or camping trailer shall not be removed except for repairs, nor shall such mobile home or camping trailer be otherwise permanently fixed to the ground by any person, firm or corporation in a manner that would prevent ready removal of the mobile home or camping trailer. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.23.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-424. - Same-Park regulations. 
    Every mobile home park shall comply with all other pertinent city and/or state regulations, together with all amendments thereto subsequently adopted. 
(1)  Any mobile home park site shall have a minimum site area of one (1) acre, and shall be developed to a density not in excess of one (1) mobile home per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of gross area of the zoning lot so developed. Any mobile home or trailer park shall contain one (1) or more developed recreation spaces with an aggregate area of two hundred (200) square feet per mobile home site in such park. 
(2)  The buildings and mobile homes in any mobile home park shall not occupy in the aggregate more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the area of the lot. 
(3)  All buildings and mobile home sites shall be located not less than five (5) feet from all lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.23.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-425. - Monasteries, convents or similar institutions. 
    A monastery, convent or similar institution of religious training shall have a site area of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.24), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-426. - Newspaper distribution stations. 
    Newspaper distribution stations shall be maintained in a sightly condition with newspapers, wrappers, and waste materials stored and handled within a completely enclosed structure until removed from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.25), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-427. - Nursery schools, day care centers or private kindergartens. 
    Any nursery school, day care center for more than five (5) children, or private kindergarten shall be on a site of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and shall maintain a wall or fence at least four (4) feet high between any play area and any other property in a residential district. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.26), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-428. - Temporary off-street parking and loading. 
    Off-street parking and loading, temporary, incidental or for a special event of a noncommercial nature, may be permitted by the board of adjustment by the issuance of a special zoning permit, provided, however, that each permit shall be valid only for the duration of the designated special event, and provided further that if the designated special event is a seasonal activity, the permit may be granted for the entire season, but restricted in use to designated dates and times in which the event is to occur. (See also article VIII, division 2.) 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.27), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-429. - Major places of public assembly. 
(a)  Major places of public assembly, including arenas, auditoriums, coliseums, stadiums or theaters with seating capacity of one thousand (1,000) or over, and drive-in theaters, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Have ingress and egress from a major thoroughfare or from a collector street of not more than three hundred (300) feet distant (by shortest street route) from a major thoroughfare, 
(2)  Have ingress and egress so designated as to minimize traffic congestion and hazards, and 
(3)  Meet the site standards required for churches in section 26-408. 
(b)  A drive-in theater projection screen shall be located not less than two hundred (200) feet from any RS, RM or RT district, and shall not be located as to be visible from any major thoroughfare within one thousand (1,000) feet thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.28), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-430. - Minor places of public assembly. 
    Minor places of public assembly, including art galleries, auditoriums, arenas, coliseums, stadiums, or theaters with seating capacity of less than one thousand (1,000): community buildings, libraries and museums, shall meet the same requirements as set forth for major places of public assembly in section 26-429, except that ingress from and egress to a collector street need not be within three hundred (300) feet of a major thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.29), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-431. - Signs generally. 
(a)  No person except a public officer or employee in the performance of public duty shall paste, post, paint, print, nail, tack, erect, place, project, or otherwise fasten any sign, pennant, or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done facing or visible from any public street within the jurisdiction of this chapter, except as provided herein and elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard by obstructing vision, or at any location where it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign or signal. 
(c)  Temporary signs and sign structures may be permitted for a set time period stated as a condition of a special zoning permit. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.30.1), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-432. - Advertising signs. 
    Advertising signs or sign structures not attached to and wholly supported by a building, where permitted in any district, shall not extend more than one (1) foot into a required yard. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.30.2), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-433. - Business or bulletin signs. 
    Business signs or bulletin signs may be erected or placed within any required front yard or exterior side yard, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  If the top of a sign or sign structure extends more than four (4) feet above the ground, then such sign or sign structure must be located not less than ten (10) feet above the ground and with the supporting structures so designed as to allow maximum visibility, 
(2)  The gross area of a sign or sign structure, including framing but excluding supports, shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet, and 
(3)  The height of a sign or sign structure shall not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.30.3), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-434. - Identification or professional signs. 
    In any residential district, identification or professional signs shall be nonilluminated and shall be not over two (2) square feet in area; except that a church, school, community center, or other public or institutional building may have for its own use an identification sign or bulletin board not over twelve (12) square feet in area, which, if not attached flat against a building, shall be at least twelve (12) feet from all property lines, or one-half the distance from the property line to the building line, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.30.4), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-435. - Real estate signs. 
    One (1) nonilluminated real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises on which it is maintained and not over six (6) square feet in area shall be permitted on any lot. For each ten (10) feet by which the width of the lot, or two (2) or more contiguous lots in single ownership, exceeds fifty (50) feet, one (1) square foot may be added to the above area of six (6) square feet, but in no case shall such aggregate area of one (1) or more signs on a single lot or group of contiguous lots exceed thirty (30) square feet. Each such sign shall be set back from every street lot line at least one-half the depth of the required yard in which it is located; if the actual yard is shallower than the required yard, the sign shall be set back one-half the depth of the actual yard. A subdivision sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area may be placed for directional purposes on private property along each major or secondary thoroughfare surrounding a subdivision that is in the process of development and initial sales, provided that the total number of such signs for any subdivision shall not exceed four (4) and shall be removed upon completion of the development. A sign indicating that a property has been sold may remain on the premises for a continuous period not exceeding ten (10) days following sale of the property. Temporary signs, each not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in area, advertising a subdivision, may be placed in such subdivision during initial sale and development, provided the signs are located at least fifty (50) feet from any abutting property line and are removed within ninety (90) days after completion of the last house or sale of the last lot in the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.30.5), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-436. - Illuminated or flashing signs. 
    No illuminated sign or sign structure shall be permitted that faces the front, side or rear lot lines of any lot in any RS, RM or RT district within fifty (50) feet of such lot line or that faces the entrance to any public park, public school, public library, or similar public institution, within fifty (50) feet thereof. No flashing sign shall be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of an RS, RM or RT district in such a location as to be visible from such district. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.30.6), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-437. - Elevated signs. 
    In any residential district and in the C1, C2 and C3 commercial districts, no sign or sign structure shall be painted, erected or located upon or above the roof of any building. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.30.7), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-438. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Generally. No swimming pool shall be permitted in any residential district unless such pool is: 
(1)  Owned and operated by a public agency, 
(2)  An accessory to a residential use, or 
(3)  An accessory to a nonresidential use that is permitted in such district. 
Except for a pool owned and operated by a public agency, no pool shall be permitted in any residential district unless the pool is intended for the use of, and is used by, only the occupants of the principal use of the property on which the pool is located, or their guests. 
(b)  Permanent Outdoor Swimming Pools. Any permanent outdoor swimming pool, 24 inches or greater in water depth, and any associated bath house in any district shall: 
(1)  Be located with the inside wall of the pool at least ten (10) feet from the nearest property line, unless a greater separation is required by section 26-409. Further, the pool and any equipment such as slides, pumps, filters and/or heaters, or any other associated improvements, such as decks or bath houses, shall not be constructed on any easement. All such pool equipment shall be located in such a manner that it does not disturb the adjoining property owners. 
(2)  Be screened by a masonry, metal or wood wall or fence at least six (6) feet high on any side which faces a street in a residential district. Such a pool shall be located in the side or back yard. 
(3)  Aside from the foregoing as to the street side of the property, all other sides of the pool must be completely enclosed by a chain-linked, masonry, metal or wood wall or fence at least four (4) feet high, with no opening more than four (4) inches wide, except for gateways and doorways: 
a.  Any wall or portion of a single-family dwelling or building accessory thereto may constitute a portion or all of the above-described enclosure. No part, however, of any hotel, motel or residential structure other than a single-family dwelling shall form a portion of the required enclosure, unless there is no door or access from such structure forming a part of the enclosure; 
b.  Any passageway through a required outdoor pool enclosure shall be equipped with a gate or door having self-closing and self-latching devices, which gate or door shall be closed and secured, except when being used for passage, provided that a doorway of a single-family residence need not be so equipped; 
c.  Such enclosure shall be maintained in a secure, safe, and operating condition at all times; 
d.  This requirement shall be applicable to all new outdoor swimming pools hereafter constructed and shall apply to all existing outdoor pools having water deeper than twenty-four (24) inches. No person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant, or licensee, upon which is situated an outdoor swimming pool having water deeper than twenty-four (24) inches shall fail to provide and maintain such enclosure. 
(4)  All outdoor swimming pools shall be drained, covered or maintained during the off-season. 
(5)  Prior to the initial filling of a pool, the enclosures required by this ordinance must be completely in place, inspected and approved by the city building inspector or his or her agent. 
(c)  Swimming Pool Permit. A swimming pool permit shall be required prior to the start of construction for all permanent outdoor swimming pools, whether aboveground, on-ground, or in-ground. 
(d)  Temporary Outdoor swimming pools. Any outdoor swimming pool, regardless of the depth of the water, which is used for one hundred twenty days or less, must be drained and removed at the end of the swimming season. Such a pool must be completely enclosed by a chain-linked, metal, wood, or masonry fence or wall at least four (4) feet high, with no opening more than four (4) inches wide. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.31), 6-18-79; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 5-18-2018) 
Sec. 26-439. - Temporary tract office. 
    A temporary tract office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of newly platted or newly constructed property, shall be located within a subdivision to which it is appurtenant and within one-half mile of all property to be serviced from such office. Each special zoning permit issued by the board of adjustment shall specify the location of the office. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) calendar months and shall not be granted for periods totaling more than twenty-four (24) months during any thirty-month period at the same location. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.32), 6-18-79) 
Sec. 26-440. - Multiple-family use of existing structures in C4 districts. 
    Any structure existing in a C4 district as of the effective date of this chapter may be converted in its entirety or in part to multiple-family dwelling use, but no new structure may be erected for this purpose in this district. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1(28-10.33), 6-18-79) 
Chapter 27 - BUDGET AND FINANCE 

Sec. 27-1. - Roadway maintenance. 
    Annual budget(s) prepared by the city manager shall provide for no less than $500,000.00 for roadway maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 1, 6-21-10) 
Sec. 27-2. - Employment positions, salaries and wages. 
(a)  The city manager's annual budget proposal shall identify all proposed Full Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) employment positions as well as the proposed entry, mid-point and max pay range for each position. 
(b)  The city council shall publish a list of approved F.T.E, as well as the approved entry, mid-point and max pay range for each position as an attachment to the annual budget. 
(c)  The city manager shall not hire personnel or authorize a pay range beyond the limitations imposed by the city council in the budget attachment described in subparagraph (b), above. The city council may, on a case-by-case basis, authorize a specific departure from those limitations by a written resolution presented and voted upon at a public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1573, § 1, 5-2-11; Ord. No. 1597, § 1, 1-24-13; Ord. No. 1612, § 1, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 27-3. - Rainy Day Fund. 
(1)  The purpose of the Rainy Day Fund is to constitute a committed fund balance for the limited purpose of responding to unbudgeted budget emergencies, emergency repairs, and qualified emergencies and events in order to minimize or stabilize the financial impact such emergencies have on existing resources. Salaries that may be paid from this fund are for definable emergencies only. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, an emergency is defined as an unappropriated or unforeseen event that may, if not immediately corrected, cause death or injury to the public, significantly disrupt essential city services, result in damage to city property, or result in significant environmental damage. 
(3)  Fund Balances: 
a.  The initial amount of the line item for unbudgeted budget emergency for the purpose of stabilization is $500,000, but after this date will be as adopted and amended within the city's annual fiscal year budget. If at any time the unbudgeted budget emergency line item balance drops to within three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), the city financial officer shall notify the mayor and council at their next regular meeting. 
b.  The initial amount of the line item for emergency repairs for the purpose of emergency repair stabilization is $2,500,000, but after this date will be as adopted and amended within the city's annual fiscal year budget. If at any time the emergency repairs line item balance drops to within one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), the city financial officer shall notify the mayor and council at their next regular meeting. 
c.  The initial amount of the line item for stabilization for the purpose of emergency management stabilization is $3,000,000, but after this date will be as adopted and amended within the city's annual fiscal year budget. If at any time the stabilization line item balance drops to within one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), the city financial officer shall notify the mayor and council at their next regular meeting. 
(4)  As part of the annual budgeting process, at the time of approving the fiscal year's budget, the city council will certify the balance of each line item of the Rainy Day Fund, with which the council anticipates ending the upcoming fiscal year. If at the time of the certification, the Fund actually contains more monies than what is certified, the council may allocate up to that difference to another municipal fund or funds by ordinance. The ordinance will specify the proposed transfer amount from the particular line item of the Rainy Day Fund and the proposed fund(s) and account(s) that will receive the transfer. 
a.  Once the annual budget is adopted, the circumstances requiring the expenditure out of the unbudgeted budget emergencies line item are not expected to recur on a routine basis. Any proposed use of the unbudgeted budget emergencies line item monies will be placed on the council agenda in the form of a budget amendment and shall be approved by ordinance. Such amendment will be strictly limited to the proposed transfer amount from the unbudgeted budget emergencies line item and the proposed fund(s) and account(s) that will receive the transfer. As part of the agenda item, the city manager shall, at a minimum, provide a written certification to the council identifying in substantial detail the nature of the unbudgeted budget emergency, the total anticipated cost of the emergency, the steps the city has taken to address the emergency and the reason(s) those steps have not eliminated the need for using a portion of the unbudgeted budget emergencies line item. An example could be an anomaly in the expenditures out of the city's health insurance fund in one fiscal year. 
b.  Once the annual budget is adopted, the circumstances requiring the expenditure out of the emergency repairs line item are not expected to recur on a routine basis. Any proposed use of the emergency repairs line item monies will be placed on the council agenda in the form of a budget amendment and shall be approved by ordinance. Such amendment will be strictly limited to the proposed transfer amount from the emergency repairs line item and the proposed fund(s) and account(s) that will receive the transfer. As part of the agenda item, the city manager shall, at a minimum, provide a written certification to the council identifying in substantial detail the nature of the repair emergency, the total anticipated cost of the emergency, the steps the city has taken to address the emergency and the reason(s) those steps have not eliminated the need for using a portion of the emergency repairs line item. An example could be a fire damaged our fleet of sanitation trucks and the insurance does not cover the cost to repair to or purchase of another fleet. 
c.  Once the annual budget is adopted, the circumstances requiring the expenditure out of stabilization line item are not expected to recur on a routine basis. Any proposed use of the stabilization line item monies will be placed on the council agenda in the form of a budget amendment and shall be approved by ordinance. Such amendment will be strictly limited to the proposed transfer amount from the stabilization line item and the proposed fund(s) and account(s) that will receive the transfer. As part of the agenda item, the city manager shall, at a minimum, provide a written certification to the council identifying in substantial detail the nature of the emergency, the total anticipated cost of the emergency, the steps the city has taken to address the emergency and the reason(s) those steps have not eliminated the need for using a portion of the stabilization line item. An example could be a major portion of our retail stores are damaged by a tornado or other disaster and sales tax would decrease significantly for a time. 
(5)  An affirmative vote of at least a majority of the entire council (i.e. at least three of the current five members, as of the date this Ordinance is adopted) is required for funds to be transferred from the Rainy Day Fund. 
(6)  In the event the council authorizes the expenditure of money from the Rainy Day Fund, either at the time of certifying the balance as part of the following fiscal year's budget process, or during the fiscal year to address emergency expenditures during the year (as set out in subsection (4)(a), (b) or (c) above), the ordinance authorizing the expenditure may include a reasonable proposed, nonbinding plan to restore the amount to be expended back into the Fund. Restoration of the Rainy Day Fund, if part of the withdrawal ordinance, should begin the next fiscal year following the use of such funds, absent extraordinary circumstances. In the event that the city qualifies to receive federal, state or any other form of emergency public assistance or an insurance resolution following or associated with a qualifying emergency or event, those public assistance or insurance funds, if available, shall be used prior to appropriation of the Rainy Day Fund monies. If such public assistance or insurance resolution is received subsequent to the appropriation of monies from the committed fund balance, such monies will be used to restore the committed fund balance, to the extent reasonably appropriate, to the Rainy Day Fund. Provided, that if any appropriated funds from general fund functions or a specific department's budget have first been utilized in response to a qualifying emergency or event, then said public assistance or insurance funds shall first be used to restore the amounts so expended in advance of the restoration of the Rainy Day Fund. 
(7)  For internal financial reporting purposes and budgetary purposes, the Fund will be treated as a separate special revenue fund. For annual financial statement purposes, the Fund will be combined with Miami Special Utility Authority Fund and the Fund balance reported as a committed fund balance in accordance with Governmental Accounting Standards. 
(Ord. No. 1588, § 1, 8-20-12; Ord. No. 1608, § 1, 6-4-13; Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 8-16-2016; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Editor's note- Prior to reenactment by Ord. No. 1588, Ord. No. 1584, § 1, adopted July 16, 2012, repealed § 27-3, which pertained to the chief financial officer and derived from Ord. No. 1574, adopted June 20, 2011. 
Sec. 27-4. - Cap on Miami Special Utility Authority (MSUA) Transfers. 
    Annual budget(s) prepared by the City Manager shall provide for no more than Four Million One Hundred Thirty-One Thousand Seventy-Nine Dollars ($4,131,079.00) in transfers to funds outside of the Miami Special Utility Authority Fund #510, unless specifically for utility infrastructure or utility capital improvements. Provided, however, any expenditure(s) over and above that amount may be determined necessary by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 27-5. - Discretionary waiver of administrative fees. 
    Administrative fees imposed by the Code of Ordinances or by written policies approved by the City Council may be waived in whole or in part on a case-by-case basis, only by written resolution of the City Council. Fee waivers shall be granted only when said waiver serves a lawful public purpose. Provided, however, the City Manager shall have the authority to waive the administrative fees for the use of the Civic Center Banquet Room and/or the Civic Center Gymnasium by any federal, state, local, or Tribal government entity, or any subdivision thereof, any tax-exempt charitable organization, or other community organization or event, except for religious or political purposes. Such waiver may be granted at the sole discretion of the City Manager if the event serves a public purpose as contemplated herein and the requesting party submits the application form for a waiver of fees and makes a refundable cleaning and damage deposit at the current rate set by the City. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 1-24-13; Ord. No. 1657, § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 27-6. - Dishonored payment fee. 
    Should a negotiable instrument (check, money order, account draft, any electronic transfer, debit/credit card, etc.) given in payment be dishonored, the account/person on which payment was applied shall be charged a dishonored payment fee of twenty-five dollars ($25) for each such payment. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 4-2-2019) 
Sec. 27-7. - Collection fee assessment and discretionary waiver. 
    A customer who allows their account with the City of Miami to become delinquent, to the point of initiating collection efforts, including the initiation of any civil suit (including an action in small claims court), will be assessed all applicable fees associated in collecting the past due debt. 
    Any collection effort fee provided for herein may be waived at the discretion of the city manager or his/her designee upon the written recommendation of the customer service department head or designee. Any waivers will be reported to council at their next regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, 4-2-2019) 
Chapter 28 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal cemeteries, 11 O.S. § 26-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-1. - Police protection for cemeteries. 
    All cemeteries which are owned and operated by the City shall, at all times, be under the police protection of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cemetery shall mean that certain cemetery owned by the city known as the G.A.R. Cemetery, which is located upon the East Half of the northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 28 North, Range 22 East of the Indian Meridian in Ottawa County, Oklahoma, and any other land hereafter acquired by the City of Miami, which is situated within or without the city limits of the City, which is used or intended to be used for purposes of a cemetery for human remains. Where the context clearly indicates, "cemetery" can also mean any other cemetery organized under the laws of the State of Oklahoma, which is not owned and operated by the City. 
    Cemetery care fund and perpetual care fund are interchangeable and both shall have the meanings ascribed to them by 11 O.S. § 26-109 and § 26-201, and as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 28-3. - Supervision. 
    G.A.R. Cemetery and any other cemeteries now owned or hereafter acquired by the City shall be under the supervision and control of the mayor and city council who shall have the power to amend, adopt and enforce such rules and regulations, as prepared by the cemetery director, for the maintenance and care of those cemeteries which shall seem necessary, reasonable and proper and not otherwise in conflict with this Code of Ordinances or other applicable law. The subdividing of lots and the laying out, defining and establishing of drives, walks and public ways in the city cemeteries shall be under the direction of the cemetery director. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 28-4. - Cemetery director. 
    The cemetery director, as designated by the city manager, shall keep city cemeteries in a good state of repair, shall keep the grounds mowed in and around the cemeteries and otherwise in a neat, clean and tranquil condition. Except in the case of a valid order signed by a court of competent jurisdiction to the contrary, he/she shall dig all graves and fill them at the time of burials utilizing appropriate cemetery staff. He/she shall be responsible for the management of all aspects of the operation of the city cemeteries and the proper management of the cemetery care fund. The cemetery director shall answer directly to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 28-5. - Animal cemetery. 
    The City of Miami may at any time create one or more animal (pet) cemetery within or without the city limits. The mayor and city council shall have the power to adopt and enforce such rules and regulations for the operation, maintenance and care of such cemeteries which shall seem necessary, reasonable and proper and not otherwise in conflict with this Code of Ordinances, or other applicable law. In the event any third party, whether an individual, partnership, corporation or any other legal entity, should decide to open an animal (pet) cemetery within the city limits, such third party must notify the city manager, in writing, of such intention. If the city then currently has in place rules and regulations for the operation, maintenance and care of such cemeteries, the location of the third party's animal cemetery must be properly zoned for such enterprise, and the animal (pet) cemetery must be operated in conformity with those same rules and regulations. If the city does not then currently have in place such rules and regulations, the third party may not open the animal (pet) cemetery for a period of ninety days from the date of the notice to the city manager, during which time the city may enact such rules and regulations for the operation, maintenance and care of such cemeteries which shall seem necessary, reasonable and proper and not otherwise in conflict with this Code of Ordinances, or other applicable law. If at any time, the city should change, amend, add to, or repeal any such necessary, reasonable and proper rules and regulations, all animal (pet) cemeteries within the city limits must then comply with such changes from that point on, but such changes shall not affect any prior operation of such cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 28-6. - Burials prohibited, except in legally created cemeteries. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any un-cremated dead human remains within the city limits at any location, whether publicly or privately owned except at a cemetery owned and operated by the City or at a cemetery operated by a charitable and eleemosynary institution, or a religious, fraternal, rural community, township, state, county, for profit or nonprofit corporate cemeteries and free community burial grounds which are subject to and regulated by Chapters 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 or 8 of Title 8 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Provided, however, this section shall not apply to a private family cemetery on a tract of land at least five acres in size as long as such cemetery is at least three hundred (300) feet from any border of the tract. Such a private family cemetery must in all other regards comply with all other requirements of applicable law and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 28-7. - Vegetation regulations. 
    No person shall plant any trees, shrubbery, vines, flowers or plants nor sow any seeds of any description within City cemeteries except by direction of the cemetery director. Any such violation shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 28-8. - Monuments. 
    No person shall erect any stone markers or monuments or mausoleum or any other structure in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the mayor and city council in any City cemetery. Any such violation shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Secs. 28-9-28-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CEMETERY CARE FUND 

Sec. 28-20. - Created; composition. 
    There is hereby created, for the maintenance and care of the cemetery, a cemetery care fund consisting of twenty-five percent (25%) of the sale price of all burial lots sold in the cemetery which fund shall be kept in a special perpetual care fund by the City. The income derived from these monies is to be used for purchasing lands for additional cemeteries and building, improving, caring for, and embellishing the lots, walks, drives, mausoleums, benches, parks, and other such improvements in the cemeteries and maintenance of the office and care of records. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 28-21. - Regulation of the cemetery care fund. 
(a)  The cemetery director shall plan, study and make recommendations with regards to the cemetery care fund to the mayor and city council, consistent with the rules and regulations, from time to time, with reference to the conditions of the cemetery in general and the conditions under which the donations or bequests to the fund will be accepted, concerning the amount necessary for the perpetual care of each lot specified by any particular donor, the conditions the lot is to be placed in with reference to grade and markers, and such other and further conditions as the cemetery director shall determine to be just and proper. 
(b)  All such recommendations shall be submitted to the mayor and city council for their consideration and approval. The mayor and city council may accept all or any portion of the recommendations, or variations thereof, as they deem in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 28-22. - Receipt for and deposit of donations and bequests. 
    Every donation and bequest made to the fund, when received, shall be receipted for by the city clerk and deposited in the fund. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 28-23. - Use of donations or bequests for specific lots. 
    Any person making a donation or bequest to the perpetual care fund may designate the specific lot for which the same is to be used. The fund may receive donations and bequests in excess of the amount necessary for perpetual care of the specific lots designated in the donation or bequest, and may, with the consent of the donor made at the time of the donation or bequest, apply the balance remaining of the net proceeds of the donation or bequest to the perpetual care of other lots in the cemetery, for which no provision has been made for perpetual care. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
Secs. 28-24-28-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COSTS AND FEES 

Sec. 28-40. - G.A.R. Cemetery costs and fees. 
    The following will be the costs and fees associated with the G.A.R. Cemetery in the City of Miami. These rates are effective immediately and the collection thereof is ratified and approved by the city council. 
Opening and Closing Fees: 
Adults ..... $450.00 
Infants ..... $100.00 
Ashes ..... $150.00 
Two (2) urns in one (1) grave ..... $175.00 
Buried at the same time (no more than two (2) urns will be placed in one (1) grave) 
Disinterment: 
Removal to another cemetery ..... $1,000.00 
Relocation within G.A.R. ..... $1,500.00 
Overtime: 
Weekdays-After 4:30 p.m. (per hour) ..... $150.00 
(No funerals scheduled after 2:00 p.m. on weekdays) 
Saturday funerals ..... $400.00 
(No funerals scheduled after 10:00 a.m. on Saturdays. Additional $150.00 per hour after 12:00 p.m.) 
Purchase Price of Plots: 
Garden of Hope (single plot) ..... $400.00 
(Garden of Hope is the only section available for single plots.) 
Companion Plots ((2) e.g.: Garden of Peace) ..... $850.00 
Cremains Plot ..... $250.00 
Infant Plot ..... $100.00 
(Infant age limit is two (2) years old.) 
Monument Section ..... $1,600.00 
(e.g.: Garden of Faith/Garden of Serenity) 
(Must purchase a minimum of four (4) plots.) 
Purchase Price of Crypts and Niches: 
Mausoleum (single crypt) ..... $3,000.00 
Mausoleum (companion crypts (2)) ..... $5,800.00 
Columbarium (single niche) ..... $950.00 
Columbarium (companion niches (2)) ..... $1,800.00 
Miscellaneous Fees: 
Vase setting (per vase) ..... $30.00 
Cemetery certificate reissue (per certificate) ..... $25.00 
Land resale by cemetery: a 10% administrative fee will be assessed for all land resales handled by the cemetery. 
Marker/Foundation Setting Fees: 
Single flat Veteran's marker ..... No charge 
Single flat marker ..... $100.00 
(Up to a 2'6" × 1'4"-Maximum allowable size for a single plot.) 
Double flat marker ..... $200.00 
(Up to a 5' × 1'4"-Maximum allowable size for a double plot.) 
Flat baby marker ..... $50.00 
(Up to a 2' × 1'-Maximum allowable size for a baby plot.) 
Upright monument foundation (half lot) ..... $200.00 
(Four (4) plots-Up to a 6' base) 
Upright monument foundation (full lot) ..... $400.00 
(Eight (8) plots-Up to a 12' base) 
(Cemetery staff does all setting of flat markers and vases, and prepares all foundations for upright monuments.) 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1(C.), 1-16-2018) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1964 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1964 Code, as updated through January 30, 1989, which are included herein. Sections of the 1964 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1964 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-2 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-4 1-7 1-6 2-1-2-5 2-116-2-120 2-7, 2-8 8-1, 8-2 2-17-2-19 2-36-2-38 2-22-2-27 18-26-18-31 2-31-2-33 5-26-5-28 2-34-2-37 2-156-2-159 2-38-2-40 2-56-2-58 2A-11-2A-31 5-51-5-71 2G-127 23-378 3-1-3-3 3-1 3-4-3-6 3-4 3-21, 3-22 3-31, 3-32 3-24, 3-25 3-33, 3-34 3-26 3-3 3-39, 3-40 3-2 4-1 4-1 4-2(a) 4-106 4-2(b) 4-108 4-2(c) 4-4 4-2(d) 4-107 4-2(e) 4-5 4-2(f) 4-106 4-3 4-108 4-4 4-3 4-5, 4-6 4-6, 4-7 4-7 4-41-4-43 4-61-4-65 4-81-4-83 4-8-4-10 4-8-4-10 4-11 4-2 5-1 6-51 5-5(a) 6-52-6-54 6-211-6-213 6-451-6-453 5-5(b) 6-27 5-6 6-55 5-6.1 7-11 5-19 2-76 5-21-5-24 2-77-2-80 6-1 12-46 6-2, 6-3 12-47 6-4, 6-5 12-48, 12-49 6-7, 6-8 12-50, 12-51 6-9, 6-10 12-52 6-11-6-22 12-53-12-64 7-1 6-76 7-2-7-5 6-96-6-99 7-6 6-101 7-7-7-9 6-161-6-163 7-9.1 6-164 7-11(a), 7-11(b) 6-181, 6-182 7-11.1 6-183 7-12-7-14 6-184-6-186 7-16 6-78 7-17 6-100 7-18 6-79 7-19 6-77 7-30-7-38 6-121-6-129 7-39 6-165 8-13-8-18 9-61-9-66 8-19 9-41 8-20-8-22 9-43-9-45 8A-1(b)-8A-1(d) 10-2-10-4 8A-2 10-1 8A-3(a), 8A-3(b) 10-5, 10-6 8A-3(c) 10-37 8A-3(d)-8A-3(g) 10-7-10-10 8A-4(a), 8A-4(b) 10-36 8A-4(c)-8A-4(e) 10-37-10-39 8A-5(a)-8A-5(f) 10-61-10-66 8A-6(a), 8A-6(b) 10-11, 10-12 9-14, 9-15 12-1 10-11 11-26, 11-27 10-11, 10-12 11-28 10-12, 10-13 11-27 10-13 11-29 10-14-10-17 11-46-11-49 12-1 13-55 12-2 13-26, 13-27 12-3 13-116 12-8 13-117 12-9-12-11 13-181-13-183 12-12(a) 12-181 12-12(b)- 
12-12(d) 12-184 12-12(e) 12-183 12-12(f) 12-182 12-13 12-2 12-15 13-51 12-16 15-1 12-17 13-46 12-17.1 13-47 12-18 13-118 12-19 13-161 12-21 13-162 12-22, 12-23 13-1, 13-2 12-24 13-54 12-25 13-76, 13-77 12-26 13-53 12-28, 12-29 13-78, 13-79 12-30 15-27 12-31 15-26 15-41-15-48 12-32 15-2 12-33, 12-34 13-221, 13-222 12-35 24-174, 24-175 12-36 13-223 12-38 13-49 12-38.1 13-50 12-39 13-119 12-40.1 13-48 12-40.2 13-201 12-40.3(a)-(c) 12-3 12-40.3(f) 12-3 12-40.4 13-202 12-41, 12-42 13-141, 13-142 12-44, 12-45 13-143, 13-144 12-56 13-120 12A-1 14-2 12A-2 14-1 12A-3-12A-6 14-3-14-6 12A-7-12A-12 14-6-14-11 12A-12-12A-18 14-12-14-18 12A-21, 12A-22 14-21 12A-22 14-23 12A-23 14-25 12A-24, 12A-25 14-26 12A-26 14-25 12A-27, 12A-28 14-27, 14-28 12A-29(a) 14-28 12A-29(b) 14-33 12A-31 14-34 13-1 24-1 13-2 24-27 13-5-13-7 24-28-24-30 13-11-13-13 24-57-24-59 13-15 24-60 13-15.1, 13-15.2 24-61, 24-62 13-15.3 24-30.4 13-16 24-36 13-16.1 24-37 13-18-13-21 24-32-24-35 13-22 24-1 24-31 13-39(1)- 
13-39(3) 24-106-24-108 13-40(1.1) 24-128 13-40(1.2), 
13-40(1.3) 24-126, 24-127 13-40(1.4) 24-129 13-40(2.1)- 
13-40(2.3) 24-139-24-141 13-40(2.4) 24-136 13-40(2.5) 24-130 13-40(2.6), 
13-40(2.7) 24-142, 24-143 13-40(3) 24-144 13-40(4.1) 24-138 13-40(4.2)- 
13-40(4.5) 24-145-24-148 13-40(4.6), 
13-40(4.7) 24-149, 24-150 13-40(4.8) 24-135 13-40(5.1), 
13-40(5.2) 24-145 13-40(5.3)- 
13-40(5.5) 24-132-24-134 13-40(6.1) 24-131 13-40(6.2) 24-137 14-1-14-3 16-1-16-3 14-13-14-24 16-31-16-42 14-26 16-43 14-37 16-66 14-38-14-41 16-81-16-84 14-42 16-67 15-1, 15-2 17-1, 17-2 15-13 17-26 15-14-15-20 17-46-17-52 15-20.1 17-28 15-21 17-27 16-1 6-376 16-1.1 6-451 16-3 6-396 16-5 6-397 16-7-16-12 6-431-6-436 16-14 6-416 16-15 6-377 16-17, 16-18 6-378, 6-379 16-31 6-398 16-113, 16-114 6-454, 6-455 16-131 6-456 16-172 6-457 16-209-16-214 6-476-6-481 16-216-16-221 6-482-6-487 16-233 6-458 17-24-17-27 15-66-15-69 19-1, 19-2 12-81, 12-82 19-13-19-18 12-96-12-101 19-29, 19-30 12-126, 12-127 19-31 12-129 19-33 12-132 19-34 12-131 19-35 12-133 19-36 12-130 19-36.1 12-128 19-37-19-40 12-157-12-160 19-41 12-156 20-16-20-22 20-26-20-32 20A-1, 20A-2 6-256, 6-257 20A-3, 20A-4 6-286, 6-287 20A-6 6-288 20A-7 6-290 20A-8 6-331 20A-10-20A-16 6-331-6-337 20A-17 6-289 20A-18 6-338 21-1-21-7 24-166-24-172 21-8 24-174, 24-175 21-9 24-173 21-19-21-26 24-196-24-203 21-28 24-204 21-32-21-35 24-81-24-84 21-37-21-42 24-85-24-90 21-49-21-52 24-176 22-1-22-3 21-26-21-28 22-4-22-7 21-46-21-49 22-8 23-420 24-1, 24-2 12-26, 12-27 25-1-25-4 25-26-25-29 25-14-25-25 25-46-25-57 25-35-25-40 25-76-25-81 26-1 23-1 26-2, 26-3 23-27, 23-28 26-4 23-103 26-5 23-349 26-6 23-353 26-7, 26-8 23-416, 23-417 26-9 13-52 26-10 23-453 26-11 23-106 26-12 23-76-23-85 26-13 23-5 26-14 23-8 26-15 23-26 26-16 23-3 26-26 23-419 26-26.1 23-102 26-27 23-101 26-27.1 23-101 26-27.2 23-9 26-28 23-126 26-29, 26-30 23-146, 23-147 26-31 23-150 26-31, 26-32 23-148 26-33 23-149 26-34 23-176, 23-177 26-36 23-178, 23-179 26-37 23-29 26-38 23-153 26-39 23-221 26-39.1 23-146 26-40, 26-41 23-227, 23-228 26-42 23-224, 23-225 26-43 23-226 26-44 23-201, 23-202 26-45 23-248 26-46 23-205 26-48 23-449 26-49 23-442 26-50 23-451 26-51 23-448 26-52 23-128, 23-129 23-452 26-53 23-327 26-54 23-128, 23-129 26-57 23-418 26-58 23-156 26-59 23-183 26-61 23-127 23-176 26-66, 26-67 23-46, 23-47 26-67.1 23-54 26-68 23-48 26-69 23-57 26-70-26-72 23-49-23-51 26-73, 26-74 23-55, 23-56 26-85 23-441 26-87 23-273 26-88 23-450 26-89 23-248 26-91 23-246 26-92 23-274 26-93 23-58 26-94 23-275 26-95 23-271 26-96, 26-97 23-276, 23-277 26-98 23-266 26-100 23-278 26-104, 26-105 23-296, 23-297 26-107-26-119 23-298-23-310 26-124, 26-125 23-373 26-126 23-374 26-128 23-377 26-129 23-379 26-131-26-133 23-398-23-400 27-117.1 14-19 28-1 22-9  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
  This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1964 Code, as updated through January 30, 1989, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1964 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede February 13, 1989, but which were never included in the 1964 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 1123  6-18-79 1(23-1.1), 
1(23-1.2) 22-2, 22-3 1(23-2.1.1), 
1(23-2.1.2) 22-56, 22-57 1(23-2.1.3(a))-1(23-2.1.3(c)) 22-58-22-60 1(23-2.1.3(f)), 1(23-2.1.3(g)) 22-62, 22-63 1(23-2.1.3) 22-61 1(23-2.1.4(a)), 1(23-2.1.4(b)) 22-64, 22-65 1(23-2.1.4(d))-1(23-2.1.4(f)) 22-67-22-69 1(23-2.1.4) 22-66 1(23-2.2.1)- 
1(23-2.2.4) 22-86-22-89 1(23-2.3.1), 
1(23-2.3.2) 22-39, 22-40 1(23-3.1.1), 
1(23-3.1.2) 22-36, 22-37 1(23-3.2) 22-38 1(23-4.1) 22-116 1(23-4.2.1)- 
1(23-4.2.8) 22-141-22-148 1(23-4.3) 22-117 1(23-4.4.1), 
1(23-4.4.2) 22-118, 22-119 1(23-4.5.1)- 
1(23-4.5.5) 22-166-22-170 1(23-4.6.1)- 
1(23-4.6.3) 22-120-22-122 1(23-4.7) 22-123 1(23-5.1)-1(23-5.4) 22-186-22-189 1(23-6) 22-5 1(23-7.1) 22-6 1(23-8.1), 
1(23-8.2) 22-7, 22-8 1(23-9.010- 
23-9.400) 22-1 1124  6-18-79 1(28-1) 26-2 1(28-2.1)-1(28-2.3) 26-136-26-138 1(28-3.1)-1(28-3.4) 26-139-26-142 1(28-4.1.1)- 
1(28-4.1.5) 26-161-26-165 1(28-4.2)-1(28-4.4) 26-166-26-168 1(28-5.1.1)- 
1(28-5.1.4) 26-186-26-189 1(28-5.1.5, 
28-5.1.6) 26-190 1(28-5.2)-1(28-5.4) 26-191-26-193 1(28-6.1.1)- 
1(28-6.1.3) 26-211-26-213 1(28-6.2), 
1(28-6.3) 26-214, 26-215 1(28-8.1)-1(28-8.4) 26-281-26-284 1(28-8.5.1), 
1(28-8.5.2) 26-285, 26-286 1(28-9.1.1)- 
1(28-9.1.8) 26-111-26-118 1(28-9.2.1), 
1(28-9.2.2) 26-356, 26-357 1(28-9.3.1) 26-331 1(28-9.4.1)- 
1(28-9.4.4) 26-332-26-335 1(28-9.5) 26-336 1(28-9.6) 26-8 1(28-9.7) 26-337 1(28-10.1)- 
1(28-10.15) 26-401-26-415 1(28-10.16) 9-61 1(28-10.17)- 
1(28-10.22) 26-416-26-421 1(28-10.23.1)-1(28-10.23.3) 26-422-26-424 1(28-10.24)- 
1(28-10.29) 26-425-26-430 1(28-10.30.1)-1(28-10.30.7) 26-431-26-437 1(28-10.31)- 
1(28-10.33) 26-438-26-440 1(28-11) 26-376 1(28-11.1) 26-377 1(28-11.2.1), 
1(28-11.2.2) 26-378, 26-379 1(28-11.3)- 
1(28-11.8) 26-380-26-385 1(28-12.1.1) 26-26 1(28-12.2.1)-1(28-12.2.5) 26-28-26-32 1(28-12.3.1)-1(28-12.3.7) 26-86-26-92 1(28-12.4.1)-1(28-12.4.8) 26-33-26-40 1(28-12.5), 
1(28-12.6) 26-41, 26-42 1(28-13.1) 26-5 1(28-13.2.1), 
1(28-13.2.2) 26-3, 26-4 1(28-14.1.1) 26-61 1(28-14.1.2)-1(28-14.1.5) 26-63-26-66 1(28-14.1.6a)-1(28-14.1.6c) 26-67-26-69 1(28-14.1.7) 26-70 1(28-14.2) 26-62 26-306 1(28-14.2.1), 
1(28-14.2.2) 26-307, 26-308 1(28-14.2.3a)-1(28-14.2.3f) 26-309-26-314 1(28-14.2.4) 26-315 1(28-14.3) 26-27 1(28-15.1) 26-1 1(28-16.1), 
1(28-16.2) 26-6, 26-7 1198  9-20-82 1 26-191 2 26-136 26-190 4 26-64 26-192 1277  6-15-89 1(26-99) 23-105 1278  6-15-89 1(26-55) 23-104 1279  6- 5-89 1 3-5 1280  6- 5-89 1 13-223 1281  6-19-89 1 3-1 1283  9-18-89 1(26-63) 23-422 1284  9-18-89 1(26-63.1) 23-421 1287  1- 2-90 1 4-1 2 4-4, 4-5 4-106, 4-107 3(4-12) 4-11 1288  1- 2-90 2 4-108  4-23-90 1 2-88-2-90 1289  3-19-90 1 7-1-7-10 7-12-7-16 1290  4-16-90 1 24-28 24-30 24-30.4 24-32, 24-33 24-36, 24-37 24-57 24-59-24-61 1292  5- 7-90 1 13-116.5 1293  6- 4-90 1 2-171-2-177 1294  6-18-90 1 24-30.4 1295 10- 1-90 2-221-2-223 1298  3-18-91 1-7 adopting ordinance, p. vii 1302  1- 6-92 1       Rpld 2-88-2-90 1303  2-18-92 1 8-1 1304  4- 6-92 1 24-177(a)-(d) 1305  6- 1-92 1 24-177(e) 1311  5- 3-93 1 23-177       Rpld 23-179 1313  6-21-93 1       Rpld 24-81-24-105       Rpld 24-166-24-204 1314  6-21-93 1 5-27 1315  7- 6-93 1       Added 2-188-2-192 1316  7- 6-93 1       Added 15-80, 15-81 1317  7- 6-93 1       Added 24-151-24-163 1318 10-18-93 1 24-126 24-127       Rnbd 24-131 as 24-132       Rnbd 24-132, 24-133 as 24-131       Rnbd 24-134 as 24-133       Added 24-134 24-139       Rnbd 24-141 as 24-142       Rnbd 24-140 as 24-141       Added 24-140       Rnbd 24-149 as 24-150.2       Rnbd 24-147 as 24-149       Rnbd 24-145 as 24-146       Rnbd 24-144 as 24-145       Rnbd 24-143 as 24-144       Rnbd 24-142 as 24-143       Added 24-147       Added 24-148       Added 24-150.1       Rnbd 24-150 as 24-150.3       Rnbd 24-148 as 24-150 24-126-24-150.3 1320 10-18-93 1 26-412 1322  2- 7-94 1       Added 2-1 1323  4- 4-94 1 6-52, 6-55, 
6-124, 6-181, 
6-289, 6-356, 
6-398, 6-451 1324  4- 4-94 1       Added 24-82-24-86 4 Ch. 24, Art. II, 
Div. 3(note) 1325  5- 2-94 1       Added 23-179 1327  6- 6-94 1 24-82 1330  2-21-95 1       Added 23-10 1331  3- 6-95 1       Rpld 6-456 1332  3-20-95 1 24-82 1336  6-19-95 1       Added 24-26.1 1337  8-21-95 1 13-162 1341  1-15-96 1       Added 22-10 1342  1-15-96 1 24-32 1346  5-20-96 1 4-1 1347  7- 1-96 1       Added 23-102(b) 1351 10-21-96 1 9-61 1353 11-18-96 1       Rpld 15-26, 15-27       Added 15-26, 15-27       Rpld 15-41-15-48 1354 11-18-96 1       Added 15-28 1355 12- 2-96 1       Added 13-203 1356  2-18-97 1 6-52 6-181 6-356 6-451 1357  2-18-97 1       Added 15-90, 15-91 1359  3-17-97 1       Added 1-10 1360  4- 7-97 1 5-52 5-55 5-57-5-60 5-67 5-69 1361  5-19-97 1 24-36(f) 1364  6-25-97 1       Rpld 3-2 1366  8-18-97 1       Added 3-2 1369 10-20-97 1 24-36(d) 24-37(b) 1371 11- 3-97 1       Added 2-121 1372 11- 3-97 1 23-422 1373 11-17-97 1 24-30.4       Added 24-63 1376  4- 6-98 1 3-2(c) 1379  6-15-98 1 9-41 1380  6-15-98 I       Added 12-200-12-231 1381  6-15-98 1 17-46 17-48 1386 11- 2-98 1 15-1(b), 15-28, 15-91 1389  1-18-99 1 12-207(1)       Rpld 12-208 1392  4- 5-99 1 24-63 1398  7- 6-99 1 13-121 1399  7-19-99 1 24-82(5) 1400  7-19-99 1 5-27 1402  9- 7-99 1 15-68 1403  9-20-99 1 24-82(6) 1405 12-20-99 26-1       Added 26-169 1406  2- 7-00 1 24-61 1407  4- 3-00 1 14-25 14-28(d) 14-34 1408  6- 5-00 2-6 2-76-2-80 7       Added 2-81 8       Added 2-82 1409  6-19-00 1 24-82 1411 10- 2-00       Added 24-164-24-170 1412 10-16-00 1 5-27 1413 11- 6-00 1 24-28 1416  2- 5-01 1       Added 15-29 1417  4- 2-01 1 2-222 1418  4-16-01 1 2-223 1419  5-21-01 1 12-205 1420  5-21-01 1 14-30 1421  6-18-01 1 16-3 1422  6-18-01 1       Added 23-454 1423  6-18-01 1 6-98 1425  7- 2-01 1 16-81 1426  7- 2-01 1       Added 16-85 1427  7-16-01 1 23-128 1428  7-16-01 1 24-82(6) 1429  8- 6-01 1 23-353 1430  8-20-01 1       Added 23-279 1432 10- 1-01 1 2-76-2-82 1434 10-15-01 1 9-61 1435 10-15-01 1 6-55 6-124 6-289 6-398 1436 10-15-01 1 24-1, 24-26, 24-27, 24-29-24-37, 24-57-24-63, 24-82-24-86,       Added 24-87, 24-88 1438 11- 5-01 1       Added 9-68 1439 11- 5-01 1       Added 9-67 1440 11-19-01 1 26-420 1441 11-19-01 1 15-68 1442 11-19-01 1 15-26 1443 11-19-01 1 23-179 1444 11-19-01 1 23-377 1445 12-17-01 1 6-52 6-122 6-163 6-181, 6-182 6-184, 6-185 6-211 6-231 6-311 6-331       Rpld 6-332-6-338 6-356       Rpld 6-436 6-451 6-476       Rpld 6-477-6-487 1446  1- 7-02 1 8-1 1447  1- 7-02 1       Added 15-101-15-108 1448  2- 4-02 1 23-104 1449  3- 4-02 1       Added 13-122 1450  6-17-02 1 24-36(h)       Added 24-36(j) 1451  6-17-02 1       Added 24-61.1 1456  7- 1-02 1       Added 24-2 1457  8- 5-02 1       Added 23-270(a)(2)       Rnbd 23-270(a)(2)-(13)       as 23-270(a)(3)-(14) 1460  4-21-03 1       Added 24-89 1462  5-19-03 1 20-28, 20-29 20-31 1463  8-25-03 1 26-1 1464  8-25-03 1 26-167 1465  8-25-03 1 26-113 1470 10-20-03 15-66-15-69       Added 15-70-15-74 1471 10-20-03 1       Added 24-90 1472 12- 1-03 1 24-82(4) 1474  2-17-04 1 14-16 1475  2-17-04 1 23-270(a)(4) 1477  5- 3-04 1       Added 23-396(b) 1478  5-17-04 1 1-5(c) 1479  6- 7-04 1 13-203(b)-(d) 1480  6-21-04 1 24-30.4 1481  7- 6-04 1 24-82 1483  9- 7-04 1 22-1 1484 10-25-04 1       Added 24-171 1488  9- 6-05       Rpld 24-1 1       Added 24-1-24-10 1489 10- 3-05 1 15-1-15-17 15-21-15-29 15-31-15-35 15-41-15-55 15-61-15-71 1492 10-17-05 1 15-41 1493 12- 5-05 1       Rpld 10-39 1494 12- 5-05 1       Rnbd 24-1-24-10       as 24-164-24-173 2       Added 24-1 1495  2-21-06 1 15-1-15-17 15-21-15-29 15-31-15-35 15-41-15-55 15-61-15-71 1496  3- 6-06 1 23-270 1497  3-20-06 1 23-273 1500  9- 5-06 1 24-82(4)a. 1501  9- 5-06 1 24-82(4) 1502  9- 5-06 1 24-82(5) 1506 11- 6-06 1       Added 23-280 1510  2- 5-07 1-3       Added 2-122 1511  2-20-07 1 24-60 1512  6-18-07 1 24-126 1513  6-18-07 1 24-140 1514  6-18-07 1 24-146 1515  6-18-07 1 24-148 1516  7- 2-07 1 24-82 1518  7-11-07 1 26-422 1519  8-13-07 1       Added 26-422(5) 1524 11-19-07 1       Added 13-124 1525 11-19-07 1       Added 13-125 1526 11-19-07 1       Added 13-123 1527 12- 3-07 1       Rpld 4-1-4-11 4-41-4-43 4-61-4-65 4-81-4-83 4-106-4-108       Added 4-1-4-11 4-41 4-61-4-65 4-81-4-83 4-100-4-104 1530  4- 7-08 1 23-179 1537 10- 6-08 1       Rpld 24-164-24-173       Added 24-164-24-178 1538  1- 5-09 1, 2       Added 4-12 1539  2- 2-09 1       Added 2-123 1540  2- 2-09 1 2-57 2 2-58 1543  4-20-09 1       Added 2-301-2-312 1544  4-20-09 1 6-52 6-122 6-163 6-181, 6-182 6-184, 6-185 6-211 6-231 6-311 6-331(a) 6-356 6-451 6-476 1545  8- 3-09 1(a-c)       Added 2-331-2-333 1548 10- 5-09 1(A.) 12-203 1(B.)       Rpld 12-204, 12-205       Added 12-204, 12-205 1549 10-19-09 1 24-28 1551 12- 7-09 1 10-36(a) 1552 12- 7-09 1 24-82 1553 12- 7-09 1       Added 24-64 24-57-24-59 24-63 1554 12- 7-09 1 24-36(d), (e) 2 24-37(b) 1555  1-18-10 1 24-82(2) 1557  2- 1-10 1 14-34 2       Added 14-38 1558  3-15-10 1 12-50 2 12-51(a) 1561  6- 7-10 1 3-1(a) 12-2(b)(9) 12-184(a) 6-55 6-121 24-28 24-32, 24-33 24-35 24-36(g)       Added 24-38, 24-39 24-61 24-177 1562  6-21-10 1       Added 27-1 1563  7- 6-10 1       Added 24-38(c) 1564  7- 6-10 1(A.) 10-1 1(B.) 10-2 1(F.) 10-6 1(H.) 10-7 1(K.)       Rpld 10-11       Rpld 10-12       Added 10-11 1(L.) 10-36 1(M.)       Rpld 10-37 1(N.)       Added 10-37 1(O.) 10-38 1(P.) 10-61 1(Q.) 10-62 1(R.) 10-63 1(S.)       Rpld 10-64 1(T.) 10-65 1(U.)       Rpld 10-66 1565  7-19-10 1 20-28 1566  8- 2-10 1       Added 23-179(12)-(16) 1568 11- 1-10 1       Rpld 6-182       Rpld 6-184 1573  5- 2-11 1       Added 27-2 1574  6-20-11 1       Added 27-3 1577 12-19-11 1 8-1 1578 12-19-11 1 25-78 1580  5- 7-12 1       Added 2-401 1581  5-21-12 1       Rpld 16-2 1583  6-18-12 1       Added 10-71 1584  7-16-12 1       Rpld 27-3 1585  7-16-12 1(A.)       Rpld 2-56-2-58 1(B.) 12-203 1(C.) 7-12(d) 1(D.) 16-81 1(E.) 17-46 1586  7-16-12 1       Added 2-90 1587  8- 6-12 1 3-2 1588  8-20-12 1       Added 27-3 1589  9- 4-12 1 23-279 1590 10- 1-12 1 6-52 6-181 6-356 6-451 6-476 9-61 1591 11- 5-12 1 12-50 1592 11- 5-12 1(2-88)       Added 2-93 1593 11- 5-12 1 13-79 1594 11- 5-12 1 1-5 1595 12- 3-12 1       Added 16-4 1596  1- 7-13 1       Rpld 16-85 2       Added 16-90 1597  1-24-13 1 27-2 1598  1-24-13 1       Added 27-5 1599  2- 4-13 1 2-90(d)(1), (2) 1602  3- 5-13 1 12-206 1603  3- 5-13 1-3 2-123 1604  3- 5-13 1-7 2-122 1605  3-19-13 2, 3 2-123 1606  5- 8-13 1 24-64 1607  5-21-13 1 15-21-15-24 1608  6- 4-13 1 27-3 1609  6-18-13 1 3-1 1610  6-18-13 1 2-333(a) 1611  8- 6-13 1       Rpld 12-2 1612  9- 3-13 1 27-2 1613  9-17-13 1 17-26 1616 11- 8-13 1 2-333(a) 1617 11- 8-13 1 2-331 1618 12-17-13 1       Rnbd 24-166-24-176, 24-196       as 24-92-24-103 1619 12-17-13 1 12-205 1621  2- 4-14 1       Added 24-40 1623  6- 3-2014 1 9-68 1624  6-17-2014 1 24-62 1625  7- 1-2014 1       Added 6-56 1626  8-19-2014 1 24-92-24-103 1628 12- 2-2014 1 16-66, 16-67, 16-81-16-84, 16-90 1632  1-20-2015 1 24-63 2 24-64 1635  3-17-2015 1 23-128 23-129 1637  5- 5-2015 1 6-231 6-26 15-23(b)       Added 15-36 15-68, 15-69 15-71 1638  6- 2-2015 1 5-52 2 5-26 1640  7- 7-2015 1(A.) 6-55 1(B.) 21-46 1(C.) 6-121 1(D.) 6-124 1(E.) 6-126 1(F.) 6-289 1(G.) 6-398 1641  7- 7-2015 1 26-28 1642  7- 7-2015 1(A.) 22-10 1(B.) 26-86 1(C.)       Rpld 26-87 1(D.)       Rpld 26-88 1(E.) 26-89 1(F.) 26-90 1643  8-18-2015 1 24-82(3)b. 1645 10- 6-2015 1       Added 23-11 1646 11- 3-2015 1(A.) 24-64 1(B.) 24-57(c) 1(C.) 24-58(c) 1(D.) 24-59(c) 1(E.) 24-63(c) 1648 11- 3-2015 1 12-205 1649 11- 3-2015 1       Added 23-130 1650 11- 3-2015 1 23-421 1651 11-17-2015 1 15-23 15-33 1652 11-17-2015 1       Added 24-65 1653 11-17-2015 1(A.) 24-59(tit.) 1(B.) 24-59(a) 1654 12- 8-2015 1 12-3(d), (f) 1656  6-21-2016 1 23-101 1657  8- 2-2016 1 27-5 1658  8-16-2016 1(24-200)       Added 24-105 1659  8-16-2016 1(A.) 12-203 1(B.) 12-205 1(C.) 16-1 1(D.) 16-84 1(E.)       Rpld 16-31-16-43       Rpld 16-82 1660  8-16-2016 1 27-3 1661 10-18-2016 1(A.) 26-90 1(B.)       Rpld 26-40 1663 11-15-2016 1 15-31 1664 12- 6-2016 24-28(a) 2017-01  1- 3-2017 1 Ch. 9, Art. II, Div. 2 (tit.) 1(A.) 9-41 1(B.)       Rpld 9-42 1(C.) 9-43 1(D.)       Rpld 9-44 1(E.)       Rpld 9-46 2017-03  1-17-2017 1 24-29 2017-04  3- 7-2017 1 24-62 2017-05  3-21-2017 1 24-153 2017-06  4-18-2017 24-28(a) 24-33 24-35 24-38 2017-07  4-18-2017 1 13-162 2017-08  5-16-2017 1(A.) 24-64 1(B.) 24-57(d) 1(C.) 24-58(d) 1(D.) 24-59(f)(2) 1(E.) 24-63(f)(2) 2       Rpld 24-30.4 2017-09  5-16-2017 1 24-60 2017-10 12- 5-2017 1 1-5 2017-11 12- 5-2017 1 13-46 2017-12 12- 5-2017 1 13-47 2017-13 12- 5-2017 1       Added 13-47.1 2017-14 12- 5-2017 1 13-48 2017-15 12- 5-2017 1       Added 13-48.1 2017-16 12- 5-2017 1 13-54 2017-17 12- 5-2017 1 13-201 2018-01  1-16-2018 1(A.) Ch. 16 (tit.) 16-1 1(B.)       Rpld 16-66, 16-67, 16-81-16-84, 16-90 1(C.)       Added 28-1-28-8, 28-20-28-23, 28-40 2018-02  1-16-2018 1 27-3 2018-03  1- 2-2018 1 4-1       Rpld 4-2 4-3-4-11       Rnbd 4-12       as 4-105 4-41       Added 4-42       Rpld 4-61 4-62-4-64       Rpld 4-65       Rnbd 4-81       as 4-7.1 4-82, 4-83       Added 4-84 4-100-4-104 Ch. 4, Art. V (tit.)       Added 4-201 2018-04  2-13-2018 1 24-64 2018-05  5-15-2018 1 9-68 2018-06  5-18-2018 1 26-438 2018-07  5-15-2018 1       Added 24-109 2018-08  6-26-2018 1 24-26.1 2018-09  7-17-2018 1       Added 27-4 2018-12  9-25-2018 1 13-203 2       Added 13-204, 13-205 2018-13  9-25-2018 1 6-1-6-17, 6-26, 6-27 6-56 2018-14 10- 2-2018 1 24-36 2018-15 10- 2-2018 1 24-37 2018-16 11- 6-2018 1 24-36 2018-17 12- 4-2018 1 13-201 2 13-202 2019-01  4- 2-2019 1 24-60 2019-02  4- 2-2019       Added 24-3 2019-03  4- 2-2019       Added 27-6 2019-04  4- 2-2019       Added 27-7  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
  This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Oklahoma Statutes. 
O.S. Title Section  Section  
this Code 3 61 et seq. Ch. 5 100 et seq. Ch. 5, Art. III 101 5-52 103 Ch. 5, Art. III 104(2) 5-71 106 5-62 107(1) 5-64 107(2) 5-63 107(3) 5-65 108-110 5-66-5-68 111 5-70 4 31 et seq. Ch. 4 44 4-1 85.1 4-1 499 4-10 499 et seq. 4-3 499.1 4-1 10 10-101 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. III 10A 2-8-224 13-204 11 1-101 Ch. 2 15-33 15-35 14-107 6-2 9-61 14-107(B) 6-2 9-61 14-108 1-1 14-111 1-5 16-101 Charter Art. VIII, § 1 16-114(B) Charter Art. VIII, § 9 22-101 2-333 22-106, 22-107 Ch. 17 22-108 Ch. 13, Art. VI, Div. 2 22-111(A) 15-23 22-111(A), (B) 15-24 22-111(A), (B), (E) 15-23 22-111(D) 15-21 22-112 15-31 15-34 22-112.1 15-31 22-113 Ch. 6 Ch. 9 22-115 Ch. 4 22-117.1 23-102 22-118 Ch. 25, Art. II 22-119 13-1 22-121 Ch. 15 26-101 et seq. Ch. 28 27-101 14-2 27-101 et seq. Ch. 14 27-102, 27-103 14-2, 14-3 27-104 14-7 27-104(A) 14-4, 14-5 27-105 14-9 27-106 14-6, 14-7 27-108 14-13 27-109 14-11 27-110 14-10 27-111 14-14 27-112 14-12 27-113 14-21 27-114 14-15 14-22 27-115 14-17 27-116 14-23 27-117 14-18 27-117.1 14-19 27-118 14-20 27-119-27-121 14-25-14-27 27-122 14-29 27-122.1 14-28 27-122.2 14-30 27-123, 27-124 14-31, 14-32 27-125 14-16 27-126 1-5 14-34 27-129 14-36 27-132 14-37 29-101 et seq. Ch. 9 29-106 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. II, Div. 2 31-101 Ch. 20 33-101 et seq. Ch. 16 34-101 et seq. Ch. 19 36-101 Ch. 21 41-101 et seq. Ch. 18 22-56 43-101 Ch. 26 43-102 Ch. 6 Ch. 26, Arts. III-VII 43-104 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II, Div. 2 43-105, 43-106 26-64 43-106 26-69 43-107 26-5 44-101 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II, Div. 3 44-108 26-38 26-90 44-110 6-27 26-92 45-104 Ch. 22 22-2 22-7 46-101 18-26 46-101 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 18-31 46-102 22-1 46-104 Ch. 22 22-2 22-7 111 5-69 153.3 14-38 12 2006 1-2 19 1601 et seq. 17-46 20 59 14-20 1108 14-20 21 2-101.1 13-202 2-405(C) 13-202 27-104 14-8 537 13-223 540 13-223 540A 13-221 589 13-223 641 13-26 641 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. II 642 13-27 649 13-222 851 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. VI 941 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. VI, Div. 2 942 13-182 943 13-181 945 13-183 1029, 1030 13-161 1101 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. IV 1191 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. IV 1220 13-119 1253 13-2 1261 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. V 1272 13-79 1289.13A 13-79 1289.24 13-79 1289.24(A)(2)(b) 13-79 1311 13-76 1314 13-77 1362 13-116 1363 13-118 1401 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. III 1503 13-47.1 1541.1 13-48 1541.4, 1541.5 13-47 1681 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. II 1686 Ch. 4, Art. II, Div. 2 1686(A) 4-63 1686(B) 4-64 1691 4-62 1698 4-83 1701, 1702 13-46 1713 13-54 1731 13-48 1740 13-48.1 1760 13-51 1835 et seq. 13-49 22 1115 et seq. 14-19 1115.1 14-19 1341-1344 13-48 25 106 27-2 301 et seq. 5-68 1101 et seq. Ch. 11 1451 et seq. Ch. 11, Art. II 11-27 1452, 1453 11-28, 11-29 1702 Ch. 11, Art. II 26 1-101 et seq. Ch. 8 109 28-2 201 28-2 14-101 8-2 27A 2-6-206 24-175(b)(1)a. 37 Ch. 3 3-4 163.1 32-2(b) 163.2 3-31 32-2(b) 163.10 3-32 213 3-34 246(A) 3-3 246(B) 3-33 502 et seq. 3-4 523 3-4 537(A)(7) 13-120 554.1 3-1 43 43-103 26-2 47 Ch. 23 23-10 23-418 1-101.1 23-1 1-103 23-1 1-103.1 23-1 1-104-1-106 23-1 1-110, 1-111 23-1 1-113 23-1 1-122 23-1 1-125-1-127 23-1 1-133.1 23-1 1-134-1-136 23-1 1-136.1 23-1 1-139 23-1 1-142(a) 23-1 1-143 23-1 1-147-1-151 23-1 1-154 23-1 1-156 23-1 1-158(a), 1-158(b) 23-1 1-159, 1-160 23-1 1-163 23-1 1-167 23-1 1-169-1-171 23-1 1-174, 1-175 23-1 1-177-1-179 23-1 1-182 23-1 1-185, 1-186 23-1 6-101 et seq. 23-101 23-296(b) 7-602(B)(1) 23-102 7-602(B)(3) 23-102 7-602.1 23-102 7-607 23-102 8-104 23-102 25-48 10-101 23-11 23-76 10-102(a) 23-77 10-103-10-107 23-78-23-82 10-108(A) 23-83 10-111, 10-112 23-84, 23-85 11-101-11-103 23-2-23-4 11-103 23-103 11-104 23-5 11-105, 11-106 23-7, 23-8 11-107 23-6 11-201 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. II, Div. 2 11-201(a), 11-201(b) 23-47, 23-48 11-202-11-204 23-49-23-51 11-204.1 23-52 11-205 23-53 11-206, 11-207 23-55, 23-56 11-301 23-146 11-301 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. IV, Div. 3 11-302-11-306 23-147-23-151 11-307(b) 23-152 11-308 23-29 11-308(b), 11-308(c) 23-153, 23-154 11-309-11-313 23-155-23-159 11-401 23-201 11-401 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. IV, Div. 5 11-402-11-405 23-202-23-205 11-501 23-371 11-501 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. VIII 11-502, 11-503 23-372, 23-373 11-505 23-375 23-379 11-506 23-378 11-507 23-377 11-601 23-221 11-601 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. IV, Div. 6 11-602-11-606 23-222-23-226 11-701 23-246 11-701 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. IV, Div. 7 11-702-11-705 23-247-23-250 11-705.1 23-229 11-801 23-176 11-801 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. IV, Div. 4 11-803 Ch. 23, Art. IV, Div. 4 11-804-11-806 23-180-23-182 11-901 23-126 11-901d 23-130 11-902 23-128 11-1001 23-268 11-1001 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. V 11-1002(a), 11-1002(b) 23-269 11-1003, 11-1004 23-270, 23-271 11-1005 23-267 11-1006 23-278 11-1007 23-272 11-1101-11-1105 23-441-23-445 11-1107-11-1109 23-446-23-448 11-1110 23-453 11-1112 23-421 11-1201 23-346 11-1201 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. VII 11-1202-11-1207 23-347-23-352 11-1301 23-326 11-1301 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. VI 11-1302 23-327 12-101 et seq. 23-416 12-218 23-8 23-205 12-402 23-417 12-417 23-422 14-105 23-420 15-101.1 23-11 15-102 Ch. 23 Ch. 23, Art. II, Div. 2 15-102(2) 23-27 15-102(a)2 Ch. 23, Art. V 15-102(a)8 Ch. 23, Art. VII 15-102(a)10 Ch. 23, Art. IV, Div. 6 15-102(a)(4) 23-29 15-102(a)(10) Ch. 23, Art. IV, Div. 4 15-106 Ch. 23, Art. II, Div. 2 15-106(a) 23-46 15-107 23-50 15-111, 15-112 23-272 16-103 23-6 22 et seq. 23-419 40-103 23-396 40-103 et seq. Ch. 23, Art. IX 40-104, 40-105 23-397, 23-398 74-1136.2 15-41 756 23-128 761 23-129 851 23-418 901 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. III 901 23-279 902 23-279 1102 23-102 23-422 1134 23-422 50 1 et seq. 15-1 12 15-6 14 15-7 15 15-7 16 15-1 15-8 15-9 51 24A.1 et seq. 2-401 24A.2 2-401 24A.3 2-401 24A.5(5), (6) 2-401 59 1000.23(C) 6-2 9-61 1001 et seq. 6-14 1016 6-6 1031 et seq. 6-6 1151.1 et seq. 6-14 1330-1333 14-20 1335 14-20 1680 et seq. 6-14 1693 6-6 1696 6-14 1850.12 6-14 1860.1 et seq. 6-14 60 176 et seq. 2-173 176 2-331 176(g) 2-331 61 101 et seq. 2-331 63 1-229.12 13-203 1-229.13 13-204 1-229.18 13-204 1-229.19 13-204 1-229.21 13-204 1-229.26 13-204 1-508 4-7 1-1011 15-10 1-1522 13-203 2-101 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. VI, Div. 3 13-202 23-128 2-101 13-201 2-101(36) 13-202 683 et seq. Ch. 7 683.3 23-1 683.11(b) 7-6 68 205 12-226 205-205.2 12-62 217 12-58 220 12-59 227 12-60 301 13-204 327 13-203 401 13-203 1350 et seq. 12-48, 12-49 12-51, 12-52 12-57 1352 12-47 1354 12-51 1355-1360 12-52 1362 12-54 1363, 1364 12-48, 12-49 1365 12-53 12-57 1625 9-68 2601 12-26 2601 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. II 2603 12-26 2701 et seq. 12-51 12-220 2704 12-220 71 23 24-1 74 85.1 et seq. 2-331 82 926.1 24-171 1601-1618 10-36  
