CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SAPULPA, OKLAHOMA 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
  
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SAPULPA, OKLAHOMA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Mr. Reg Green 
Mayor 
Mr. Lou Martin, Jr. 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Mr. John Anderson 
Mr. Bruce Bledsoe 
Mr. Marty Cummins 
Mr. Wes Galloway 
Ms. Carla Gunn 
Mr. Craig Henderson 
Mr. Hugo Naifeh 
Ms. Carla Stinnett, Esq. 
Councilors 
____________ 
Ms. Joan Riley 
City Manager 
____________ 
Ms. Shirley Burzio 
City Clerk 
Mr. David R. Widdoes 
City Attorney  
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the republication were the City Code, as updated through June 17, 2019. The source of each new section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is part of the Sapulpa Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this republication, the reader can locate any section of the Code, as updated. 
The Code has been arranged into parts, chapters, and sections. The various sections within each part have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this republication. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a title of the republication, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the title. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
Index or Indexes 
The index (indexes) has (have) been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself (indexes themselves) which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; (pretitle or prechapter) section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 2019. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2810 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SAPULPA, OKLAHOMA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREAFTER PROVIDED; PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE; PROVIDING FOR SALE AND COPIES IN THE CLERK'S OFFICE; PROVIDING FOR SUPPLEMENTS OR CHANGES TO CODE; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAPULPA, OKLAHOMA: 
SECTION 1.  TITLE. 
A code and revision of the ordinances of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma is hereby adopted as the "Sapulpa City Code" or by any other properly identifying designation. 
SECTION 2.  CODE SUPERSEDES OTHER ORDINANCES. 
This code shall be treated and considered as a new and comprehensive ordinance of the City which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances enacted by the City Council prior to January 1, 2019, except such as by reference thereto are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for any purpose. 
SECTION 3.  EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE, REPEAL. 
All provisions of this code shall be in full force and effect from the date this ordinance becomes law. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City in effect on or before January 1, 2019, and not in the code or recognized and continued in force by reference herein and which are in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
SECTION 4.  ORDINANCES NOT REPEALED. 
The repeal provided for in Section 3 hereof shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the City; nor shall the repeal affect the administrative regulations or resolutions of the City Council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the code; nor shall the repeal affect any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the City Council to any person, firm or corporation; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City; nor shall the repeal affect any annual budget or salary ordinance; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the City; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing charges therefor; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance extending the limits of the City or providing for zoning of property within the City; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance declaring an emergency within the City; nor shall the repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance establishing rates, fees or charges, except those specifically re-established in this code, until the City Council re-establishes such rates, fees, or charges by ordinance, motion, or resolution. The continuance in effect of temporary or special ordinances and parts of ordinances, although omitted from the code, shall not be affected by such omission therefrom; and the adoption of the code shall not repeal or amend any such ordinance or part of any such ordinance. 
SECTION 5.  CODE NOT NEW ENACTMENT. 
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
SECTION 6.  ORDINANCES ADOPTED AFTER EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE. 
Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted on and after the effective date of this code may be passed or adopted either: 
1.  In the form of amendments to the Code of Ordinances adopted by this ordinance; or 
2.  Without specific reference to the code. 
In either case, all such ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed amendments to the code. All of the substantive permanent and general parts of such ordinances and changes made thereby in the code, shall be inserted and made in the code whenever authorized or directed by motion, resolution, or ordinance of the City Council, as provided hereinafter. 
SECTION 7.  SUPPLEMENTS TO CODE. 
By contract or by City personnel, a change, or supplement, to the City code adopted by this ordinance shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City Council. A change to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the City Council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the change and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a change shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be up to date to the date to which the code is being brought up to date. Each change shall include a new title page for the code; and the title page shall include a notation below the title indicating that the code contains all permanent and general ordinances and parts of ordinances passed prior to the date to which the code is brought up to date and still in effect. The words "as amended" and the date, may be added to the title after the year. After every change has been prepared and printed, a number of copies of the change equal at least to the number of copies of the code still in existence, shall be deposited in the office of the City Clerk. The City Clerk, if possible, shall notify each holder of a copy of the original code about the availability of the change or supplement. 
SECTION 8.  COPY OF CODE IN CLERK'S OFFICE. 
A copy of the current code as amended or supplemented from time to time shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. This copy of the code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it. The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to sell copies of the Sapulpa City Code to the public at a price determined from time to time by motion or resolution of the City Council. 
SECTION 9.  COPY OF CODE ONLINE. 
A copy of the current code as amended and supplemented from time to time shall be published and maintained on the City's website so that it is accessible to persons desiring to examine it. 
SECTION 10.  PREPARATION OF CODE. 
The Sapulpa City Code hereby adopted was prepared by the City Attorney of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, and consists of Seventeen (17) Parts and an Appendix, all of which have been examined, considered, and approved by the City Council of the City of Sapulpa and adopted by compliance with Sections 14-109 et seq. of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. 
SECTION 11.  EMERGENCY. 
Reference being made to "Section 3" hereinbefore set out, it is immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace, health and safety of the City and the inhabitants thereof, that the provisions of this code not heretofore enacted be put into full force and effect, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, by reason whereof this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage, as provided by law. 
PASSED AND APPROVED this by the City Council of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, this 22 day of January 2019, with the emergency clause separately voted upon. 
  
	      Reg Green, Mayor 
 	 
  
ATTEST: (Seal) 	APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
	
/s/ _____   
Shirley Burzio, City Clerk 	 /s/ _____
David R. Widdoes, City Attorney 
  
CHARTER 
CITY OF SAPULPA, OKLAHOMA 
Adopted April, 1922 
Revised 2014 (2018)  
PREAMBLE 
We, the people of the City of Sapulpa, under and by virtue of the Constitution and Laws of the State of Oklahoma do ordain and establish this Charter for the City of Sapulpa as an amendment to and substitute for the Charter of said City heretofore prepared by a Board of Freeholders on May 23, 1910, and approved by the Governor of the State of Oklahoma on September 1, 1910, and all amendments thereto thereafter adopted.  
ARTICLE I. - ORGANIZATION AND POWERS 
 
Sec. 1. - Organization. 
That the inhabitants within the boundaries hereinafter defined and their successors, are hereby created and organized a municipal corporation, with perpetual succession, under the name of "City of Sapulpa," and as such they and their successors, are hereby created a body political and corporate, and shall succeed to, own, and possess all the property, whether real, personal or mixed, and all the rights, privileges, franchises, powers and immunities now belonging to, possessed or enjoyed by, the present corporation known as the City of Sapulpa, and which was created under the laws of the United States in force in the Indian Territory, and continued in existence by the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma; that said municipal corporation shall be subject to and liable for all debts, judgments, valid bonds, notes and other legal obligations for which the present corporation is now legally bound; that the said municipal corporation hereby created, and its successors, in said corporate name of the City of Sapulpa, shall have power to sue and to be sued, plead and be impleaded, complain, intervene, and defend in all courts; that it shall have power to make contracts, to take and acquire property, either real or personal, by purchase or otherwise, for municipal purposes, and hold, sell, lease, convey, or otherwise dispose of any such real or personal property within or without the limits of said City; that it shall also have exercise, and enjoy such other additional power, rights and privileges, franchise and immunities as are granted and conferred by any other parts of this Charter; that it may make and use a corporate seal and alter same at the pleasure of its Board of Councilors.  
Sec. 2. - Boundaries. 
That the boundaries of the City of Sapulpa, until otherwise changed as provided in this Charter, shall remain and continue to be the same, and divided into the same wards, as are existing at the time of the adoption of this Charter, with power and authority vested in the City to change its boundaries in the manner authorized by law and to change the boundaries and number of its wards and ordinance.  
Sec. 3. - General grant of power. 
The City shall have and exercise all powers, privileges and functions which are pursuant to the Constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma, have been or could be granted to, or exercised by, any city of the first class, except as herein otherwise provided, it shall by ordinance regulate the speed at which all trains, engines, and cars of any railroad company, whether steam or electric, shall be run within the corporate limits upon the streets, ways, or public places of the City. And may also by ordinance require such companies to maintain flagmen or gates or both flagmen and gates at any intersection or street crossing where in the judgment of the Board of Councilors, the public safety requires the same; and may also require all railway companies to erect viaducts over, or tunnel under their tracks at crossing of streets.  
Sec. 4. - Repealed. 
(Effective 1970)  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIVE AND APPOINTIVE OFFICERS OF MUNICIPALITY 
 
Sec. 1. - Elective officers. 
The elective officers of the City of Sapulpa shall be two (2) Councilors from each ward, one (1) of said councilors shall be elected Mayor by a majority of the Board of Councilors. 
The appointive officers of the City of Sapulpa shall be: 
A City Manager. 
A City Attorney. 
A City Treasurer. 
A Judge of the Municipal Court.  
Sec. 2. - Compensation and elections. 
The Councilors provided for in Section 1, shall serve without compensation and until otherwise provided by ordinance, four (4) qualified electors shall be nominated in each ward for Councilors who shall be voted for at the regular election and the two (2) receiving the highest number of votes in said ward at the regular election shall be declared to be elected.  
Sec. 3. - Salary limitation. 
No full-time, salaried employee of the City shall hold an office or employment in the federal, state, or county Government. No person shall be elected or appointed to any office, position, or employment, the compensation of which was increased or fixed by the Board of Councilors while he was a member thereof at least one (1) year from date when he ceased to be a member of the board.  
Sec. 4. - Conflict of interest. 
No officer or employee of the City, or any business in which the officer or employee, or spouse of the officer or employee has a proprietary interest, shall engage in: (i) selling, buying or leasing real or personal property to or from the City; (ii) contracting with the City; or (iii) buying or bartering for or otherwise engaging in any manner in the acquisition of any bonds, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness of the City. Provisions of this section shall not apply where competitive bids were obtained consistent with municipal ordinance or state law and two (2) or more bids were submitted for the materials, supplies, or services to be procured by the City, provided the notice of bids was made public and open to all potential bidders. For purposes of this section, "employee" means any person who is employed by a municipality more than ten (10) hours in a week for more than thirteen (13) consecutive weeks. For purposes of this section, "proprietary interest" means ownership of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the business or of the stock therein or any percentage which constitutes a controlling interest but shall not include any interest held by a blind trust. Any violation of any provision of this section by any such officer, or employee, shall be sufficient grounds for removal from office. No officer of the City, whether elective or appointive, shall be directly or indirectly connected with or interested in any franchise granted to the City; and if any City officer accepts employment from any person, company or corporation operating under any franchise granted by the City, or be guilty of a violation of these provisions, he shall thereby forfeit his office, and the same shall immediately become vacant. 
(Amended, effective 2014)  
Sec. 5. - Oath of office. 
Every officer provided for in this Charter shall before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation: 
"I do solemnly swear, (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of (here insert the name of the office), according to the best of my ability."  
Sec. 6. - Vacancies in office. 
If any elective officer shall die, resign, or remove from the ward from which he was elected, or shall fail to attend for four (4) consecutive regular meetings of the Board of Councilors, or shall fail to qualify by taking the oath of office and filing his official bond as hereinafter required within ten (10) days from the time he receives his certificate of election, or if he shall otherwise become unable to discharge the duties of his office, such office may be declared vacant by the Board and said Board shall thereupon appoint some qualified person from the ward in which the said vacancy may occur to fill the unexpired term of the person originally elected therefrom. In the event of a vacancy or vacancies in the Board of Councilors, such vacancy or vacancies shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members of said Board, within thirty (30) days of the declaration of said vacancy. Nominations for consideration by the Board will be made by the remaining Councilor from the ward where the vacancy has occurred. In the event that both Councilors representing a single ward are vacant at the same time, nominations for the filling of these two (2) positions shall be made by the Mayor. Appointments will be for the remainder of the original term. 
(Amended, effective 2014)  
Sec. 7. - Appointive offices. 
The City Manager, the City Attorney, the Municipal Judge, and the City Treasurer shall be appointed by the Board of Councilors.  
Sec. 8. - General powers of appointive officers. 
All officers appointed by the Board of Councilors of the City of Sapulpa shall have such powers and perform such duties as may be imposed on them by this Charter or by ordinance.  
Sec. 9. - Limitation on board to appointive office. 
No member of the Board shall, during the term for which he shall have been elected, be eligible to any office to be filled by the Board of Councilors, nor shall any member of the Board be selected to fill any vacancy that may occur or employment where such vacancy is to be filled by the Board of Councilors.  
Sec. 10. - Description of work day. 
All persons holding any appointive office or employment under the City shall be required to engage in the actual work of the office or employment so held, to the extent that their services may be necessary for the full and complete discharge of the duties of said office or employment, and a failure to do so shall be grounds for summary dismissal.  
Sec. 11. - Compensation to employees. 
No officer or employee shall receive any pay, commission, money, or thing of value, or derive any benefit, profit, or advantage directly or indirectly from or by reason of any dealings with, or service to the City, by himself or by others, or from or by reason of any improvements, alterations, or repairs, required, by authority of the City except his lawful compensation or salary as such officer or employee.  
Sec. 12. - Merit appointments. 
No appointment to any position under the City government shall be made or withheld by reason of any political opinions or affiliations or political service, and no appointment or election to, or removal from, any office or employment, and no transfer, promotion, reduction, reward, or punishment shall be in any manner effected or made by reason of such opinions, affiliations, or service.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIVE OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 1. - Powers of Board of Councilors. 
The Board of Councilors shall be the legislative body of City Government, and all legislative power of the City is vested therein excepting the legislative power herein reserved to the inhabitants of the City under the Initiative and Referendum.  
Sec. 2. - Council meetings. 
The Board of Councilors elected and provided for herein shall hold regular meetings at least twice a month at the City Hall on a day to be named by ordinance, and shall hold such special meetings as may be deemed necessary for the transaction of business. All meetings of the Board of Councilors shall be public, and a complete record of the proceedings shall be kept. The City Clerk shall be clerk of said Board of Councilors. At 6:00 p.m. on the first Monday following the canvass of the municipal election, the Board of Councilors shall meet, at which time the newly elected members of the board shall assume the duties of their office. A majority of all members of the board, not including any declared vacancy, shall constitute a quorum to transact business, but a less number may adjourn from day-to-day or until the next regular meeting, and may compel the attendance of absent members in such a manner as the board may by ordinance or some resolution provide. 
(Amended, effective 2002; Amended, effective 2014)  
Sec. 3. - City Clerk. 
The City Clerk, or a designee appointed by the City Manager, shall be present at the meetings of the board and shall keep a journal of the proceedings under its direction, and the ayes and nays shall be taken and entered on the journal in the final action upon all matters coming before the board. 
(Amended, effective 2014)  
Sec. 4. - Selection of Mayor/Vice-Mayor. 
The Board of Councilors shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its members. The Board of Councilors herein provided for shall immediately after their election and qualification elect one (1) of said Councilors as Mayor and one (1) as Vice-Mayor, who in the absence of the Mayor, or his refusal or inability to fulfill the duties required by him, shall be vested with all the powers and authority by the Board of Councilors.  
Sec. 5. - Council power of duty assignment. 
The Board of Councilors shall, except as otherwise herein provided, prescribe for any officer, agent, or employee appointed by it, other duties than those herein prescribed not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter.  
Sec. 6. - Council responsibility of office space. 
The Board of Councilors shall provide for and maintain necessary rooms for officers, agents, and employees of the City for the transaction of the business of the City.  
Sec. 7. - Establishment of ordinances and resolutions. 
The legislative acts of the Board of Councilors shall be by ordinance or resolution, the subject of which shall be clearly set out in its title, and no ordinance or resolution shall contain more than one (1) subject; provided, that if any subject be embraced in any ordinance or resolution contrary to the provisions of this section, such ordinance or resolution shall be void only as to so much of the ordinance or resolution as may not be expressed in the title thereof. The enacting clause of every ordinance shall be "Be it ordained by the City of Sapulpa." Every member of the Board of Councilors when present shall vote unless disqualified; and every ordinance shall require, on its final passage, the affirmative vote of a majority of the membership of said board.  
Sec. 8. - Time for ordinance effectiveness. 
All ordinances passed by the Board of Councilors except emergency ordinances, shall take effect and become valid at the end of fifteen (15) days from the date of the publication of such ordinances. All ordinances finally adopted shall be published either in a daily or weekly newspaper published and of general circulation in the City of Sapulpa, such publication to be within ten (10) days from the final passage of the ordinance. 
(Amended, effective 2002)  
Sec. 9. - Emergency clause. 
The Board of Councilors, by a vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of its membership may pass an emergency ordinance when the public safety of the City or the inhabitants thereof shall, in the judgment of the Board of Councilors demand it; and every ordinance which shall, in a separate section, declare that an emergency exists, by reason whereof the said ordinance shall immediately become effective, shall take effect at once upon its final passage and publication.  
Sec. 10. - Mayor's signature on ordinances. 
Every ordinance, order, or resolution which shall have been passed by the Board of Councilors shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.  
Sec. 11. - Council records. 
Every ordinance, after its passage, shall be recorded in a book to be called "Ordinance Record," and likewise every resolution shall be recorded in a book called "Resolution Record," kept for that purpose, which records of such ordinances and resolutions shall be authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.  
Sec. 12. - Council's power to adopt ordinances. 
The Board of Councilors shall be vested with the power and charged with the duty of adopting all laws and ordinances, and to carry into effect all powers of the municipality, not inconsistent with the Constitution and general laws of the State of Oklahoma touching every object, matter, or subject within the provisions of the local government instituted by this Charter, whether the same may be specially mentioned in this Charter or omitted herefrom.  
Sec. 13. - Council power to amend or repeal ordinances. 
The Board of Councilors shall have power to amend or repeal any ordinance or resolution which may have been adopted, whenever in their opinion such amendment or repeal shall be for the best interests of the City; provided, that no ordinance or amendment to an ordinance that may have been created or amended by an initiative or referendum vote of the electors of the City shall ever be changed except by resubmission of the question to such initiative or referendum vote.  
Sec. 14. - Special meeting. 
Special meetings of the Board of Councilors may be called by the Mayor or by three (3) Councilors at any time on such notice as the Board of Councilors may prescribe by ordinance. The purpose of such meetings shall be set forth in such call and no other business shall be transacted at such meetings.  
Sec. 15. - Council quorum. 
Repealed (effective 2014)  
Sec. 16. - Council vacancy. 
Repealed (effective 2014)  
ARTICLE IV. - EXECUTIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 
The executive and administrative powers of the City of Sapulpa shall, except as otherwise provided for herein, be vested exclusively in the City Manager as provided herein. 
 
Sec. 1. - City Manager. 
The Councilors shall, as soon as practicable, after having met, qualified, and elected a Mayor and Vice-Mayor, proceed to elect a City Manager, City Attorney, Judge of the Municipal Court and City Treasurer; and whenever a vacancy shall occur in any of said offices, the Councilors shall select some qualified person to fill such vacancy. The City Manager shall be elected without regard to his political affiliation, and it shall not be necessary that said manager be a legal resident or qualified voter of the City of Sapulpa, but in the selection of a manager, residents of Sapulpa, possessing qualifications equal to those of other available persons shall be given preference. Said manager shall be paid a salary of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month until said compensation shall be changed by resolution, and said manager shall serve during the pleasure of the Board. In the event the manager shall for any reason be temporarily incapable of performing the duties of his office, the Councilors shall immediately upon receiving notice of such temporary inability, select a manager pro tem who shall perform all the duties imposed upon the manager by this Charter or by ordinances until the manager shall return to duty, or a new manager be selected. The entry in the minutes of the meeting of the Councilors shall be conclusive evidence of the fact of such inability and the proper selection of manager pro tem.  
Sec. 2. - City Manager's qualifications. 
The manager herein provided for shall be chosen by the Councilors solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, and shall be discharged at the pleasure of the Councilors by majority vote thereof.  
Sec. 3. - City Manager's limitation of employment. 
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and supervision of the Councilors. He shall not, during his services as such manager, be an employee of or perform any duty for any person, firm or corporation, or institution other than the City of Sapulpa; and shall not be interested in the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work, or service for the City. Provisions of this section shall not apply to prohibit the City Manager from engaging in voluntary pro bono, charitable, or educational services otherwise permitted by the Councilors. 
(Amended, effective 2014)  
Sec. 4. - Oath and bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of this office, he shall take the official oath required of City Officers and shall execute a bond in such sum as shall be fixed by the Councilors in favor of the City of Sapulpa for the faithful performance of his duties, said bond to be approved by the Councilors.  
Sec. 5. - General powers of City Manager. 
(a)  The City Manager, as chief administrative officer of the City, shall have charge and supervision of all branches of the City government, except as otherwise provided in this Charter of the City of Sapulpa. 
(b)  He shall see to the faithful execution of all laws and ordinances of the State of Oklahoma and the City of Sapulpa. 
(c)  He shall appoint all officers and employees of the City of Sapulpa except the elective officers and the officers and employees whose election or appointment is vested in the Councilors by the Charter. 
(d)  He shall have power to dismiss any officer or employee appointed by him whenever, in his judgment, the interests of the City service so requires. 
(e)  He shall control and direct the several officers and employees so appointed by him. 
(f)  He shall have power at any time to investigate the affairs of any department. He or any person appointed by him in writing for the purpose shall have power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, and other evidence. 
(g)  He shall attend all meetings of the Councilors and may take part in the discussions, but shall have no power to vote. 
(h)  He shall keep the Councilors advised of the needs of the City and shall recommend measures for adoption by the Councilors. 
(i)  He shall supervise and manage all public works of the City and the repair and maintenance thereof. He shall manage and control the public utilities of the City, and shall have general charge of the cleaning, sprinkling, lighting, and improving of the streets, sidewalks, bridges, and public grounds, within and without the City, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
(j)  He shall make a monthly report to the Councilors and shall prepare and submit to the Councilors, an annual budget, subject to the approval of the Board of Councilors. 
(k)  He may create such departments for the more efficient and economical administration of the affairs of the City as to him shall seem necessary and expedient. 
(l)  He shall perform such other duties as may be imposed on him by the Charter or by ordinance. 
(m)  He shall be the Purchasing Agent for the City and shall follow the purchasing procedures and laws of the State of Oklahoma governing municipalities or as may be established by ordinance, resolution or as set forth in this Charter. 
(Amended, effective 1996)  
Sec. 6. - Mayor's general powers. 
The chief officer of the City shall be designated "The Mayor of the City of Sapulpa". He shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Councilors and vote on all questions as other members of said Board. The Mayor shall sign all deeds, bonds, contracts and other instruments requiring the assent of the City, and shall cause the seal of said City to be affixed thereto by the City Clerk. He shall see that all contracts and agreements with the City are faithfully kept and fully performed, and to that end shall, when directed by the Board of Councilors, cause legal procedures to be commenced and prosecuted in the name of the City against all persons or corporations failing to fulfill their agreements or contracts, either in whole or in part, and by like authority shall, on behalf of the City prosecute or defend all actions or suits to which the City may be a party or in which it may be interested.  
Sec. 7. - Civic responsibility. 
It shall be the duty of every officer and person in the employ or service of the City, when it shall come to his knowledge that any contract or agreement with the City or with any officer or department thereof, or relating to the business of any office, has been or is about to be violated by the other contracting party, forthwith to report to the Board of Councilors and City Manager all facts or information within his possession concerning the matter, and willful failure or neglect to do so, shall be cause for the discharge of such officer or employee. 
The Mayor, when directed by the Board of Councilors, must institute such action and proceedings as may be necessary to revoke, cancel, or annul all franchises that may have been granted by the City to any person, firm, or corporation, which are subject to forfeiture in whole or part, or which for any reason may be illegal and void and not binding on the City. The City Attorney on demand of the Board of Councilors, shall institute and prosecute the actions necessary to enforce the provisions of this section.  
Sec. 8. - Organization of City administration. 
The City administration under the manager shall be arranged into departments as provided in this Charter or as may hereinafter be created by ordinance.  
Sec. 9. - Sale of abandoned material. 
The City Manager shall be the agent of the City for the sale of or disposal of all abandoned or discarded materials and equipment, and for all products or by-products of the City. Whenever the value of any article or lot of articles to be sold together shall amount to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more as set by the Board of Councilors by ordinance, the sale thereof shall be made upon competitive bids upon notice prescribed by the Board of Councilors; provided that in case no satisfactory bid is received, the Board of Councilors may reject all bids and call for more, or direct the City Manager to dispose of such articles at private sale for not less than the amount fixed by order of the Board of Councilors. 
(Amended, effective 2014)  
Sec. 10. - Repealed. 
(Effective 1996)  
Sec. 11. - City printing. 
The City printing shall be let by contract to the lowest responsible bidder on competitive bids.  
ARTICLE IV-(A). - DIRECT PURCHASES OF MATERIALS, SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 1. - Competitive bidding requirements and procedures. 
Except in case of emergency, the City Manager shall procure sealed bids from competitive vendors where the estimated cost of the purchase of materials, supplies or equipment exceeds three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) or in an amount set by state law for public trusts as hereafter established by the legislature, or in an amount set by the Board of Councilors by ordinance, whichever is greater. The City Manager may authorize the purchase of materials, supplies or equipment where the estimated cost does not exceed three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) or in an amount set by state law for cities as hereafter established by the legislature, whichever is greater, by seeking competitive price quotations from prospective vendors and purchase at the lowest and best price available. The Mayor and City Council shall make rules governing the making of purchases by the City Manager, but no purchase, where the amount exceeds three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00), shall be valid unless approved by the Mayor and Council. 
(Amended, effective 2002; Amended, effective 2014)  
Sec. 2. - Emergency defined. 
Emergency as used herein shall be limited to conditions resulting from a sudden, unexpected happening or unforeseen occurrence or condition and situation wherein the public health and safety is endangered and/or a condition or situation which if allowed to continue, would lead to economic loss to the City or to further damage of City property. 
(New, effective 1996)  
Sec. 3. - Advertisement. 
The purchase of materials, supplies, or equipment in any sum in excess of three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) or in an amount set by state law for cities if hereafter established by the legislature, whichever is greater, shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder after advertisement for bids has been published in not less than two (2) consecutive weekly issues of a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the materials are to be purchased. 
(New, effective 1996; Amended, effective 2002)  
Sec. 4. - Bid award. 
The Council may let the bid to the lowest and best bidder or may reject any or all bids and authorize the City Manager to buy on the open market at a price less than the lowest bid received from a responsible bidder; and further provided, that if no bids be received the City Manager may buy in the open market, subject to the approval of the City Council. 
(New, effective 1996)  
ARTICLE IV-(B). - CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 1. - Controlling Act. 
The Public Competitive Bidding Act of 1974, as amended, and as may be subsequently amended by the legislature, shall apply to all City contracts for public improvements as defined in the act except as herein provided by the following sections. 
(New, effective 1996)  
Sec. 2. - Hometown preference for public works. 
Insofar as possible, home labor shall be given preference on all public works, in the City of Sapulpa whether done by the City or by any contractor or sub-contractor; provided, that all public work insofar as practicable shall be done by City personnel and not by contract. 
(Amended, effective 1996)  
Sec. 3. - Bid limits for City public improvement contracts. 
Except in case of emergency as defined in the Public Competitive Bidding Act of 1974, as amended, the City Manager shall procure sealed bids from competitive vendors where the estimated cost of the public improvement contract exceeds three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) or in an amount set by state law for cities as hereafter established by the legislature, whichever is greater. The Mayor and Council may approve a contract for a public improvement in an amount less than three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) or in an amount set by state law for cities as hereafter established by the legislature, whichever is greater, as established above, based on competitive quotations, and the Mayor is authorized to enter into a contract for public improvements in the case of emergency without prior council approval in an amount not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00), or as subsequently amended by the Public Competitive Bidding Act of 1974, provided that the reasons therefore be recorded in the minutes of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. 
(New, effective 1996; Amended, effective 2002)  
Sec. 4. - Advertisement. 
The provisions of the Competitive Bidding Act of 1974, as amended, shall apply to the bidding and notice procedures affecting contracts for public improvements except that contracts shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder after advertisement for bids have been published in not less than in two (2) consecutive weekly issues of a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the public improvement contract is to be performed and then opened at least twenty (20) days after the first publication. 
(New, effective 1996; Amended, effective 2002)  
ARTICLE V. - NON-ELECTED OFFICIALS 
 
Sec. 1. - City clerk. 
The office of the City Clerk shall be appointive, and the City Manager shall appoint the City Clerk. 
The City Clerk shall have the custody of and be responsible for all books and papers, records, and archives belonging to the City, not in actual use by other officers or elsewhere by special provision committed to their custody. 
The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Board of Councilors and shall attend all meetings and keep a record of the same, and shall with the Mayor sign and attest all ordinances, resolutions, and orders. 
He shall keep all the books properly indexed and open to public inspection when not in actual use. He shall keep separate books in which he shall record all ordinances, resolutions, orders, official bonds, and contracts. 
He shall make out, sign all licenses, and perform such other duties as are or shall be imposed by this Charter or by ordinance or by direction of the City Manager. 
The City Clerk shall receive any and all monies due the City from any and all sources and shall issue his receipt for the same. He shall make a daily report of all monies received, in triplicate form, one (1) to the City Auditor and one (1) to the City Treasurer, and retain one (1) in the office of City Clerk. He shall deposit with the City Treasurer at the end of each day all monies received by him and take a treasurer's receipt for same.  
Sec. 2. - Municipal Court Judge. 
The Municipal Court Judge shall be appointed by the Board of Councilors and he shall serve for a term of two (2) years, said term to commence on the first day of May in even numbered years. Provided, that any Municipal Court Judge serving at the time of passage of this section shall serve until that May first in an even numbered year first following passage of this section. He shall act as Judge of the Municipal Court, and shall perform such other duties and receive such compensation as may be prescribed by the Board of Councilors. He shall be removed only in those instances for good cause shown. In case of his absence or inability to act, the Mayor shall in writing appoint some other person to act as Municipal Court Judge during such absence or inability to act.  
Sec. 3. - Municipal Court. 
A court is hereby created to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Sapulpa, which shall have and possess the jurisdiction and powers now had and possessed by municipal courts in cities of the first class under the statutes of the State of Oklahoma and such powers and jurisdiction as may be prescribed by ordinance. Proceedings of the Municipal Court shall be conducted in accordance with the laws of the State of Oklahoma in regulating the proceedings in justice and Municipal Court, so far as such procedure is applicable.  
Sec. 4. - City Attorney. 
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to prosecute all cases arising from violations of provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the City of Sapulpa, and to attend to all suits, matters, and things in which the City may be interested; provided, the Board of Councilors shall have authority to employ other attorneys to assist in prosecuting or defending on behalf of the City or to render legal services on behalf of the City. 
He shall give his opinion or advise in writing whenever required by the Mayor, the Board, or City Manager, and shall do and perform such other services as may be required of him by resolution of the board. 
He shall approve by endorsement in writing the form of all official or the other bonds required by this Charter, or by ordinance, before the same be submitted to the Mayor or the Board or other persons authorized to approve bonds, for final approval, and no such bond shall be approved by the Mayor, the Board, or any other person, without such prior approval by the City Attorney. 
He shall approve in writing the drafts of all contracts before the same are entered into on behalf of the City. 
The Board of Councilors before providing for the employment of other attorneys, than the City Attorney, shall by resolution entered of record give the reason thereof. 
No case pending in court or claim against the City of Sapulpa shall be compromised or judgment thereon confessed without an order of the Board of Councilors entered of record in which the reason shall be distinctly stated, and any member of the Board opposing the action of the Board may have his reasons entered of record.  
ARTICLE VI. - TAXES 
 
Sec. 1. - Councilor's responsibility. 
The Board of Councilors may, by ordinance, provide a system for the assessment, equalization, levy, and collection of all municipal taxes, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter and of law, but, in no case, shall any tax levy, made by the Councilors, exceed the amount fixed by the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma.  
Sec. 2. - Annual assessment. 
Until otherwise provided by ordinance, the annual assessment of all taxable property in the City of Sapulpa as finally fixed by the County and State assessing and equalizing officers and boards shall be accepted as the assessment for the City of Sapulpa, and the same shall be the basis for the levying of taxes for City purposes; and, until otherwise provided by law, the collection of taxes for and on behalf of the City of Sapulpa and the certification and collection of all delinquent charges, assessments and taxes shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Oklahoma.  
Sec. 3. - City Manager's responsibility. 
On or before the first Monday in May of each year, the City Manager shall certify to the Board of Councilors the amount of money to be raised by taxes during the ensuing fiscal year, to make payment of interest, judgment, or such part as is required to be paid annually, sinking fund, the principal of bonded indebtedness, and also the estimated amount of revenue from sources other than the taxes to be levied and he shall, at the same time or in such other day of each year as may be fixed by the Board of Councilors, prepare and present to the Councilors his annual budget for the ensuing fiscal year, showing all the needs of the City for all purposes. The budget so prepared shall be compiled from detailed information; and, in its arrangement the classification of expenditures shall correspond to the accounting system of the City and shall give in parallel columns the following information: 
(a)  Detailed estimates of the expense of conducting each department and division of the City government. 
(b)  Expenditures for corresponding items during the two (2) fiscal years last past. 
(c)  Amount of supplies and materials on hand. 
(d)  Estimated revenue from the operations of public utilities and incidental to other operations of the City government, other than a tax levy. 
(e)  Increase or reduction of demands as compared with the corresponding appropriations for the fiscal years last past. 
(f)  Such other information as may be required by the Board of Councilors, or as the City Manager may deem advisable to submit. 
The estimates so given and constituting the recommendation of the City Manager as to the amounts necessary to be appropriated for the ensuing fiscal year shall be supported with information giving the reasons therefore and each detail may be necessary to afford the Board of Councilors a comprehensive understanding of the needs and requirements of the City government of the ensuing fiscal year. 
Sufficient copies of the annual budget by the City Manager shall be prepared that there may be copies on file in the office of the City Clerk for inspection by the public.  
Sec. 4. - Annual budget. 
Upon receipt of the budget as required by the preceding section, the Board of Councilors shall consider and adopt the same, with or without amendments; and, in adopting the said budget shall estimate and declare the amount of money necessary to be raised by tax levy and shall proceed to make by ordinance, the proper levy in mills upon each dollar of the assessed valuation of all taxable property within the City and shall cause the tax levy to be certified by the City Clerk to the proper county officials, shall extend the same upon the tax list of the ensuing fiscal year in a separate column, designated, "The City of Sapulpa," and shall include said City taxes in a general warrant to the proper county officials for collection. And the amount of funds estimated by the Board of Councilors as necessary for the conduct of the City government and the levy based thereon shall be final, and no other officer or board shall have authority to increase or decrease the same; provided, however, that in event assessments of the taxable property within the City of Sapulpa, for the ensuing fiscal year is not available to the time herein mentioned, the board may defer the levying such taxes until said assessment has been finally fixed.  
Sec. 5. - Exemption from taxation. 
The Board of Councilors may by vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the membership thereof exempt from municipal taxation for a period not to exceed five (5) years manufacturing establishments and public utilities and any other industry or business as otherwise allowed by state law and located in the City when this provision takes effect, or that may be brought into the City by change of the boundaries of the City, unless in any particular case of the Board, considering all the conditions and circumstances under which said establishment or utility was built shall be of the opinion that any such establishment or utility shall be entitled to such exemption. 
(Amended, effective 2002)  
ARTICLE VII. - SALARY OF OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 1. - Fixing salaries. 
The Board of Councilors shall fix the amount of compensation for all officers and employees of the City of Sapulpa, who are employed on stated salaries, except as otherwise provided herein.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFICIAL BOND 
 
Sec. 1. - Bond. 
If any officer or employee is required by law or by this Charter to give bond, he shall not be deemed qualified for his office until such bond has been duly approved and filed. All such bonds must be approved by the City Attorney as to form, and by the Board of Councilors as to sufficiency and validity and deposited with the proper custodian as herein provided. Before any officer or employee of whom a bond is required, shall enter upon the duties of his office, he shall deliver such official bond to the Board of Councilors in such penal sum as shall be required with surety company bond, conditioned that he will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of such office or employment and account for all moneys or other things of value that may come into his hands by virtue of his office or employment.  
Sec. 2. - Council's authority on bonds. 
The Board of Councilors are authorized to require any officer or employee of said City to execute a bond for the faithful performance of his duties, and fix the amount thereof, and the cost of bonds required shall be borne by the City.  
Sec. 3. - Indemnification. 
The City Council may by ordinance indemnify all City officials whether elected or appointed on such a basis, as they deem appropriate. This indemnification is limited to those areas of official representation of the City and shall not be authorized if the City official has been found guilty of any criminal action.  
ARTICLE IX. - DEPARTMENTS  
FIRE 
 
Sec. 1. - Fire Chief—How appointed, qualifications. 
The Chief of the Sapulpa Fire Department shall be appointed by the City Manager and confirmed by the Board of City Councilors. The Chief so appointed shall have at least three (3) years actual experience as a paid fireman in the State of Oklahoma.  
Sec. 2. - Firemen—How appointed. 
The members of the Sapulpa Fire Department shall, upon the approval and recommendation of the Fire Chief, be appointed by the City Manager; provided that all persons so appointed shall serve on probation for a period of twelve (12) months from the time of such appointment, during which time the City Manager may terminate the appointment of such probationary firemen, if, upon observation, investigation, or consideration of the performance of duty, he finds them unsatisfactory or unfit for the service. 
(Amended, effective 1996)  
Sec. 3. - Tenure of office. 
Members of the Sapulpa Fire Department, including the chief, shall hold their respective positions during good behavior, unless removed for good and sufficient cause. No member of the Fire Department shall be removed, demoted, or discharged, except for good and sufficient cause, and then only upon compliance with established policies and procedures of the Fire Department approved by the City. 
(Amended, effective 2014)  
Sec. 4. - Rules and regulations. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall prescribe reasonable rules and regulations to govern and regulate the Fire Department, subject to approval thereof by the Board of Councilors.  
Sec. 5. - Promotions. 
All promotions in the Sapulpa Fire Department, including Chief thereof, shall be made according to the most qualified individual for the position. 
(Amended, effective 2014)  
Sec. 6. - Reduction of force—Curtailment of expenditures. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the Board of City Councilors from reducing the number of the force of the Fire Department because of curtailment of expenditures or like causes; provided, that the persons discharged for such reasons shall be those of least seniority in period of time of service in the Sapulpa Fire Department; and provided further that each person so discharged for such cause shall be at the head of the list of eligible for appointment and first employed in the order of such seniority.  
Sec. 7. - Adoption and induction of incumbent. 
For the benefit of public service and so to prevent delay, injury, or interruption by reason of the enactment of this amendment, all persons holding a position in the Fire Department, including the Chief thereof, when this act takes effect, are hereby appointed to such office, place, rank, or position which they shall then hold.  
Sec. 8. - Constitutionality of act. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this act shall for any reason be held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this act.  
POLICE 
 
Sec. 1A. - [Composition.] 
The Police Department of the City of Sapulpa shall consist of a Chief of Police and as many other police officers as may be provided for by ordinance or other action of the Board of Councilors of said City.  
Sec. 2A. - [Management and Control.] 
The Police Department of the City of Sapulpa shall be under the management and control of the City Manager of such City. He shall appoint the Chief of Police, and such appointment shall be confirmed by the Board of Councilors, and shall appoint and council such other police officers allowed and provided for by ordinances of said City or by rules and regulations prescribed by the Board of Councilors. The Chief of Police and all other officers and members of the Police Department may be removed, suspended, or discharged by the City Manager.  
Sec. 3A. - [Failure to act.] 
In case of riot or insurrection or the failure or inability of the City Manager to act, the Mayor of the City of Sapulpa may assume the duties of the City Manager in regard to the Police Department of said City.  
Sec. 4A. - [Probation period.] 
All personnel of the Police Department of the City of Sapulpa shall serve on probation for a period of twelve (12) months from the time of their appointment, during which time the City Manager may terminate the appointment of such probationary personnel, if, upon observation, investigation, or consideration of the performance of duty, he finds them unsatisfactory or unfit for the service. This section shall become effective on the beginning of the fiscal year after approval. 
(New, effective 1996)  
ARTICLE X. - ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Types of elections. 
Elections to be held in the City of Sapulpa for the purposes of electing the officers of said City, and for all other purposes shall be of three (3) kinds. 
1.  General municipal elections. 
2.  Special elections. 
3.  Primary elections.  
Sec. 2. - Terms of office. 
Effective with the 1986 General Municipal Election, the candidate who received the highest number of votes in each ward's race will hold his office for four (4) years, with the second highest vote recipient serving a two (2) year term. Effective in 1988 and thereafter all councilors shall serve four (4) year terms. All Councilors will serve until the election and qualification of their respective successor(s) and provided further that the terms of office of any and all elective officials may be terminated at any time through and by means of the provisions of the recall as provided in the Charter of the City of Sapulpa.  
Sec. 3. - Qualifications. 
Each of the elective officials shall be a registered voter and a bona fide resident in the City of Sapulpa for not less than one (1) year immediately preceding his nomination. Additionally, he shall be a bona fide resident of the ward in which he is seeking office for not less than six (6) months immediately preceding his nomination. No such elective officials shall hold any other elective office in federal, state, or county government. 
(Amended, effective 1996)  
Sec. 4. - Two councilors from each ward. 
Until otherwise provided by ordinance, there shall be two (2) councilors representing each ward; said officers shall be nominated by the qualified electors of the respective wards in which they reside and until otherwise provided by ordinance shall be elected by the qualified electors of the said wards of the City. Said officers shall qualify and their terms of office shall begin on the first Monday in May after their election, except as otherwise provided. 
(Amended, effective 2002)  
Sec. 5. - Election dates. 
The primary election for nomination of candidates for Councilors shall be held on the first Tuesday of March, 1986, and on either the first Tuesday of March every two years thereafter or on the statutory election date as may hereafter be established by the legislature and set by state law; and a General Municipal Election for the election of Councilors shall be held on either the second Tuesday in May of the said years or on the statutory election date as may hereafter be established by the legislature and set by state law. 
(Amended, effective 2002; Amended, effective 2005)  
Sec. 6. - Candidates. 
In the 1986 Primary Election if there are more than four (4) candidates seeking the two (2) Councilors' positions, the four (4) candidates receiving the highest number of votes for these positions shall be placed on the ballot for Councilors at the general election. If the number of candidates is four (4) or less, then all shall be placed on the general ballot. In the 1986 Primary election and thereafter, if there are more than two (2) candidates seeking the one (1) Councilor's position, the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes for this position shall be placed on the ballot for Councilor at the general election. If the number of candidates is only two (2); then both shall be placed on the general ballot without necessity of primary election.  
Sec. 7. - Qualified voters. 
No person shall be permitted to vote in a primary or general municipal election in the City of Sapulpa unless he is a qualified voter of the State of Oklahoma, and until otherwise provided by ordinance, the Registration Laws of the State of Oklahoma are hereby made applicable to the City of Sapulpa.  
Sec. 8. - Elected without opposition. 
If no more persons become candidates than there are offices to be filled in any ward, such persons shall, without submission of their names to the electors, be declared elected with a certificate of the officer with whom applications to become candidates are filed has been issued.  
Sec. 9. - Initiative and referendum. 
The powers of the initiative and referendum as defined by Article XVIII of the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma are hereby reserved to the City of Sapulpa with reference to all legislative authority which it may exercise for its government. 
All exercises of the people of Sapulpa of the powers of the initiative and referendum, shall be by a petition signed by a number of qualified electors residing in said City equal in number to twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of votes cast at the next preceding municipal election, which petition shall be filed with the Mayor, the procedure in regard to a vote of the people of the City, and the elections therefore shall be in all cases as prescribed in said Article XVIII of the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma, and not otherwise.  
ARTICLE XI. - FINANCES 
 
Sec. 1. - Ad valorem tax. 
The Board of Councilors shall by ordinance or resolution on or before the first Tuesday in July of each year, or as soon as the assessed valuation upon ad valorem basis has been ascertained, levy an ad valorem tax for all purposes, except as herein provided, not to exceed the limit provided by the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma. Said ordinance or resolution shall specify distinctly the purpose of which said tax is levied, and no tax levied and collected for one (1) purpose shall ever be devoted to another purpose.  
Sec. 2. - Establishing of sinking funds. 
The Board of Councilors shall, on or before the first Tuesday in July of each year, or as soon as the assessed valuation upon an ad valorem basis has been ascertained, levy sufficient additional revenue to create a sinking fund to be used; first, for the payment of interest coupons as they fall due; second, for the payment of bonds as they fall due; third, for the payment of such parts of judgments as such municipality may by law be required to pay.  
Sec. 3. - Tax rates may be increased. 
The rates of taxation herein limited may be increased for the purpose and in the manner provided for in the Constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma.  
Sec. 4. - Bonds. 
Repealed (effective 1970)  
Sec. 5. - Limitation on City officials on personal use of City funds. 
The receiving directly or indirectly by an officer or employee of said City, of any interest, profit, or perquisite arising from the use or loan of public funds in his hands or to be raised through his agency for City purposes, shall be deemed sufficient cause to forfeit his office, and the person so receiving shall then and there forfeit his office, and be disqualified to hold office in the City until otherwise provided by ordinance.  
Sec. 6. - City Treasurer's responsibilities. 
The City Treasurer shall receive all moneys due and belonging to the City and keep an accurate and detailed account of the same in such manner as at all times to show the exact financial conditions of the City. There shall be adopted and maintained by the City Manager, such systems of accounting as will show from the books at the close of each business day, the financial conditions of the City, and each department thereof. The Treasurer shall issue a quarterly statement to be published in a newspaper of the City of Sapulpa, showing a full, clear, and complete report of all moneys and revenues collected and expended during the previous quarter, indicating the sources which the moneys were derived and the distribution made thereof, and showing all disbursements during such period.  
Sec. 7. - Limitations on City deposits. 
The City Treasurer shall not lend any or otherwise dispose of the same, except as provided by ordinance. He shall invest all funds received by him by virtue of his office in the federally insured financial institutions of the City of Sapulpa, without discrimination, such federally insured financial institutions shall not be required to pay interest on said deposits; provided, that any financial institutions receiving such deposits at any time to accept such said current City warrants at par, the City Treasurer shall deposit funds coming into his possession at the best financial rates, only in such financial institutions as will accept said warrants at par. In the event that at any time all the financial institutions of the City of Sapulpa shall refuse to accept current City warrants at par, the City Treasurer shall deposit the funds coming into his possession in all the federally insured financial institutions at highest prevailing rate. The City Treasurer shall require surety bonds or other security acceptable to him guaranteeing the deposits in any financial institutions in which he has funds deposited.  
Sec. 8. - City may purchase outstanding bonds. 
The City shall have the power to purchase, whenever possible, from the holders of any outstanding bonds of the City, bonds which may not at the time be due; provided, that the price paid for such bonds shall not exceed par and accrued interest; and provided further, that no money shall be used for such purpose except such part of the sinking fund created to pay such bonds as may have been collected and on deposit.  
ARTICLE XII. - FRANCHISES 
 
Sec. 1. - City-owned property. 
The ownership, right, and control and use of the streets, highways, alleys, parks, public places, and all other real property of the City of Sapulpa, is hereby declared to be inalienable by said City, as hereinafter provided; and no franchise or easement involving the right to use the same, either along, across, over or under the same shall ever be valid unless expressly granted and exercised in compliance with the terms hereof. No act or omission of the City, its officers or agents shall be construed to confer or extend by estoppel or indirection, any right, franchise, or easement not necessarily granted as herein provided.  
Sec. 2. - Power to confer franchise. 
The City of Sapulpa shall have power subject to the terms and provisions hereof, to confer upon any person or corporation the franchise or right to use the property of the City, as defined in the preceding section, for the purpose of furnishing to the public any general service, including heat, light, power, telephone service, refrigeration, steam, or carriage of passengers, or freight, within the said City and its suburbs, over the streets, highways, and property of said City, or for any other purpose whereby a general service is to be furnished to the public for compensation or hire, to be paid to the franchise holder in whole or in part, and for which a right to appropriate streets, highway, or other property of the City is necessary or proper; provided, that no franchise shall be granted by said City to any person, firm or corporation to own, control, or operate water works therein.  
Sec. 3. - Exclusive franchise. 
No exclusive franchise or privilege shall ever be granted, and no franchise for any public utility shall ever be granted that shall not contain a provision reserving to the City the right to engage in the same business mentioned in the said franchise.  
Sec. 4. - Time limit on franchise. 
No franchise shall ever be granted for a longer term than twenty-five (25) years. No subsidiary franchise or franchises or any character appertaining or relating to any other franchise which shall extend beyond the life of such main franchise shall ever be granted to any franchise holder, or to any person, firm or corporation, acting for him directly or indirectly and any such grant in violation of the prohibition shall be absolutely void. No franchise, privilege or easement granted by the City of Sapulpa shall ever be used or operated so as to extend or enlarge any other franchise or privilege as granted by said City, and any violation of this prohibition shall operate as a forfeiture of each and all such franchises, privileges and easements.  
Sec. 5. - Rights reserved by Council. 
No franchise shall hereafter be granted that does not contain a provision reserving to the City the right through its Board of Councilors, to determine, fix, or regulate the charges, fares, and rates to be charged by the person, firm or corporation under said franchise, and to prescribe the equipment and kind of service to be furnished by such person, firm or corporation, and the manner in which it shall be rendered; and from time to time to alter or change such rules and regulations and compensation. The Board shall make rules and regulations granting a fair hearing to persons or corporations to be affected by said regulations and no change in regulations shall be adopted except after a fair hearing; provided, that in adopting such regulations and in fixing or changing such compensations, or determining the reasonableness thereof, no stocks or bonds authorized or issued by any corporation enjoying a franchise shall be considered, unless upon proof that the same have been actually issued by the corporation for money paid and used for the development of the corporate property by the labor done, or property actually received in accordance with the laws and Constitution of the State applicable thereto; and in order to ascertain all facts necessary for a proper understanding of what is, or should be a reasonable rate or regulation, the board shall have the full power to inspect books and compel attendance of witnesses, and may prescribe penalties for failure or refusal to attend and testify or produce books.  
Sec. 6. - Transportation franchise. 
Any franchise or right which may hereafter be granted to any person or corporation or operate a street railway within the City or its suburbs shall be subject to the condition that the Board of Councilors shall have the right to any other person or corporation desiring to build or operate a street railway or interurban railway within the City of Sapulpa, the right to operate its cars over the tracks of the said street railway insofar as may be necessary to enter the City, and to reach the section thereof used by business purposes, provided, that the person or corporation desiring to operate its cars over the lines of said street railway shall first agree in writing with the owner thereof to pay it reasonable compensation within sixty (60) days from offering in writing to do so, as to terms and conditions for the use of its tracks and facilities. And if the person or persons desiring to use the same cannot agree with the owners of said street railway as to said compensation of the use of said tracks and facilities, then the Board of Councilors shall by resolution after the fair hearing to the parties concerned, fix the terms and conditions of such use and compensation to be paid therefor, which award of the board, when so made shall be binding on and observed by the parties concerned.  
Sec. 7. - Vote on franchise. 
All franchises shall be granted, extended, or renewed only with the approval of a majority of the qualified electors residing within the corporate limits of the City, who shall vote thereon. Whenever the Board of Councilors is petitioned by any person, firm or corporation for a franchise or for extension or renewal of any existing franchise such petitioner shall file with the petition an agreement that they will pay the expenses of any special election, and shall deposit with the City Clerk a certified check for the amount which shall be estimated by the Board necessary for holding such election. Thereupon the Mayor and Board of Councilors shall cause thirty (30) days' notice to be given in a daily newspaper of the City of such special election, and if the majority of the qualified voters residing in the City who vote upon the question shall vote in favor thereof, the franchise shall be granted, extended or renewed by the board at its next succeeding regular meeting; provided, that no franchise shall be granted to any non-resident of the State or any foreign corporation until such foreign corporation shall have domesticated according to the provisions of the laws of the State of Oklahoma.  
Sec. 8. - Petition for franchise. 
The qualified electors of the City may demand that a franchise be granted, extended, or renewed by filing with the Mayor, a petition signed by electors equal in number to twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of votes cast at the preceding general municipal election. The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one (1) paper, but each signer shall add to his signature his place of residence, giving the street number. Each such paper shall be verified in the manner prescribed by the Initiative and Referendum Laws of the State. The Mayor shall cause the City Clerk to immediately examine and from the registration ascertain whether or not said petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified voters, and the City Clerk shall attach to said petition his certificate showing the result of his examination. If the petition shall be found sufficient, the Mayor shall within ten (10) days after filing the same with him, call a special election at which shall be submitted the question of whether or not such franchise shall be granted, extended or renewed, and if at said election, a majority of said electors voting thereon shall vote for the grant, extension or renewal of such franchise, the same shall be granted by the Board of Councilors at the next succeeding regular meeting of that body.  
Sec. 9. - No sub-leasing of granted franchise. 
No franchise granted by the City shall ever be leased, assigned, or otherwise alienated without the expressed written consent of the City, authorized by ordinance, and no use of estoppel shall ever be invoked against the City asserting the invalidity of any attempted transfer in violation of this section.  
Sec. 10. - Repealed. 
(Effective, 2014)  
Sec. 11. - Purchase of franchise. 
Every grant for a franchise or right shall provide that the City may, upon the payment therefor of its fair valuation, to be made as provided in the grant, purchase and take over the property and plant of the grantee in whole or in part. The procedure to affect such purchase shall be prescribed by ordinances.  
Sec. 12. - Arbitration of differences. 
All holders of grants or franchises granted by the City of Sapulpa shall submit to the Board of Arbitration of all differences that may arise between themselves and their employees that cannot be adjusted by mutual agreement; the manner of selecting the board shall be as follows: The holder or holders of such grant or franchise shall select one (1) disinterested person, and the employees of such grant or franchise company shall also select one (1) disinterested person, and the two (2) selected shall select a third disinterested person to constitute the Board of Arbitration to decide the question in dispute. The decision and findings of such board shall be binding on both parties to the controversy. If either party shall not consent to the findings of said Board of Arbitration, such question in controversy shall be referred to the State Board of Arbitration and Conciliation.  
Sec. 13. - Annual payment to city. 
All franchises hereafter granted, extended, or renewed shall contain a provision that the franchise holders, or their assigns and successors shall pay to the City a sum not less than three (3) percent of the gross receipts of the business pursued by the holder of the franchise. The amount of said bonus or compensation shall be fixed by ordinance granting the franchise and shall be payable quarterly each year. Said bonus or compensation shall be in addition to all lawful ad valorem taxes upon the values of the franchise or other property of the holder thereof, and the lawful occupation taxes imposed upon the occupation or calling of the holder of such franchise. In order to ascertain the true amount of such gross receipts and to determine the amount of such bonus or compensation, and for the purpose of fixing rates and regulating charges, the Board of Councilors shall have power to examine the books, papers, and records of the franchise holders, and to take testimony and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, and regulations as said Board may adopt, and should any franchise holder refuse inspection of its books, papers, and records or the production of the same when lawfully required to do so by said board or should any officer, agent, or employee of said franchise holder refuse to give testimony before said Board of Councilors, then the board shall have power, by ordinance, to declare the franchise privilege enjoyed by such corporation or person so in default, annulled, and terminated.  
ARTICLE XIII. - THE RECALL 
 
Sec. 1. - The recall. 
The holder of any elective office may be removed for just cause at any time by the electors qualified to vote for the successor of such incumbent. Just cause for recall is any act or acts of malfeasance or any act or acts of misfeasance by the elective official while in office. For the purposes of this section, "misfeasance" or "malfeasance" in office means any wrongful conduct that affects, interrupts, or interferes with the performance of official duty. Additionally, "misfeasance" in office means the performance of a duty in an improper manner, and "malfeasance" in office means the commission of an unlawful act. "Violation of the oath of office" means the neglect or knowing failure by an elective public officer to perform faithfully a duty imposed by law. The procedure to effect the removal of an incumbent of an elective office shall be as follows: Petitions filed by the electors entitled to vote for a successor to the incumbent sought to be removed, equal in number to at least twenty-five (25) percent of the registered voters of the ward of the Councilor or Councilors to be recalled, shall be filed with the City Clerk, who shall immediately refer it to the Board of Councilors, which board shall within ten (10) days after receipt thereof, examine and pass upon the sufficiency of said petition; provided further, the said petition shall contain a specific statement of the act or acts complained of in concise language, give a detailed description including the approximate date, location, and nature of each act complained of, signed by the person or persons making the charge, give their respective residence addresses, and be verified under oath that the person or persons believe the charge or charges to be true and have knowledge of the alleged facts upon which the stated grounds for recall are based. The signatures to the petitions need not be appended to on paper, but each signer shall show his place of residence, and his qualifications to vote at such election and that he is familiar with the contents of the petition. The person circulating each such paper shall make an oath before an officer, competent to administer oaths, that the statements therein made are true and that each signature to the petition appended is a genuine signature of the person whose name purports to be thereunto subscribed, and the same circulated and signed within sixty (60) days. 
(Amended, effective 2014)  
Sec. 2. - Sufficiency of petition. 
If the petition is found insufficient it shall be returned to the person filing the petition with a statement of the present reasons for such return, but without prejudice to the filing of new or amended petitions within ten (10) days to the same effect; if the petition or amended petition shall be found sufficient, the Board of Councilors, by resolution or ordinance, shall order and fix a date for a recall election, which shall be held at the earliest date permitted under the laws of the State of Oklahoma. There shall be no primary election. The recall election shall be an election to fill the office or offices held by the incumbent or incumbents sought to be recalled. Any qualified person including the incumbent(s) may file for the office or offices. The candidate(s) receiving the greatest number of votes for the office or offices in the recall election shall be elected. If at such election some other person than the incumbent(s) shall receive the highest number of votes, the incumbent(s) shall thereupon be deemed removed from office and shall vacate the office after the said election is certified to the City; otherwise the incumbent(s) shall remain in office. The successor of any officer removed shall hold office during the unexpired term of his predecessor. Any person sought to be removed may be a candidate to succeed himself, and unless requested not to do so by the incumbent, the City Clerk shall place his name on the official ballot without nomination. 
(Amended, effective 2014)  
ARTICLE XIV. - PUBLIC WORKS 
 
Sec. 1. - Repealed. 
(Effective 1996)  
Sec. 2. - Paving. 
Until otherwise provided by ordinance the general laws of the State of Oklahoma relating to cities of the first class as now in force by the session laws and the amendments thereto of the State of Oklahoma, or as the same as may be hereafter amended, shall govern the paving of streets, avenues, alleys, lanes, places, and courts of the City of Sapulpa, and the Board of Councilors shall adopt such ordinances, rules, and regulations as are necessary for the construction of any paving in the City of Sapulpa, and for the inspection of the same in accordance with the laws of the State governing paving. The general care and supervision of all paving shall be vested in the City Manager.  
Sec. 3. - Acquisition of property—Public utilities. 
Said City shall have power, to construct, condemn, purchase, acquire, lease, improve, add to, maintain, and conduct and operate, in whole or in part, waterworks, light plants, telephone systems, power plants, transportation systems, heating plants, incinerating plants, and any other public utility or works, or ways local in use, and everything required therefor for the use of said City and the inhabitants thereof. Any such systems, plants, works or ways, or any contracts in relation or connection therewith which may exist and which said City may desire to purchase in whole or in part, may be purchased by proceedings at law or in equity by right of eminent domain, and said City shall have the power to issue bonds upon the vote of the tax paying electors at any special or general election in any amount necessary to carry out any of said powers or purposes, said amount being alone limited by the Constitution and the laws of the State of Oklahoma.  
Sec. 4. - Accounts of municipally owned utilities. 
Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City, distinct from other City accounts and in such manner as to show the true and complete financial result of such City ownership or ownership and operation, including all assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. Such accounts shall show the actual cost to the City of each public utility owned; the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements; all expenses of maintenance and renewals; the amounts set aside for sinking fund purposes; and, in case of City operation, all operation expenses of every description. The accounts shall show as nearly as possible the value of any service furnished to, or rendered by, any such public utility, by or to any other City or government department. The accounts shall also show proper allowance for depreciation, insurance and interest and the investment and estimates of the amount of taxes that would be chargeable against the property if privately owned. The Mayor and Board of Councilors shall annually cause to be made and printed for public distribution a report showing the financial result of such City ownership, or ownership and operation which report shall give the information specified in this section and such other information as the Mayor and the Council shall deem expedient.  
Sec. 5. - Basis for charge for service. 
In the operation of any public utility or business owned by the City, if the funds invested therein by the proceeds of the sale of bonds issued by the City, the rate of toll or charges for the commodity and service furnished shall be based on not less than the cost of production of such commodity and service furnished plus three (3) percent per year on the investment; provided, that in determining the cost of such commodity and service, a sufficient deduction must first be made from the annual gross earnings to pay, (i) the annual interest of said bonds; (ii) to create a sinking fund sufficient to retire said bonds at maturity; (iii) to create depreciation reserve fund sufficient for the maintenance of the plant or plants occasioned by exhaustion, wear and tear of the physical property. It is intended by this section that the Mayor and Council and the City Manager shall institute and put into effect the system herein described as soon as it may be practicable, and it is the belief of the citizens that such system should be and can be put into effect gradually and in the course of three (3) to five (5) years that system should be fully installed.  
ARTICLE XV. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Ordinances in force. 
All City ordinances, resolutions, and other regulations, now in force, not inconsistent herewith, shall be and remain in force after this Charter takes effect until changed or repealed by the proper authority; and all rights vested under any former act or regulation, when this takes effect, shall not be lost, impaired, or discharged thereby.  
Sec. 2. - Separation of parts of the Charter. 
If any section or part of any section of this Charter shall be found inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma, not relating to cities of the first class, said portion shall be held void, and shall not be considered a part of this Charter, and shall in no way affect the validity of any other portion of this Charter.  
Sec. 3. - Effective date of Charter. 
This Charter shall take effect immediately on its approval by the governor as provided by law.  
Sec. 4. - Definitions of terms. 
Whenever in this Charter the word "City" may be used, it shall be understood to, and shall be construed to mean the City of Sapulpa. Whenever in this Charter the word "Board" appears, it shall be understood to, and shall be construed to mean the Board of Councilors of the City of Sapulpa. Whenever the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma or in the laws thereof relating to cities of the first class, or any ordinance of the City of Sapulpa continued in force, reference shall be made to the City Council, or to the Mayor and Councilmen or the legislative body of the City, such reference shall be deemed to be and is made to mean the "Board of Councilors."  
Sec. 5. - Oath of office. 
The Mayor, Councilors, the City Clerk, the Auditor, Municipal Court Judge, and the City Manager shall have the power and they are hereby authorized to administer oaths in all municipal affairs and government of the City.  
Sec. 6. - Mayor may pardon. 
The Mayor shall have the power, by and with the consent of the Board of Councilors, to remit fines and grant pardons after convictions for offenses arising under the violations of ordinances of the City.  
Sec. 7. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end with the last day of June of the succeeding year.  
Sec. 8. - Workday for city employees. 
Article XXII of the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma providing that "eight hours shall constitute a day's work in all cases of employment by and on behalf of the State or any County or Municipality" is hereby adopted insofar as the same relates to municipalities, and the same is hereby made a part of the Charter Law of the City of Sapulpa.  
Sec. 9. - Repealed. 
(Effective 1996)  
Sec. 10. - Nepotism. 
No person who is related within the third (3rd) degree by affinity or consanguinity to the Mayor or to any of the Councilors shall be appointed or employed in any service on behalf of the City, unless the person shall have been appointed or employed prior to the commencement of the term of the Councilors or Mayor to whom he is related.  
Sec. 11. - Power to enforce fines, etc. 
Any violation to the provisions of this Charter or of any of the ordinances of the City which now exist or may hereafter be adopted is hereby declared an offense and the person committing such offense shall be liable to such fine or imprisonment or both fine and imprisonment, as may be prescribed by ordinance.  
Sec. 12. - Continuation of employees. 
All officers, appointees, and employees of the City of Sapulpa, except the elective officers, shall continue in their offices and employment upon the adoption of this amended Charter until their successors are chosen and qualified, or until their services are dispensed with by order of the Board of Councilors or the City Manager.  
Sec. 13. - Continuation of elective officers. 
The elective officers of the City of Sapulpa, in office when this amended Charter takes effect, shall continue in office, and continue to exercise all the powers and duties conferred upon them by the Charter, the amendments thereof and ordinances of the City of Sapulpa in force prior to the approval of this amended Charter by the Governor of the State of Oklahoma until the first Tuesday in May, 1922, and until the election and qualification of the elective officers provided herein, which said Charter, the amendments thereof, and said ordinances, insofar as they provide for the duties, powers and compensation of such officers are hereby continued in force and effect until the first Tuesday in May, 1922, and until the election and qualification of said officers provided for herein.  
Sec. 14. - Gender. 
When the masculine gender is used in this Charter, it shall also include the feminine unless the masculine alone is clearly indicated.  
Sec. 15. - Charter review. 
It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Councilors to review the Charter of the City of Sapulpa at least every ten (10) years from the date of the 1984 Revision.  
Sec. 16. - Council. 
When the terms "Commission," "Board of Commissioners" and "Commissioner" are used they shall now be amended to refer to "Council" and "Councilor" whenever found in said Charter. 
(New, effective 1996)  
ARTICLE XVI. - ADOPTION OF CHARTER 
 
Sec. 1. - Separability of Charter. 
The invalidity of any section, paragraph, or part thereof of this Charter shall not affect the remaining portion thereof.  
Sec. 2. - No loss of rights by new Charter. 
Nor any existing right, actions, suit, proceedings, contracts, or claims shall be affected by the change in the form of government of the City of Sapulpa, but all shall continue as if no change of government had taken place.  
Sec. 3. - All rights are protected. 
The adoption and approval of this amended Charter shall not affect any accrued right, penalty incurred, or proceedings begun by virtue of any provision of the Charter, amendments thereof or ordinances in effect prior to the amended Charter becoming effective.  
Sec. 4. - All ordinances, etc., stay in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, including those levying and providing for taxes and special assessments, in force when this amended Charter takes effect and not repugnant hereto or otherwise inapplicable, shall remain in force in the City of Sapulpa until they expire by their own limitations, are altered or repealed.  
Sec. 5. - Original Charter repealed. 
The original Charter of the City of Sapulpa prepared by the freeholders approved by the Governor of the State of Oklahoma, all amendments thereof, are hereby repealed; and the above and foregoing articles and sections are adopted as an amendment of, and a substitute for the said Charter and all amendments thereto.  
ARTICLE XVII. - ADOPTION OF 1985 CHARTER REVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - No loss of rights by Charter revision. 
No existing right, actions, suit, proceedings, contracts or claims shall be effected by the amendments and repealers adopted in the 1985 Charter Revision election.  
Sec. 2. - All rights protected. 
The adoption and approval of the amendments and repealers in the 1985 Charter Revision shall not affect any accrued right, penalty incurred, or proceedings begun by virtue of any provision of the Charter, amendments thereof or ordinances in effect prior to the Charter revision of 1985 becoming effective.  
Sec. 3. - All ordinances, etc., to stay in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, including those levying and providing for taxes and special assessments, in force when those amendments approved in the 1985 Charter Revision take effect and not repugnant hereto or otherwise inapplicable, shall remain in force in the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, until they expire by their own limitations, are altered or repealed.  
Sec. 4. - Repugnant portions repealed. 
Any and all portions of the Charter of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, and all amendments thereto existent prior to the 1985 Charter Revision, which are inconsistent or repugnant to those amendments approved in said 1985 Charter Revision shall be deemed repealed by implication.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - ADOPTION OF 1996 CHARTER REVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - No loss of rights by Charter revision. 
No existing right, actions, suit, proceedings, contracts or claims shall be effected by the amendments and repealers adopted in the 1996 Charter Revision Election.  
Sec. 2. - All rights protected. 
The adoption and approval of the amendments and repealers in the 1996 Charter Revision shall not effect any accrued right, penalty incurred, or proceedings begun by virtue of any provision of the Charter, amendments thereof or ordinances in effect prior to the Charter Revision of 1996 becoming effective.  
Sec. 3. - All ordinances, etc., to stay in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, including those levying and providing for taxes and special assessments, in force when those amendments approved in the 1996 Charter Revision take effect and not repugnant hereto or otherwise inapplicable, shall remain in force in the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, until they expire by their own limitations, are altered or repealed.  
Sec. 4. - Repugnant portions repealed. 
Any and all portions of the Charter of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, and all amendments thereto existent prior to the 1996 Charter Revision, which are inconsistent or repugnant to those amendments approved in said 1996 Charter Revision shall be deemed repealed by implication.  
ARTICLE XIX. - ADOPTION OF 2002 CHARTER REVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - No loss of rights by Charter revision. 
No existing right, actions, suit, proceedings, contracts or claims shall be affected by the amendments and repealers adopted in the 2002 Charter Revision Election.  
Sec. 2. - All rights protected. 
The adoption and approval of the amendments and repealers in the 2002 Charter Revision shall not affect any accrued right, penalty incurred, or proceedings begun by virtue of any provision of the Charter, amendments thereof or ordinances in effect prior to the Charter Revision of 2002 becoming effective.  
Sec. 3. - All ordinances, etc., to stay in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, including those levying and providing for taxes and special assessments, in force when those amendments approved in the 2002 Charter Revision take affect and not repugnant hereto or otherwise inapplicable, shall remain in force in the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, until they expire by their own limitations, are altered or repealed.  
Sec. 4. - Repugnant portions repealed. 
Any and all portions of the Charter of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, and all amendments thereto existent prior to the 2002 Charter Revision, which are inconsistent or repugnant to those amendments approved in said 2002 Charter Revision shall be deemed repealed by implication.  
ARTICLE XX. - ADOPTION OF 2005 CHARTER REVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - No loss of rights by Charter revision. 
No existing right, actions, suit, proceedings, contracts or claims shall be effected by the amendments and repealers adopted in the 2005 Charter Revision Election.  
Sec. 2. - All rights protected. 
The adoption and approval of the amendments and repealers in the 2005 Charter Revision shall not affect any accrued right, penalty incurred, or proceedings begun by virtue of any provision of the Charter, amendments thereof or ordinances in effect prior to the Charter Revision of 2005 becoming effective.  
Sec. 3. - All ordinances, etc., to stay in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, including those levying and providing for taxes and special assessments, in force when those amendments approved in the 2005 Charter Revision take effect and not repugnant hereto or otherwise inapplicable, shall remain in force in the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, until they expire by their own limitations, are altered or repealed.  
Sec. 4. - Repugnant portions repealed. 
Any and all portions of the Charter of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, and all amendments thereto existent prior to the 2005 Charter Revision, which are inconsistent or repugnant to those amendments approved in said 2005 Charter Revision shall be deemed repealed by implication.  
ARTICLE XXI. - ADOPTION OF 2014 CHARTER REVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - No loss of rights by Charter revision. 
No existing right, actions, suit, proceedings, contracts or claims shall be effected by the amendments and repealers adopted in the 2005 Charter Revision Election.  
Sec. 2. - All rights protected. 
The adoption and approval of the amendments and repealers in the 2014 Charter Revision shall not affect any accrued right, penalty incurred, or proceedings begun by virtue of any provision of the Charter, amendments thereof or ordinances in effect prior to the Charter Revision of 2014 becoming effective.  
Sec. 3. - All ordinances, etc., to stay in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, including those levying and providing for taxes and special assessments, in force when those amendments approved in the 2014 Charter Revision take effect and not repugnant hereto or otherwise inapplicable, shall remain in force in the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, until they expire by their own limitations, are altered or repealed.  
Sec. 4. - Repugnant portions repealed. 
Any and all portions of the Charter of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, and all amendments thereto existent prior to the 2014 Charter Revision, which are inconsistent or repugnant to those amendments approved in said 2014 Charter Revision shall be deemed repealed by implication.  
Part 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
CHAPTER 1. - USE AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE CODE 
 
Sec. 1-101. - How Code designated and cited. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Sapulpa City Code," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Adoption and revision of codes of ordinances, 11 O.S. §§ 14-108, 14-109.  
Sec. 1-102. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules are observed unless the construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council: 
Business manager. See "City Manager"; 
Citizen means a resident of the City of Sapulpa unless the context plainly requires a broader meaning; 
City or "city shall be construed as if the words "of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, followed them; 
City Council or "Council or "Councilors means the Board of Councilors of the City of Sapulpa; 
Computation of time means whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which the notice is given or the act is done shall be counted in computing the time but the day on which the proceeding is to be had shall not be counted; 
County or this County means the County of Creek, Oklahoma; 
Gender means importing one (1) gender only shall extend and be applied to other genders and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well; 
Joint authority means "giving joint authority" to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers; 
Law means and includes applicable federal law, provisions of the Constitution and statutes of the State of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the City, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder; 
Manager or City Manager means the City Manager of the City; 
May, the word "may" is permissive; 
Mayor means the Mayor of the City, the person serving as Mayor pursuant to the City Charter, state law and the State Constitution; 
Month means a calendar month; 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases which are not specifically defined shall be construed according to the common and accepted usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning; 
Number means a word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. Words used in the plural number may also include the singular unless a contrary intention plainly appears; 
Oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed"; 
Or, and or may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it; 
Other officials or officers, etc. whenever reference is made to officers, agencies, or departments by title only, i.e. "Clerk", "City Clerk", "City Attorney", "Fire Chief," "Chief of Police", etc., they shall mean the officers, agencies, or departments of the City; 
Person shall extend and be applied to an actual person, any persons and to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them, unless a contrary intention plainly appears; 
Preceding, following means next before and next after, respectively; 
Property means real and personal property; 
Shall means mandatory and not permissive; 
Signature or subscription includes a mark when a person cannot write; 
State or "this state means the State of Oklahoma; 
Statutory references means references to statutes of the State of Oklahoma as they now are or as they may be amended to be; 
Street means any streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, highways, courts, places, squares, curbs, and all other public ways in the City which are dedicated and open to public use; 
Tense means words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present; 
Week means seven (7) days; and 
Year means a calendar year. 
(Prior Code, Sections. 1-2, in part)  
Sec. 1-103. - Headings of sections; citations. 
The headings of sections in this Code are printed in capital letters and citations included at the end of sections are intended to indicate the contents of the section and original historical source respectively, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles and official sources of such sections; nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections, including the headings, or citations, are amended or re-enacted.  
Sec. 1-104. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
A.  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
B.  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-105. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code or of any ordinance in the code shall be declared unconstitutional, illegal, or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code of Ordinances.  
Sec. 1-106. - Amendment to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
A.  All ordinances passed subsequent to this City Code which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code of ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or subsection or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
B.  Amendments to any of the provisions of this City Code may be made by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, that Section _____ of the Sapulpa City Code is hereby amended to read as follows:" (Set out new provisions in full.) 
C.  When the City Council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the Councilors desire to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language may be made part of the ordinance: 
"Section _____ Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Sapulpa City Code, and the sections of this ordinance may be re-numbered to accomplish this intention." 
D.  All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed may be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
State Law reference— 11 O.S. § 14-103 et seq.  
Sec. 1-107. - Altering Code. 
It is unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code.  
Sec. 1-108. - General penalty. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by state law or this Code, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in the City Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) and court costs as set by the City. Each day or any portion of a day during which any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Provided further that the City Attorney is authorized to make application in the prosecution of any offense for an increased or enhanced penalty upon filing of a separate information or complaint in which case said offense shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or thirty (30) days in jail, or both, plus court costs as set by the City. 
B.  Any person who shall aid, abet, or assist in the violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 2505, 11/06/2006) 
State Law reference— 11 O.S. § 14-111.  
Sec. 1-109. - Fines recoverable by civil action. 
All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law.  
Sec. 1-110. - Ordinances in effect in outlying territory of City. 
All ordinances of the City now in effect within the City are hereby extended to all real property belonging to or under the control of the City outside the corporate limits of the City, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar as they are applicable. All ordinances of the City which shall go into effect in the future, shall also apply to, and be in full effect within the boundaries of all outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable. Any words in any ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance provision is limited to the corporate limits of the City shall be deemed to mean and include also the outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the City, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.  
CHAPTER 2. - CORPORATE AND WARD LIMITS 
 
Sec. 1-201. - Map of City designated as official map. 
The map of the City showing its territorial limits is hereby designated as the official map of the City, and the corporate limits as shown thereon are declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the City, including all annexations made to the City through and including the date of July 1, 2010.  
Sec. 1-202. - Ward number and boundaries. 
The City shall be divided into five (5) wards as follows: 
A.  Ward 1 shall consist of that area and portion of the City of Sapulpa within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at a point being the intersection of the centerlines of West Taft Avenue and South Oklahoma Street; thence east along the centerline of West Taft Avenue to the centerline of South Hickory Street; thence south along the centerline of South Hickory Street to the center of Rock Creek; thence easterly along the center of Rock Creek to the centerline of US Highway 75 Alternate, also being South Main Street; thence south, southeasterly along the centerline of US Highway 75 Alternate to the east line of Section 11, Township 17 North, Range 11 East also being the Sapulpa City limits boundary; thence north along said east line of Section 11 to the southeast corner of Section 2, Township 17 North, Range 11 East; thence north along the east line of said Section 2 to the southwest corner of the Northwest Quarter of Section 1, Township 17 North, Range 11 East; thence east along the south line of said Northwest Quarter to the intersection of the centerlines of East Goodykoontz and South Apple Street; thence north along the centerline of South Apple Street to the centerline of East Davis Avenue; thence west along the centerline of East Davis Avenue to the centerline of South Adams Street; thence north along the centerline of South Adams Street to the centerline of East Taft Avenue; thence east along the centerline of East Taft Avenue to the centerline of South Watchorn Street; thence north along the centerline of South Watchorn Street to the centerline of East Grayson Avenue; thence west along the centerline of East Grayson Avenue approximately eighty (80) feet to the centerline of an unnamed street; thence north along said unnamed street approximately three hundred eighty (380) feet; thence east approximately eighty (80) feet to the centerline of South Watchorn Street; thence north along the centerline of South Watchorn Street to the centerline of East Dewey Avenue; thence west along East Dewey Avenue to the centerline of North Mission Street; thence south along the centerline of North Mission Street to the centerline of East Dewey Avenue; thence west along the centerline of East Dewey Avenue to the centerline of South Main Street; thence south along the centerline of South Main Street to the centerline of West Bryan Avenue; thence west along the centerline of West Bryan Avenue to the centerline of South Oklahoma Street; thence south along the centerline of South Oklahoma Street to the centerline of West Taft Avenue, also being the point of beginning. 
B.  Ward 2 shall consist of that area and portion of the City of Sapulpa within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of Wickham Road and the centerline of State Highway 117; thence south along the centerline of Wickham Road approximately one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet to the Sapulpa City limits boundary; thence west and in a clockwise direction following the Sapulpa City limits boundary and the Sapulpa fence line to the intersection of the centerlines of North Mission Street and East Denton Avenue; thence south along the centerline of North Mission Street to the centerline of East Dewey Avenue; thence west along the centerline of East Dewey Avenue to the centerline of North Main Street; thence south along the centerline of North Main Street to the centerline of West Bryan Avenue; thence west along the centerline of West Bryan Avenue to the centerline of South Oklahoma Street to the centerline of West Taft Avenue; thence west along the centerline of West Taft Avenue, also being State Highway 117, to the centerline of Wickham Road, also being the point of beginning. 
Together with other strips of land generally and commonly referred to as the Sapulpa fence line, and other lands within the corporate limits of the City of Sapulpa and attached thereto described as follows: 
The south sixty-seven (67) feet of the north half of Section 15 Township 17 North Range 11 East less the east three hundred one (301) feet thereof. 
The west sixty-seven (67) feet of the South half of Section 6, Township 17 North, Range 11 East. 
The west sixty-seven (67) feet of Sections 7, 18, and 19, Township 17 North, Range 11 East. 
The south sixty-seven (67) feet of Section 19, Township 17 North, Range 11 East less the west sixty-seven (67) feet thereof. 
The west sixty-seven (67) feet of Section 29, Township 17 North, Range 11 East less the north sixty-seven (67) feet thereof and less the south sixty-seven (67) feet thereof. 
The south sixty-seven (67) feet of Sections 29, 28, and 27, Township 17 North, Range 11 East. 
The east three hundred one (301) feet of Sections 27, 22, and 15, Township 17 North, Range 11 East less the south 540 feet of the east 204 feet of Section 27, Township 17 North, Range 11 East. 
The south one hundred twenty (120) feet of Section 10, Township 17 North, Range 11 East. 
C.  Ward 3 shall consist of that area and portion of the City of Sapulpa within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at a point being the Sapulpa City limits boundary at the southeast corner of Section 11, Township 17 North, Range 11 East; thence west along said Section 11 south boundary to the centerline of South Hickory Street; thence north approximately one hundred twenty (120) feet along the centerline of South Hickory Street to the northeast corner of Oklahoma House District 29; thence west along the north boundary of said District 29 to the west line of Section 10, Township 17 North, Range 11 East; thence north along the west line of said Section 10 to the centerline of Teel Road; thence north along the centerline of Wickham Road to the southeast corner of the north half of the Southeast Quarter of Section 4, Township 17 North, Range 11 East; thence west along the south line of the north half of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 4, also being the south boundary of The Lakes at Jefferson Heights subdivision to the southwest corner of said subdivision; thence north along the west boundary of said subdivision to the northwest corner of said subdivision; thence east along the north boundary of said subdivision to the centerline of Wickham Road; thence north along the centerline of Wickham Road to the centerline of State Highway 117; thence east along the centerline of State Highway 117, also being West Taft Avenue, to the centerline of South Hickory Street; thence south along the centerline of South Hickory Street to the center of Rock Creek; thence easterly along the center of Rock Creek to the centerline of US Highway 75 Alternate, also being South Main Street; thence south, southeasterly along the centerline of US Highway 75 Alternate to the east line of Section 11, Township 17 North, Range 11 East; thence south along said east line of Section 11 to the southeast corner of said Section 11; also being the point of beginning. 
D.  Ward 4 shall consist of that area and portion of the City of Sapulpa within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of North Mission Street and the centerline of East James Avenue; thence east along the centerline of East James Avenue to the Burlington Northern Railroad; thence northeasterly along said Railroad approximately four hundred thirty (430) feet; thence east approximately three hundred forty-five feet to the centerline of North Ridgeway Street; thence north along the centerline of North Ridgeway Street to the centerline of East Hill Avenue; thence east and south along the centerline of East Hill Avenue to the centerline of East James Avenue; thence west along the centerline of East James Avenue to the centerline of North Brown Street; thence south along the centerline of North Brown Street to the centerline of East Cobb Avenue; thence east along the centerline of East Cobb Avenue to the centerline of North Moccasin Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of North Moccasin Street to the centerline of Skyline Circle; thence east along the centerline of Skyline Circle approximately three hundred eighty (380) feet to a point; thence continuing east approximately two hundred (200) feet to the center of Polecat Creek; thence east, southeasterly along the center of Polecat Creek to the centerline of East Taft Avenue; thence east along the centerline of East Taft Avenue, also being West 121st Street South to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 4, Township 17 North, Range 12 East; thence south three hundred one (301) feet; thence west to the west line of said Section 4; thence continuing west approximately two thousand (2,000) feet to a point; thence south approximately one thousand one hundred (1,100) feet to a point; thence west approximately six hundred sixty (660) feet to a point; thence north to a point three hundred one (301) feet south of the north line Section 5, Township 17 North, Range 12 East; thence west to the west line of Section 6, Township 17 North, Range 12 East also being the Sapulpa City limits boundary, also being the centerline of Brenner Road; thence south along the centerline of Brenner Road, to the centerline of Woodland Road; thence continuing south along the east line of said Section 1 to the southeast corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 1; thence west along the south line of said Northeast Quarter to the centerline of South Apple Street; thence north along the centerline of South Apple Street to the centerline of East Davis Avenue to the centerline of South Adams Street; thence north along the centerline of South Adams Street to the centerline of East Taft Avenue; thence east along the centerline of East Taft Avenue to the centerline of South Watchorn Street; thence north along the centerline of South Watchorn Street to the centerline of East Grayson Avenue; thence west along the centerline of East Grayson Avenue approximately eighty (80) feet to the centerline of an unnamed street; thence north along said unnamed street approximately three hundred eighty (380) feet; thence east approximately eighty (80) feet to the centerline of South Watchorn Street; thence north along the centerline of South Watchorn Street to the centerline of East Dewey Avenue; thence west along East Dewey Avenue to the centerline of North Mission Street; thence north along the centerline of North Mission Street and the Sapulpa City limit boundary to the centerline of East James Avenue, also being the point of beginning. 
Together with other strips of land generally and commonly referred to as the Sapulpa fence line, and other lands within the corporate limits of the City of Sapulpa and attached thereto described as follows: 
The south three hundred one (301) feet of Section 12, Township 17 North, Range 11 East less the east three hundred one (301) feet thereof. 
The east three hundred one (301) feet of Section 12, Township 17 North, Range 11 East. 
The east three hundred one (301) feet of the south half of Section 1, Township 17 North, Range 11 East. 
The east three hundred one (301) feet of Sections 4 and 9, Township 17 North, Range 12 East. 
The south three hundred one (301) feet of Section 7, Township 17 North, Range 12 East. 
The east sixty-seven (67) feet of Sections 13, 24, and 25, Township 17 North, Range 11 East. 
The south sixty-seven (67) feet of Section 25, Township 17 North, Range 11 East less the east sixty-seven (67) feet thereof. 
The south sixty-seven (67) feet of Section 26, Township 17 North, Range 11 East. 
E.  Ward 5 shall consist of that area and portion of the City of Sapulpa within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of North Mission Street, also being Highway 66, and the centerline of East James Avenue; thence east along the centerline of East James Avenue to the Burlington Northern Railroad; thence northeasterly along said Railroad approximately four hundred thirty (430) feet; thence east approximately three hundred forty-five (345) feet to the centerline of North Ridgeway Street; thence north along the centerline of North Ridgeway Street to the centerline of East Hill Avenue; thence east and south along the centerline of East Hill Avenue to the centerline of East James Street; thence west along the centerline of East James Street to the centerline of North Brown Street; thence south along the centerline of North Brown Street to the centerline of East Cobb Avenue; thence east along the centerline of East Cobb Avenue to the centerline of North Moccasin Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of North Moccasin Street to the centerline of Skyline Circle; thence east along the centerline of Skyline Circle approximately three hundred eighty (380) feet to a point; thence continuing east approximately two hundred (200) feet to the center of Polecat Creek; thence south, east and southeasterly along the center of Polecat Creek to the centerline of East Taft Avenue; thence east along the centerline of East Taft Avenue, also being West 121st Street and Highway 117 to the centerline of South 39th West Avenue, thence continuing east approximately six hundred fifty (650) feet to a point, thence north approximately two thousand three hundred ten (2,310) feet to a point, thence east approximately one thousand one hundred ninety-four (1,194) feet to a point, thence south approximately two thousand three hundred ten (2,310) feet to a point, thence east to the centerline of South 33rd West Avenue, also being the Creek/Tulsa County boundary, and the east boundary of the Sapulpa fence line; thence north along the Sapulpa fence line to the centerline of West 61st Street South; thence west along the centerline of West 61st Street South, also being the north boundary of the Sapulpa fence line to the City of Sapulpa boundary; thence northeasterly along the City of Sapulpa boundary to the centerline of West 51st Street South; thence southwesterly along the City of Sapulpa boundary to the centerline of 49th West Avenue, thence north approximately three hundred forty (340) feet to a point, thence following in a counter clockwise direction the City of Sapulpa boundary back to a point at the intersection of the centerlines of 49th West Avenue and Southwest Boulevard, thence continuing southwesterly along the City of Sapulpa boundary to the centerline of West 61st Street South; thence continuing southwest along the City of Sapulpa boundary to the intersection of North Mission Street and the centerline of East James Avenue, also being the point of beginning. 
Together with other strips of land generally and commonly referred to as the Sapulpa fence line, and other lands within the corporate limits of the City of Sapulpa and attached thereto described as follows: 
The north one hundred thirty-three (133) feet of the east half Section 6, Township 18 North, Range 12 East. 
The north one hundred thirty-three (133) feet of Section 5, Township 18 North, Range 12 East beginning at the west line of said Section 5; thence east to the Sapulpa City limits boundary.  
Sec. 1-203. - Ward map. 
A.  The City Clerk shall maintain a map showing the ward boundaries of the City, and said map is designated as the official ward map of the City. 
B.  The five (5) wards constituting the City of Sapulpa shall consist of those boundaries delineated and numbered one (1) through five (5) on the official ward map of the City, as adopted by the City Council meeting in regular session on December 5, 2011. 
C.  Pursuant to state statute, the ward boundaries shall be modified if necessary to reflect population variations between such boundaries as soon as practical after the results of each federal decennial census are known, by action of the City Council. 
(Prior Code, Sections. 1-9; Ord. 1857, 02/06/1984; Ord. 1973, 09/05/1987; Ord. 2104-A, 04/05/1993; Ord. 2472, 10/10/2005; Ord. 2656, 12/05/2011) 
Editor's note— Prior Code § 1-9 amended the Code by adding provisions designated as 1-202. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated and named, the provisions have been redesignated and renamed at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference— Review of wards after each federal census, 11 O.S. Section 20-101; changing wards, 11 O.S. Sections 20-102 to 20-105.  
Part 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT  
CHAPTER 1. - GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION 
 
Sec. 2-101. - City Council-Manager form of government. 
The City is governed by a City Council which appoints a City Manager, City Attorney, City Treasurer, and Judge. The powers of the City are vested in the City Council. 
State Law reference— City Charter, 11 O.S. § 13-101 et seq.  
CHAPTER 2. - CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Composition of the City Council, Mayor, terms. 
The City Council shall consist of two (2) Councilors from each ward of the City. One (1) of the Councilors shall be elected Mayor and one (1) shall be elected Vice Mayor by a majority of the Council. The Councilors shall be elected as provided in the Charter for four-year terms. 
Charter reference— Article II of the Charter covers the City Council. Article X covers elections. Elections are nonpartisan and conducted by the county election board.  
Sec. 2-202. - Time of regular meetings of the council. 
The City Council shall hold a regular meeting on the first and third Mondays of every month at 7:00 p.m. If a meeting day falls on a legal holiday, as designated by the Council, then the meeting shall be held at a time determined by a majority vote of the Council. Such meetings may be adjourned from time to time by a majority vote of the Councilors present at such meeting. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-3)  
Sec. 2-203. - Meetings of the council. 
A.  Every meeting of the City Council shall be held in the City Hall Council meeting room and at such other places designated by the City Council, unless, in case of an emergency, the Mayor or the Councilors calling a special meeting designate another place in the City for the holding of the special meeting. The Mayor or any three (3) Councilors may call a special meeting by filing with the City Clerk a call therefor, stating the purpose of such meeting. A copy of such call shall be mailed by the City Clerk to each member at least two (2) days prior to the special meeting, and each Councilor shall also be personally notified whenever possible. The City Clerk shall keep in their office a record of the calling of all special meetings and the notice thereof given. Special meetings of the City Council may be held at any time when a quorum of members are present, and the State open meeting law is complied with. Only matters set forth in the purpose of the call of a special meeting shall be considered at such special meeting. Any adjourned meeting may be held at any other place designated by the City Council. 
B.  The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council except during his absence the Vice Mayor shall preside. In the absence of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, a Mayor pro-tem may be elected by a vote of the majority of the membership of the City Council and shall preside at such meeting. 
(Prior Code, Secs. 2-4, 2-5) 
State Law reference— Open meeting act requirements, 25 O.S. § 301 et seq.; Absence from meetings, grounds for vacancy, 11 O.S. § 8-108.  
Sec. 2-204. - Agenda, order of business. 
A.  All matters to come before the City Council shall be placed upon a written agenda which shall be prepared by the City Manager not less than three (3) days prior to the meeting date. This section shall not apply to special meetings and matters involving an emergency. 
B.  The order of business for a meeting shall be as provided on the agenda. 
(Prior Code, Secs. 2-6, 2-7)  
Sec. 2-205. - Rules of procedure. 
The City Council may determine its own rules, and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and under penalties as the City Council may prescribe.  
CHAPTER 3. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 2-301. - City Manager appointment. 
The City Council shall appoint a City Manager, who shall also be known as the City Manager, for an indefinite term by a vote of a majority of all its members. The Council shall choose the City Manager solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. 
Charter reference— See Charter on City Manager.  
Sec. 2-302. - Duties. 
The City Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer and head of the administrative branch of the City government and shall have such duties as are prescribed by the Charter and law, and as assigned by the City Council. 
Charter reference— See Charter, Section 5, on City Manager powers.  
CHAPTER 4. - CITY CLERK AND TREASURER 
 
Sec. 2-401. - City Clerk. 
The City Clerk is an officer of the City appointed by the City Manager. 
Charter reference— City Clerk office, Charter. 
State Law reference— 11 O.S. § 10-117.  
Sec. 2-402. - Duties. 
The City Clerk shall collect or receive revenue and other money for the City and shall deposit the same daily as required by law. The Clerk shall attend all City Council meetings and shall keep the journal of the proceedings of the City Council. He shall enroll in a book kept for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council. He shall keep the seal of the City and attest the signature of the Mayor. He shall perform such other duties as may be required by law or ordinance for the City Clerk, including providing a certification as to the existence of any special assessments by the City against any parcel of real estate upon receipt of the fee therefor as specified by the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 2-403. - City Treasurer, duties. 
A.  The City Treasurer is an officer of the City appointed by the City Council. 
B.  The Treasurer shall have the responsibility for the receipt, safekeeping, investment, and daily deposit of all funds coming into his hands in such depositories as the Council may designate; and shall disburse such funds in the manner provided by applicable law, ordinance, and the Charter. He shall have such other powers, duties, and functions as may be prescribed by applicable law, by ordinance, and the Charter, including but not limited to, the promulgation of rules and procedures for the receipt, handling, and deposit by City officers and employees of the City, monies into the City Treasury. He shall also provide training, technical assistance, and other support to other City departments in performing financial functions.  
CHAPTER 5. - OTHER DEPARTMENTS AND PERSONNEL 
 
Sec. 2-501. - City Attorney. 
The City Attorney is an officer of the City appointed by the City Council. He shall be licensed to practice law in this state. The City Attorney is the chief legal adviser of the Council and all other officers, departments, and agencies of the City government in matters relating to their official powers and duties. He represents the City in proceedings in the courts, and performs all services incident to his position which may be required by law or ordinance. He shall attend regular meetings of the Council and prepare ordinances for the Council. He may receive a regular salary as set by the City Council and, in addition thereto, receive reasonable fees for representing the City in lawsuits or controversies to which the City is a party, whether tried, settled or otherwise. He may provide other special services as requested by the Council or Manager. When duly authorized by the Council or Manager, the City Attorney shall receive a reasonable fee for such special services.  
Sec. 2-502. - City-County Health Department; Director. 
If so designated by the City Manager, the Cooperative Health Department of the County and its director shall have the powers of a City Health Department and City Health Officer respectively for the City. References to Health Department and Health Officer or Director of the Health Department in this Code and in other ordinances of the City mean the cooperative Health Department and its director, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning.  
Sec. 2-503. - Officers and employees; number and classes; compensation. 
The City Council, by motion, resolution, or ordinance, may regulate the number of classes of officers and positions of employment in the various departments, offices, and agencies of the City government, and may determine or regulate the compensation to be paid to officers and employees.  
Sec. 2-504. - Certain personnel to be bonded. 
A.  Before entering upon their official duties, the following personnel of the City government shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their official duties, payable to the City, with a surety company authorized to operate within the State, in such amounts as set or approved by the Council: 
1.  City Manager; 
2.  City Clerk; 
3.  City Treasurer. 
B.  The City Council, by motion or resolution, may require other officers and employees in such positions as it may designate to be bonded. 
C.  The City shall pay the premiums on the bonds. 
State Law reference— Officers designated by ordinance to give bond, City pay premium, 11 O.S. § 8-105.  
Sec. 2-505. - Oath. 
Every officer of the City as required by law, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office prescribed by the State Constitution and Charter.  
CHAPTER 6. - CITY RECORDS 
 
Sec. 2-601. - Appointment of official custodian. 
The City Clerk is hereby appointed as the official custodian for purposes of the Oklahoma Open Records Act and is charged with responsibility for compliance with that act with respect to all public records of the City. In addition, for any public record not on file in the office of the City Clerk but kept and maintained in a department of the City, the respective department head of said office shall cooperate by providing copies of any responsive document to the City Clerk upon request.  
Sec. 2-602. - Designation of additional record custodians. 
A.  The official custodian appointed in Section 2-601 of this Code is hereby authorized to designate any subordinate officers or employees to serve as record custodian. The record custodians shall have such duties and powers as are set out in the Oklahoma Open Records Act. 
B.  Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a record custodian, he or she shall notify the City Clerk of such designation and the City Clerk shall maintain a register of all such designations.  
Sec. 2-603. - Duties of custodians. 
All City officials and employees appointed or designated under this chapter shall: Protect public records from damage and disorganization; prevent excessive disruption of the essential functions of the City; provide assistance and information upon request; insure efficient and timely action and response to all applications for inspection of public records; and shall carry out the procedures adopted by the City for inspecting and copying open public records.  
Sec. 2-604. - Requests to be directed to City Clerk. 
A.  All members of the public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a public record in accordance with the provisions of the Oklahoma Open Records Act, shall address their requests to the City Clerk's office. 
B.  Whenever any City official or employee appointed or designated as a custodian under this chapter is presented with a request for access to, or copy of, a public record the person making the request shall be directed to submit the request to the City Clerk's office.  
Sec. 2-605. - Procedures regarding both inspection and copying of open public records. 
The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by the official custodian and record custodian: 
A.  Consistent with the policy, duties, and procedures established by the Oklahoma Open Records Act, the record custodian shall provide full access and assistance in a timely and efficient manner to persons who request access to open public records; 
B.  The record custodian shall protect the integrity and organization of public records with respect to the manner in which such records are inspected and copied; 
C.  The record custodian may prevent excessive disruptions of essential functions and provide the record at the earliest possible time; 
D.  All inspections and copying of open public records shall be performed by, or under the supervision of, the City Clerk or Department Head responsible for such records; 
E.  All persons requesting the inspection of or a copy of open public records shall make such request in writing prior to the request being honored, except that no form shall be required for requests made for records which have been reproduced for free public distribution; 
F.  All record inspection and copying forms are to be completed by the person requesting the record. The record custodian may demand reasonable identification of any person requesting a record; 
G.  Any fees for record inspection or for copies are due at the time the records, or copies thereof, are provided to the requester, unless the record custodian has demanded that prepayment of all or part of such fees be made. Fees are to be paid to the City Clerk or City Treasurer; 
H.  The record custodian shall demand full or partial prepayment of fees whenever the estimate for such fees exceeds the amount set out in Section 2-612 of this Code; 
I.  No record search or copying charge shall be assessed against officers or employees of the City who make requests which are reasonably necessary to the performance of their official duties; 
J.  Hours for making requests for inspection or copying shall be all regular working hours for each day the office maintains regular office hours; 
K.  Removal of open public records from the office where kept and maintained, for purposes of inspection or the making of copies, shall not be permitted; and 
L.  The above procedures, as well as any other inspection and copying procedures, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the record custodian.  
Sec. 2-606. - Procedures regarding inspection of open public records. 
The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by every official custodian and record custodian: 
A.  The record custodian shall handle all inspection requests in accordance with their duties to protect and preserve public records and to assist persons requesting inspection of open public records; 
B.  All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the record. In all cases the party so requesting must sign his or her individual name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the record custodian and presented to the record custodian; 
C.  A written request is sufficient if it reasonably describes the record sought. In instances where the requester cannot provide sufficient information to identify a record, the custodian shall assist in making such identification; and 
D.  The record custodian shall, upon making a denial of an inspection request, forward a copy of the denial to the City Manager.  
Sec. 2-607. - Procedures regarding copies of open public records. 
The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by each official custodian and record custodian: 
A.  The record custodian shall handle all copy requests in accordance with their duties to protect and preserve public records and to assist persons requesting copies of open public records; 
B.  All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the copies. In all cases the party so requesting must sign his or her individual name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the record custodian; 
C.  Mechanical reproduction of a record shall not be undertaken when it is the judgment of the record custodian that any available means of mechanically reproducing the subject record is likely to cause damage to such record; and 
D.  No copy fee shall be assessed when multiple copies of the record requested have been prepared for free public distribution, or when the record custodian determines that the cost of charging and handling the fee exceeds the cost of providing a copy without charge.  
Sec. 2-608. - No fee for inspection. 
Where a request has been made for the inspection of an open public record, no fee shall be charged.  
Sec. 2-609. - Copying fee. 
A fee per page as set by the Master Fee Schedule appended to this Code shall be charged for photocopying an open public record, such fee to cover the cost of labor, materials, and equipment.  
Sec. 2-610. - Fee for mechanical reproduction. 
For copying any open public record which cannot be reproduced by photocopying, such as a computer printout or a blueprint, the requester shall be charged the actual cost to the City, including the cost of labor, materials, and equipment.  
Sec. 2-611. - Search fee. 
A search fee shall be charged a requester who is using the record solely for a commercial purpose. Such fee shall be the actual cost to the City of producing the record, including the cost of labor, materials, and equipment.  
Sec. 2-612. - Prepayment of fees. 
The record custodian may demand prepayment of a fee whenever the estimated amount exceeds twenty dollars ($20.00). The prepayment amount shall be an estimate of the cost of copying, mechanical reproduction or searching for the record. Any overage or underage in the prepayment amount shall be settled prior to producing the requested record or delivering the copy or mechanical reproduction of the record.  
CHAPTER 7. - SOCIAL SECURITY 
 
Sec. 2-701. - Declaration of policy to come under coverage. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the City to extend, at the earliest date, to the eligible employees and officials of the City the benefits of the system of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and all amendments thereto, and Section 121 et seq. of Title 51 of the Oklahoma Statutes. In pursuance of this policy, the officers and employees of the City shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-1) 
State Law reference— Social Security coverage for local governments, 51 O.S. § 125.  
Sec. 2-702. - Execution of agreement with state agency. 
The Mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments with the State Department of Human Services to accomplish the provisions of Section 2-701 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-1)  
Sec. 2-703. - Withholdings. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purposes provided in Section 2-701 of this Code are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by the laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-1)  
Sec. 2-704. - Contributions. 
Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts appropriated for these purposes from available funds to the designated state or federal agency in accordance with applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-1)  
Sec. 2-705. - Records and reports. 
The City shall keep such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-1)  
Sec. 2-706. - Exclusions. 
Excluded from this chapter authorizing the extension of Social Security benefits to City officers and employees are the following: 
A.  Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, employee, or official covered or authorized to be covered as of the initial effective date of this chapter by any other ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the City; or 
B.  Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, employee, or official for which compensation is on a fee basis, or any position, employee, or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-1)  
CHAPTER 8. - RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS  
ARTICLE A. - FIREFIGHTERS RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-801. - Fire pension and retirement system. 
There is hereby created a local firefighter's pension and retirement board composed of the Mayor, the Clerk, and three (3) members from the fire department. The board shall have the membership, organization, powers, duties, and functions and the fund shall operate as prescribed by Section 49-103 et seq. of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. The system shall operate in accordance with applicable state law. 
State Law reference— Firefighter's retirement and pension law, joining state system, 11 O.S. § 49-101 et seq.  
ARTICLE B. - EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-810. - Employee retirement system created. 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the State and for the purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the part of City employees and thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby authorized, created, established, approved, and adopted, effective as of July 2, 1980, the funded pension plan designated "Employee Retirement System of Sapulpa, Oklahoma" (hereinafter called "system"). 
State Law reference— Authority of City to establish retirement systems, procedure, 11 O.S. § 48-101 et seq.  
Sec. 2-811. - Administration. 
For the purpose of administration of the system there is hereby established a board of trustees of the employee retirement system consisting of five (5) members, one (1) of which shall be the City Treasurer, one (1) of which shall be the City Clerk, and three (3) of which shall be other participating employees of the City. The three (3) employee members shall be elected by the employees of the City who participate in the retirement system. The employee members shall serve for three-year staggered terms. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22A)  
Sec. 2-812. - Fund. 
A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the person entitled to benefits under the system. All contributions to such fund shall be paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the City Treasurer, who shall be the treasurer of the system. The City Treasurer shall hold such contributions in the form received, and from time to time pay over and transfer the same to the retirement fund, as duly authorized and directed by the Board of Trustees. The fund shall be non-fiscal and shall not be considered in computing any levy when the annual estimate is made to the county excise board. The fund and system shall be evaluated each year for actuarial soundness by a qualified actuarial firm. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22A)  
Sec. 2-813. - Appropriations. 
The City is hereby authorized to incur the necessary expenses for the establishment, operation, and administration of the system and to appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the City is hereby authorized to appropriate annually such amounts as are required in addition to employee contributions, to maintain its amended retirement system and the fund on a sound actuarial basis in accordance with the respective actuarial valuation. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22A)  
Sec. 2-814. - Execution. 
A.  The Mayor and City Clerk be and they are each hereby authorized and directed to execute (in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original) the original system instrument, and all amendments thereto, and to do all other acts and things necessary, advisable, and proper to put the system and amendments and related trust into full force and effect, and to make such changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same under Sections 401(a) and 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States. 
B.  This City Council is hereby authorized and directed to proceed immediately on behalf of the City to negotiate a contract with other incorporated cities and towns of the State to pool and combine the fund into the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund as a part thereof, with similar funds of such other cities and towns, for purposes of pooled management and investment. The Council shall manifest approval of such contract and the execution thereof by the Mayor and City Clerk by a formal resolution. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22A)  
Sec. 2-815. - Conflicting laws. 
Any ordinance inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed, provided, however, that such repeal shall be only to the extent of such inconsistency and in all other respects this chapter shall be cumulative of other ordinances regulating and governing subject matter covered by this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22A)  
ARTICLE C. - POLICE PENSION SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-820. - State Police retirement provisions adopted. 
The City Council hereby adopts the provisions of the State law governing the Oklahoma Police Pension and Retirement System and amendments thereto for the purpose of providing the police officers of the City with a retirement program. The City agrees to make contributions to the system in such amounts as are required by law. 
(Prior Code, Secs. 1-57 to 1-79 as amended) 
State Law reference— Police pension and retirement system, 11 O.S. § 50-101 et seq.; Joining State system, 11 O.S. § 50-106.3; Contributions to be paid by municipality and police members, 11 O.S. §§ 50-109 and 50-110.  
CHAPTER 9. - COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-901. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall, except as otherwise expressly provided, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Age means that period of time when a worker is at least forty (40) years old and less than seventy (70) years old; 
Commission means the Sapulpa Human Rights Commission; 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designated or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof; 
Employer means any person who employs five (5) or more employees, exclusive of the parents, spouse, or children of such person, including the City of Sapulpa, its departments, boards, commissions, and authorities, and any other governmental agency within its jurisdiction, but excluding any religious, fraternal, or sectarian organization which is not supported in whole or part by any governmental appropriations; 
Employment excludes the employment of individuals in domestic service; 
Employment agency means any person regularly undertaking with or without compensation, to procure opportunities for employment or to procure, recruit, refer, or place employees; 
Handicapped person means a person who has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of such person's major life activities, has a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment; 
Housing accommodations" means: 
A.  A building, structure, or portion thereof which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged, or designated to be used or occupied, as a home, residence or sleeping place by a person, by a family, or by a group of persons living together; or 
B.  A parcel of real property or lot available for the construction of a housing accommodation; 
Labor organizations mean any organizations which exists for the purpose in whole or in part of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid or protection in relation to employment; 
Lending institutions mean any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association, or any other person regularly engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans; 
Owner means the owner, co-owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee, assignee, manager, agent, employee, or any other person having the right of ownership or possession or the authority to sell, rent, or lease any housing accommodation, or any person having equitable or security interest in any housing accommodation, including the City and its departments, boards, commissions, and authorities; 
Person means any individual, association, corporation, joint apprenticeship committee, joint-stock company, labor union, legal representative, mutual company, partnership, receiver, trust, trustee, unincorporated organization, or other legal or commercial entity, including the City of Sapulpa; 
Public accommodation means any place, business, or activity which is open to, accepts, or solicits the patronage of the general public, or offers goods, services, or recreation to the general public; 
Real estate broker means any person, who for a fee or other valuable consideration manages, sells, purchases, exchanges, or rents, or negotiates, or offers, or attempts to negotiate the sale, purchase, exchange, or rental of, the real property of another, or holds himself out as engaged in the business of managing, selling, purchasing, exchanging, or renting the real property of another, and includes real estate salesmen or agents or any other person employed by a real estate broker to perform or to assist in the performance of his business; 
Sexual harassment means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when: 
A.  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; 
B.  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or 
C.  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-91; Ord. 1901, 05/06/1985)  
Sec. 2-902. - Discrimination in employment. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any employer, employment agency, or labor organization, because of a person's race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, or handicap to: 
1.  Refuse to hire any person or otherwise discriminate against any person with respect to hiring, tenure, compensation, promotion, discharge, or any other terms, conditions, or privileges, directly or indirectly related to employment; 
2.  Establish, announce, or follow a policy of denying or limiting through a quota system or otherwise, the employment or membership opportunities of any person or group of persons; 
3.  Deny to or withhold from any person the right to be admitted to or participate in a guidance program, an apprenticeship training program, an on-the-job training program, or any other occupational training program; 
4.  Publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any notice or advertisement relating to employment or membership which indicates any discrimination; 
5.  Fail or refuse to properly classify or refer to employment or otherwise to discriminate against any person; or 
6.  Discriminate against any person in any way which would deprive or limit his employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his status as an applicant for employment or as an employee with regard to tenure, compensation, promotion, discharge, or any other terms, conditions, or privileges, directly or indirectly related to employment. 
B.  Nor shall any person: 
1.  Discriminate against any person because he has opposed any practice forbidden in this chapter or because he has made a complaint or testified or assisted in any manner in an investigation or proceeding brought under this chapter; 
2.  Aid, incite, compel, coerce, or otherwise participate in the commission of any unlawful employment practice under this chapter, or otherwise obstruct or prevent any person from enforcing or complying with the provisions of this chapter, or any rule, regulation, or order lawfully promulgated by the commission; 
3.  Substantially confine or limit the recruitment or hiring of employees to any employment agency, employment service, labor organization, training school, training center or any other employee referring source which services persons who are predominantly of the same race, color, religion, national origin, sex, or handicap, except were such information as to a handicap is related to a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the performance of the prospective employment or membership; 
4.  Require of any applicant for employment or membership, any information concerning his race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, or handicap (except as allowed by state law); or 
5.  Nor shall any person sexually harass any other person, as defined in Section 2-901. 
C.  The above mentioned practices are not unlawful discriminatory practices when based upon applicable national security regulations established by the United States. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-92; Ord. 1901, 05/06/1985)  
Sec. 2-903. - Exceptions to discriminatory employment services. 
The provisions of Paragraph 6 of Subsection A of Section 2-902, of this Code shall not apply to those situations wherein: 
A.  A school, college, university, or other educational institution hires and employs a person of a particular religion, when: 
1.  That particular institution is wholly or substantially owned, supported, controlled, or managed by a particular religious corporation, association, or society; or 
2.  The curriculum of that particular institution is directed to the propagation of a particular religion; 
B.  Differing standards of compensation, terms, conditions, privileges, or responsibilities exist in a bona fide seniority or merit system, when: 
1.  The earnings are measured by quantity or quality of production; 
2.  The employees work in different locations; or 
3.  Such differences are not the result of an intention to discriminate because of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, or handicap, or otherwise results in such discrimination; 
C.  Differing standards of compensation, terms, conditions, privileges, or responsibilities exist between male and female employees, when such differences are required or permitted by: 
1.  The laws of the State of Oklahoma; 
2.  The provisions of the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended; or 
3.  The provisions of Section 6(d) of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, as amended; 
D.  The adoption and implementation of a plan eliminates or reduces any percentage imbalance respecting a particular race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, or handicap when that plan has been filed with and approved by the regulations of the Sapulpa Community Relations Committee; 
E.  The hiring, employment classification, reference, or admittance for training, or retraining an individual occurs on the basis of his sex, age, or handicap when such is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the particular business enterprise; or 
F.  A professionally developed and validated ability test is given and the results acted upon when the test, its administration or action upon the results is not designed, intended, used to discriminate, or results in discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, or handicap. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-93; Ord. 1901)  
Sec. 2-904. - Discrimination in housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, real estate broker, or lending institution to directly or indirectly engage in the following acts because of a person's race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, or handicap: 
A.  To print, publish, circulate, issue, or display any communication, notice, advertisement, or signs relating to the sale, rental, lease, sublease, assignment, transfer, or listing of a housing accommodation which indicates any preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination; 
B.  Misrepresent that any housing accommodation is not available for inspection, sale, lease, sublease, rental assignment, or other transfer; 
C.  To induce the sale, rental, or listing for sale or rental of a housing accommodation by representing that a change has occurred, will or may occur with respect to the racial, religious, or ethnic composition of the street, block, neighborhood, or area in which such housing accommodation is located; 
D.  Include in the terms, conditions or privileges of any lease, sublease, rental assignment, or other transfer of any housing accommodations, such clause, condition or restriction that discriminates against another person in the use or occupancy of such housing accommodation; 
E.  Discriminate against, segregate or assign quotas in connection with a sale, lease, sublease, rental assignment or other transfer of title, leasehold, or other interest in any housing accommodation; 
F.  After the making a bona fide offer: 
1.  Refuse to negotiate for the sale, lease, sublease, rental assignment, or other transfer of a title, leasehold, or other interest in any housing accommodation; 
2.  Refuse to sell, lease, sublease, rent, assign, or otherwise transfer a title, leasehold, or other interest in any housing accommodation; or 
3.  Deny or otherwise withhold any housing accommodation; 
G.  To utilize any form or application of financial assistance, (for the purchase lease, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of any housing accommodation) or make any record or inquiry in connection with such application, which indicates or makes any limitation, specification, or discrimination; or 
H.  To discriminate in the granting, withholding, extending, modifying, or renewing, or in the rates, terms, conditions, or privileges of any application for financial assistance for the purchase, lease, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of any housing accommodation after the making of a bona fide offer, or in the extension of services in connection therewith. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-94; Ord. 1901, 05/06/1985)  
Sec. 2-905. - Exceptions to discriminatory housing practices. 
The provisions of Section 2-904 of this chapter shall not apply to those situations wherein: 
A.  A religious or sectarian institution or organization, or a charitable or education organization (which is operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious organization), or any bona fide private or fraternal organization: 
1.  Limits admission to, or gives preference to persons of the same religion or sect, or to members of such private or fraternal organization; or 
2.  Makes such selection as is calculated by that organization to promote the religious or sectarian principles or the aims, purposes, or fraternal principles for which it is established or maintained; 
B.  An owner privately offers property or gives preference to prospective tenants or buyers, as long as those reasons for the private offer or preference are based upon other than religion, sex, age, race, color, national origin, or handicap; 
C.  An owner rents a portion of a dwelling containing accommodations for not more than four (4) families, and one (1) of those accommodations is the residence of the owner; 
D.  An owner sells or rents a single-family house, provided that: 
1.  The private individual owner does not own more than two (2) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; 
2.  The private individual owner resided in that house as the most recent resident prior to that sale, if the private individual owner did not so reside or was not the most recent resident, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply to one (1) such sale or rental within any twenty-four (24) month period; 
3.  Such bona fide owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved in his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than two (2) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; 
4.  Such sale or rental was: 
a.  Without the use of the sales or rental facilities or services or any real estate broker, agent, employee, any other person in the business of selling or renting dwellings; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of item of Section 2-908 of this chapter; 
5.  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and such other professional assistance as is necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-95; Ord. 1901, 05/06/1985)  
Sec. 2-906. - Discrimination in public accommodations. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, or superintendent of any public accommodation to engage in the following acts because of another person's race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, or handicap: 
A.  To refuse, withhold from, or deny to any person any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, services, privileges, products, or goods of such place of public accommodation, resort, or amusement; or 
B.  To publish, circulate, issue, display, post, or mail any written or printed communication, notice, or advertisement to the effect that any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, goods, products, services, and privileges of any such place shall be refused, withheld, or that the patronage of such persons is unwelcome, objectionable, or not acceptable, desired, or solicited. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-96; Ord. 1901, 05/06/1985)  
Sec. 2-907. - Qualifications and make-up of commission. 
A.  The Sapulpa Community Relations Commission shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council, for terms of two (2) years; provided, however that for the first appointment under the provisions of this chapter, four (4) members shall be appointed for a period of two (2) years and five (5) members shall be appointed for a period of one (1) year. All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of two (2) years. Five (5) of the members of the above board shall be from the protected classes of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, or handicapped. All members must be residents of the City and live within its City limits. All members will serve in a voluntary capacity without compensation. All members must be diligent in attending meetings of the commission and failure to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the commission without cause shall be grounds for removal from the commission. 
B.  At any time that a vacancy exists because of resignation, removal, or expiration of a term, the Mayor shall appoint a new member to either fill the unexpired term for a new term, subject to approval of the Council. 
C.  There is hereby established a Clerk of the Community Relations Commission. The Clerk shall be a member of the City administrative staff designated by the City Manager. The City shall send out public notices and perform any other necessary clerical function which the commission shall hereinafter prescribe. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-97; Ord. 1901, 05/06/1985)  
Sec. 2-908. - Duties of community relations commission. 
The following are the duties of the community relations commission: 
A.  To receive, investigate, and seek the satisfactory adjustment of complaints which charge discriminatory practices as set forth herein; 
B.  To study and investigate by means of public hearing or otherwise any condition having an adverse effect on intergroup relations in the City and study the problems of prejudice and intolerance, bigotry and discrimination as they affect the public safety and general welfare of the City; 
C.  To institute and conduct educational and other programs to promote the equal rights and opportunities of all persons regardless of their age, race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, and to promote understanding among persons, groups of different ages, races, colors, religions, sex, or national origins. In performance of this duty the commission may cooperate with interested citizens, private agencies, and agencies of the federal, state and local government; and 
D.  To hold hearings, make findings of fact, adopt such rules and policies as may be necessary within the limits of this chapter, and otherwise carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-98; Ord. 1901, 05/06/1985)  
Sec. 2-909. - Community relations commission: Procedure and powers. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by discriminatory practices prohibited by this chapter, may file with the Clerk of the Community Relations Commission a complaint in writing, administered under oath. The complaint shall be signed by the person claiming to be aggrieved, and shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter, and shall further set forth the particulars of the violation, and may include such other information as may be required by the commission. Complaints filed under this section shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the alleged violation, and failure to file within the time shall be considered a waiver of the application of this chapter. The Commission may issue a complaint on its own initiative at any time it has knowledge that a person has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Commission shall investigate each complaint filed, and shall attempt an adjustment of the complaint by means of conference and conciliation. Sixty (60) days shall be allowed for the purpose of investigation, conference and conciliation. Upon determination that a complaint is not well founded, the commission shall dismiss the complaint and notify the complainant and respondent in writing of the dismissal. If the Commission takes no action within ninety (90) days of the filing of the complaint, it shall be considered dismissed. 
C.  If conference of conciliation does not result in compliance with this chapter, the Commission shall give respondent and claimant written notice stating when the hearing on the complaint alleging discrimination is to be held. Written notice should be given at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
D.  At the hearing provided for in subsection C above, the complainant or person aggrieved may appear in person or by counsel, and the respondent may file a written answer to the complaint and may appear in person or by counsel. The Commission, when conducting any hearing, pursuant to this section, may permit amendments to any complaint or answer, and the testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath, and shall be transcribed or recorded at the request of either party, or at the direction of the Commission. If the Commission finds at the hearing that the respondent has engaged in any discriminatory practice or practices, prohibited by this chapter, it shall state its findings of fact, and shall so certify the matter to the City Attorney for appropriate action. No prosecution shall be brought under this chapter except upon such certification. If the Commission, upon hearings, finds that respondent has not engaged in any discriminatory practice, it shall state its findings of act, and shall issue and file an order, dismissing the complaint. The Commission shall establish rules and regulations to govern, expedite, and effectuate the foregoing procedure, and shall maintain the files provided for herein. 
E.  A quorum for the purposes of hearing complaints as prescribed in subsection C above, shall be six (6) members; further, it shall require a vote of no less than five (5) Councilors to certify a complaint for prosecution. 
F.  All notices required under this chapter to be served upon any person, may be served personally on such person, or by mailing a copy thereof by certified or registered mail, with return receipt requested, to the current business or residence address of such person. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-99; Ord. 1901, 05/06/1985)  
Sec. 2-910. - Penalties. 
Commission of any of the acts or omissions herein prohibited as unlawful shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as provide by Section 1-108 of this Code.  
Part 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  
CHAPTER 1. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
Sec. 3-101. - Definitions. 
All terms and definitions set forth in 37A O.S. Section 1-103 of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act are incorporated by reference as if set fully forth in its entirety herein. For the purpose of Part 3 of the Code, each word, term, and phrase shall have the same meaning as provided in Section 1-103 of Title 37A and shall be construed in conformity as the word, term, and/or phrase is used in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act as amended. 
(Ord. 2804, 09/04/2018, effective)  
Sec. 3-102. - Occupational tax levy. 
A.  There is hereby levied and assessed an annual occupational tax on every business or occupation relating to alcoholic beverages pursuant to the provisions of Section 4-104 of Title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes in the amount set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the occupational tax for those service organizations which are exempt under Section 501(c)(19), (8), or (10) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) as provided in Section 2-101(C)(1) of Title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes. 
B.  The occupational tax shall be paid in advance annually, on or before April 1, to the City Clerk, who shall issue a receipt therefor. The tax shall be prorated on a monthly basis for the year in which an occupation begins operations. 
C.  Upon payment of the occupational tax, the City Clerk shall issue a receipt, signed by the City Clerk, to the state licensee paying such occupational tax. The City Clerk shall also record the name of the licensee and the address where the licensee engages in his occupation. Such record shall be duly filed and kept in the permanent files of the City for at least five (5) years. 
D.  Any state licensee shall post its tax receipt in a conspicuous place on the premises wherein the occupation is conducted. 
E.  The occupational tax shall cover only the person paying the tax and no other of a successor thereof, and shall not be refundable. 
F.  The City Clerk shall make and transmit to the ABLE Commission an annual report showing the number and class of licenses subject to the tax and the amount of money received therefrom. 
G.  All sums due from any person by reason of occupational taxes imposed by this chapter and all penalties accruing from such person by reason of failure to pay such tax shall be recoverable at the suit of the City, brought against such person in any court of competent jurisdiction. In any suit, in addition to the tax and penalties, the plaintiff shall recover interest, at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum, upon all sums due by way of tax and penalty from the date of accrual thereof, and all costs of collection, judicial or otherwise, including reasonable attorney's fees, all to be determined by the court. Prosecution for an offense against the City, arising out of the failure to pay a tax levied by this chapter, regardless of the outcome thereof or its continued pendency, shall not constitute a defense or bar in any manner to the collection of the tax and penalties, if any are due, as herein provided. 
State Law reference— Cities may levy occupation tax not to exceed state fee, 37A O.S. § 4-104; state license fee amounts, 37A O.S. § 2-101.  
Sec. 3-103. - Application for license, conditions. 
A.  Every person required to pay an occupational tax shall make application to the City Clerk on forms to be provided setting forth the location of the business, the names of all persons with any ownership interest in the business, together with their addresses; and other pertinent information; if a corporation, the application shall include the names of the president and managing officer. 
B.  No licensee shall be issued a license without satisfactory showing that the applicant has: 
1.  Satisfied the conditions of this chapter; 
2.  Obtained all applicable state and county permits or licenses, including permits required from the Oklahoma Tax Commission; and 
3.  Paid the tax or taxes as required herein. 
C.  No license shall be issued or valid unless the applicant licensee meets the requirements of the City's zoning ordinances and regulations.  
Sec. 3-104. - Certificates of compliance, conditions. 
A.  Every applicant for an original license from pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act shall apply for a certificate of compliance with the zoning, fire, health, and safety codes of the City as required by Title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes, by making application for such certificate at the office of the City Clerk by: 
1.  Filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office; and 
2.  Paying a verification and certification fee at the time of filing in the amount as set in the Master Fee Schedule. 
3.  Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance, the City Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the premises proposed for licensed operations comply with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and any health, fire, building, or other safety codes applicable to it. 
B.  The application for certificate shall be reviewed and approved by the following City departments: 
1.  The applicant's proposed location and use thereof must comply with all municipal zoning ordinances, verified by the Director of Urban Development, or his/her designee. 
2.  The applicant's proposed site and structure must comply with all building codes as required by the Code of the City of Sapulpa, verified by the Director of Urban Development, or his/her designee. 
3.  The applicant's proposed site, structure, and location must comply with all Fire Code requirements required by the Code of the City of Sapulpa, verified by the Fire Marshal for the City of Sapulpa or his designee. 
4.  The applicant's proposed location and use thereof must comply with all provisions regarding food service requirements as required by the Code of the City of Sapulpa, verified by the Creek County Health Department Inspector or his designee. 
C.  Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all applicable zoning, fire, safety, and health codes/ordinances, a certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued to the ABLE commission. 
D.  Such applications shall be acted upon within twenty (20) days of receipt thereof, and if approved, the certificate of compliance shall be signed by the City Manager or duly designated representative.  
Sec. 3-105. - General prohibitions. 
A.  No person shall own or operate a brewpub, retail spirits store, package store, mixed beverage establishment, bottle club, or produce, manufacture, distribute, rectify, distill, bottle, or sell (either retail or wholesale) any beer, spirits, wine, mixed beverages, or other alcoholic beverage, without having previously paid the applicable occupational tax and/or license fee provided for in this chapter and first obtaining all required license(s) issued by the ABLE Commission and the City. 
B.  No person shall act as a brewer, distiller, winemaker, retailer, wholesaler, rectifier, retailer, mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event or special event licensee, bottle club, manufacturer, wine and spirits wholesaler, or beer distributor, or otherwise sell, serve, mix, dispense, or allow consumption of beer, wine, spirits, mixed beverages, or other alcoholic beverages without having previously paid the applicable occupational tax and/or license fee provided for in this chapter and first obtaining all required license(s) issued by the ABLE Commission and the City. 
C.  No brewery or brewpub to which the brewery or brewpub occupational tax is applicable, nor any agent, servant, or employee of such establishment, shall sell, dispense, serve, or allow to be consumed any beer on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
D.  No establishment to which the mixed beverage or on premises beer and wine occupational tax is applicable, nor any agent, servant or employee of such establishment, shall sell, dispense, serve or allow to be consumed any mixed beverages, beer, or wine on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
E.  Retail spirits stores will be permitted to remain open and operational from 8:00 a.m. through midnight. 
F.  A retail wine or retail beer establishment may offer wine or beer for retail sale on Monday through Sunday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. the following day. 
G.  No person shall employ any person under eighteen (18) years of age in the selling of beer or wine or employ any person under twenty-one (21) years of age in the selling of spirits, provided that: 
1.  A mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special event, bottle club, retail wine, or retail beer licensee may employ servers or sales clerks who are at least eighteen (18) years of age, except persons under twenty-one (21) years of age may not serve in designated bar or lounge areas, and 
2.  A mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special event or bottle club licensee may employee or hire musical bands who have musicians who are under eighteen (18) years of age if each such musician is either accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or has on their person, to be made available for inspection upon demand by any employee of the ABLE Commission or law enforcement officer, a written, notarized affidavit from the parent or legal guardian giving the underage musician permission to perform in designated bar or lounge areas. 
H.  No wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages shall sell or deliver to any retail spirits store any alcoholic beverages on Sundays, New Year's Day, Fourth of July, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day. 
I.  No person shall erect or maintain any sign designating a retail spirits store unless they comply with the City of Sapulpa Sign Code, codified in Chapter 9 of the Zoning Code of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
J.  Except as otherwise provided by state law, no person shall sell, deliver, furnish, or give any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
K.  No licensee shall permit any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to enter, remain within, or be about the premises of a retail package store or mixed beverage establishment, except as otherwise may be provided by state law. 
L.  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall enter, remain within or be about the premises of a retail package store or mixed beverage establishment, except as otherwise may be provided by state law. 
M.  No person shall knowingly transport alcoholic beverages in any vehicle upon any public highway, street, or alley unless in the original container which is unopened, the seal unbroken, and the original cap in place. This subsection shall not apply if the opened container is in the rear trunk or compartment or the spare tire compartment in a vehicle commonly known as a station wagon or panel truck, or in any outside compartment which is inaccessible to the driver or any passenger while the vehicle is in motion. 
N.  No person shall purchase any alcoholic beverage at retail or wholesale from any person other than a dealer licensed by the ABLE Commission. 
O.  Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, no person shall drink any alcoholic beverage in public except on the premises of a licensee who is authorized to sell or serve alcoholic beverages by the individual drink or be intoxicated in a public place. 
P.  No person shall open a container of intoxicating beverages or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a retail package store. 
Q.  No licensee shall give any alcoholic beverage as a prize, premium or consideration for any lottery, game of chance or skill or any type of competition. 
R.  No licensee shall allow any person on the premises where nonintoxicating or alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises of the licensee where such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic area, buttocks or genitalia or permit any person to perform acts of, or acts which simulate sexual acts, or permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any lewd activities, or permit the showing of films, still pictures, electronic reproduction, or other visual reproduction depicting any of the prohibited acts in this paragraph. 
S.  No person within the City shall drink intoxicating beverage in any public place, unless authorized by the Alcoholic Control Beverage Act, nor shall any person be intoxicated in a public place within the City. 
T.  No person shall misrepresent his age either orally or in writing or by presenting false or altered documentation of age for the purpose of inducing any person to sell him alcoholic beverages.  
CHAPTER 2. - SOCIAL HOST PROHIBITION 
 
Sec. 3-201. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Gathering means a party, gathering, or event, where a group of three (3) or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity. 
Legal guardian means: 
1.  A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
2.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
Minor means any person less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or stepparent of another person. 
Premises means any residence or other private property, place, or premises, including any commercial or business premises. 
Response costs are the costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire, and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including but not limited to: 
1.  Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s); 
2.  The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; 
3.  The cost of repairing any City equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; and 
4.  Any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of this section.  
Sec. 3-202. - Consumption of alcohol, wine, or beer by minor in public place, place open to public, or place not open to public prohibited. 
Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to: 
A.  Consume at any public place or any place open to the public any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer; or 
B.  Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer, unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage, wine or beer, that minor is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.  
Sec. 3-203. - Hosting, permitting, or allowing a party, gathering, or event where minors consuming alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer prohibited. 
A.  It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting drivers' licenses or other government-issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer while at the gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises where at least one (1) minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer, whenever the person having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer, or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of an alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer by a minor as set forth in subsection A of this section. 
C.  This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer that occurs exclusively between a minor and the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit any family activity held in the confines of the family home from providing the use of alcohol, wine, or beer to immediate family members within the supervision of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering intoxicated and is found in public then said providers of alcohol, wine, or beer will be held responsible in the same manner as a non-family gathering. 
E.  Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any religious practice which includes the use of alcohol, wine, or beer. However, if a minor leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated and is found to be in public then said providers of alcohol, wine, or beer will be held responsible in the same manner as a non-religious gathering.  
Sec. 3-204. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this part, chapters or sections shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the City and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108, with fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus all court costs and statutory penalties. Violations of this section may be prosecuted by the City of Sapulpa criminally, civilly, or through both processes. The City may seek administrative fees and response costs associated with enforcement of this section through all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance, or law. This section shall not limit the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this section, nor shall they limit the City's ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this section.  
Part 4 - ANIMAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 4-101 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, each word and phrase shall have the following meaning: 
Animal means any living creature, except human beings, and include (without limiting the generality) mammals, birds, reptiles, fish, amphibians, and invertebrates, except in Section 4-104 of this chapter the word "animal" shall mean only mammals when referring specifically to the control of rabies and rabies-suspected animals. 
Animal wild by nature means and includes any animal, except reptiles which, because of dangerous physical features, or great size, or vicious nature presents a clear and proven danger to human beings, and shall include: 
A.  The following members of the Class Aves: Order Falconiformes (hawks, eagles, falcons, and vultures) which are not kept pursuant to federal or state permit, and Order Ratite (ostriches, rheas, cassowaries and emus) or birds native to the continental United States and Alaska and all birds covered under the Lacey Act and Migratory Bird Act. 
B.  The following members of the Class Mammalia Order Carnivora, Family Felidae (ocelots, margays, tigers, lions, panthers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, bobcat, lynx, cheetah, and serval), except commonly accepted domesticated cats; the Family Canidae (wolves, foxes, dingoes, coyotes, and jackals), except domesticated dogs; Family Ursidae (bears); Order Chiroptera (bats); Order Edentata (sloths, anteaters, and armadillos); Order Marsupialia (kangaroos and common opossums); Order Proboscidea (elephants); Order Primate (monkeys, chimpanzees, orangutans, and gorillas); Order Rodentia (beaver, muskrat, and porcupines); Order Artiodactyla (antelope, deer, bison and camels); and Order Perissodactyla (horse-like animals); and any hybrid or cross-breed of any of the above-listed animals. 
C.  Any species of animal which is venomous to human beings, whether the venom is transmitted by bite, touch or other means, except for venomous aquarium specimens. Venomous aquarium specimens which cannot survive outside the confines of an aquarium and which cannot survive in the lakes, ponds, rivers, or streams of northeastern Oklahoma shall not be permitted. 
D.  Any species of animal when kept, maintained or harbored in such numbers or in such manner as to constitute the likelihood of danger to the animals themselves, to human beings or to the property of human beings. 
E.  Except as expressly provided in this title, the term "animal wild by nature" shall not include non-poisonous aquatic or amphibious animals, gerbils, hedgehogs, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice, rabbits, birds except for those listed in this section, domestic rats, chinchillas, domestic honey bees, and ferrets. 
At heel means when a dog is obedient to and under the immediate control and supervision of its owner or its owner's agent. 
At large means when: 
A.  An animal is not confined on the premises of its owner; or 
B.  A dog is not under leash, at heel, or under the control of the person having possession of the dog; or 
C.  A cat not in the physical control of its owner. 
Cat means and includes any domestic cat. 
Chief of Police means the duly appointed, qualified, or acting Chief of Police of Sapulpa, or the Chief's authorized representative. 
Commercial animal establishment (Type A) means any stable or boarding facility, grooming or bathing facility, veterinarian clinic or boarding facility, carriage horse or pony service, or sentry or guard dog service. 
Commercial animal establishment (Type B) means any business keeping animals in stock for retail or wholesale trade which shall include but not be limited to, wholesale distributors, pet store, stockyards, slaughterhouses, and hatcheries. 
Confined on the premises means that condition in which an animal is securely and physically confined and restrained on and within the premises of the owner by means of walls or fences, or by rope, chain, leash, or other device of such strength and size as to prevent such animal from leaving the premise and not permit it to stray onto the property of one other than the owner. 
Dangerous dog means any dog which: 
A.  Exhibits a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, cause injury, or threaten the safety of persons or other domestic animals; 
B.  Chases, confronts or approaches a person on a street, sidewalk, other public property, or another person's private property in a fashion such as would put an average person in fear of attack; 
C.  Snaps, bites, or manifests a disposition to snap or bite when not unduly provoked or otherwise acts in a manner that causes or should cause a reasonable person to know that it is potentially dangerous. A dog shall be deemed to exhibit a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack if it is restrained by a leash, fence or other means, and it is clear from the dog's excited actions that only the presence of the leash, fence or other means of restraint is preventing the dog from making an immediate attack or bite. 
Director means the superintendent of the Sapulpa Animal Control Department of the City or the superintendent's authorized representative. 
Clerk means the duly appointed City Clerk of the City of Sapulpa or the Clerk's authorized representative. 
Domestic animal means dogs and cats, as well as horses, donkeys, mules, burros, cattle, sheep, goats, rabbits, and fowl. 
Fowl means any bird which has been domesticated and is commonly raised for food or egg production, including but not limited to chickens, ducks, geese, turkey, peafowl, pheasant, partridge, quail, and grouse. 
He, him, his, it, its means and include the masculine, feminine, and neuter gender. 
Hive means a manmade home for bees which includes one (1) or more boxes containing removable frames for rearing young bees, a queen excluder, one (1) or more boxes with removable frames for honey storage, an inner cover and a top cover, all of which are set on a hive stand. 
Hobbyist means any person so registered with the City Clerk as having met the requirements for the hobbyist exemption in Section 4-118 of this title. 
Large animal means and include horses, mules, ponies, cattle, sheep, ostriches, lamas, goats, and any other animal over twenty-five (25) pounds except dogs and/or cats. 
Nuisance means any animal which habitually commits any or a combination of the following acts: 
A.  Scratches or digs into any flower bed, garden, tilled soil, vines, shrubbery, or small plants and in so doing injuries the same; 
B.  Overturns any garbage can or other vessel for waste products or scatters the contents of the same; 
C.  Chases any person or domestic animal, or kills any domestic animal; 
D.  Barks, howls, brays, or makes any other loud or offensive noise common to its species or peculiar to itself, so as to disturb the inhabitants of the community; 
E.  Is at large. 
Owner means any person, firm, or corporation having the care or maintenance of, keeping or harboring, or in possession and control of, or custody of any dog, cat, animal, or domestic animal. 
Pigeon or dove means any bird in the family Columbidae, and shall include any exotic dove (ringneck, white, diamond, fruit, cape, laceneck, etc.) and any fancy pigeon, racing pigeon, or common pigeon. 
Poultry means any bird of the species Gallus or Meleagris gallipavo (domestic turkey), generally, any type of chicken. 
Rabies-suspected animal means any animal which has bitten a human being, or which has been bitten by any animal suspected of having rabies. 
Releasing agency means any municipal shelter, humane society organization, or any other agency or group that has an ongoing adoption program and/or rescues animals for placement, whether to the public or private. 
Rescuer means an individual or organization who regularly harbors dogs or cats which have no readily identifiable owner. An individual rescuer shall be named as such on a roster of recognized rescuers furnished by a local animal welfare organization to the Director of Finance. 
Under leash means and includes the condition of a dog being securely held, restrained, and confined by its owner, member of family, or agent by means of a strap, chain, rope, cord, or other device not exceeding sixteen (16) feet in length, and in such manner as to prevent the dog from attacking any person. 
Vicious animal means any animal which, without provocation, has: 
A.  Killed or inflicted serious bodily injury upon any person, requiring hospitalization, medical facility, or rehabilitative treatment; or 
B.  Bitten two (2) or more human beings during one (1) or more encounters; or 
C.  Bitten one (1) human being two (2) or more times during two (2) or more encounters; or 
D.  Evidenced a propensity, tendency, or disposition to: 
1.  Attack without provocation; or 
2.  Cause injury to, or otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals. 
Vicious dog means any dog which: 
A.  Attacks a human being engaged in lawful activity resulting in serious injury; 
B.  While off the property of the owner and without provocation, kills or seriously injures another domesticated animal; 
C.  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, attacks or bites without provocation a person engaged in lawful activity; or 
D.  Is trained for dog fighting or is owned or kept for the purpose of dog fighting. 
(Ord. 2562, 09/02/2008)  
Sec. 4-102. - Offenses. 
It shall be an offense under the terms of this chapter for any owner within the corporate limits of the City to: 
A.  Own, keep, possess, harbor, or allow to remain on premises under his control any dog or cat over four (4) months old, unless such dog or cat has a current license and a current vaccination against rabies as required herein; 
B.  Fail to prevent any dog or cat owned, possessed, kept, or harbored by him from running or being at large as defined in this chapter, whether such dog or cat is licensed or unlicensed; provided, however that it shall be permissible for a dog to be led off the premises of its owner when under leash or obediently at heel; and provided further, that is shall be permissible for a police dog not to be under leash or obediently at heel while being utilized as a police dog in the performance of police duty and when accompanied by a police officer. 
C.  Deposit any live dog, cat, or other domestic animal along any private or public roadway or in any other private or public place with the intention of abandoning the domestic animal; 
D.  Harbor, keep, or have possession of any vicious animal; 
E.  Harbor, keep, or have possession of any animal which is a nuisance; 
F.  Fail or refuse to deliver to the Chief of Police, Director, or their designated agents upon demand any unlicensed dog or cat, vicious animal, animal which is a nuisance, rabies-suspected animal, dog or cat, found at large, or any animal the keeping or harboring of which is declared to be an offense. 
G.  Remove or fail to affix or attach to collars or harnesses worn by dogs or cats a current license tag as provided in this chapter, unless the dog or cat is permanently and uniquely identified with a microchip implant or tattoo. 
H.  Keep, possess, own, harbor or exhibit any animal wild by nature except as an exhibition complying with all aspects of federal laws and regulations and Oklahoma laws and regulations applicable to exhibition of animals wild by nature; 
I.  Fail or refuse to keep every female dog or cat "in heat" confined in a building or secure enclosure or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel in such a manner that another dog or cat cannot come into contact with it except for controlled breeding purposes; 
J.  Interfere or hinder the Chief of Police or Animal Control Officer from performing his duties as set forth herein; 
K.  Release, other than by owner, any animal from its confinement at any exhibition or sporting event; or release any animal from their home, housing or yard; 
L.  Allow an animal to defecate (without the owner, keeper or harbor removing the excreta deposited) on public or private property other than that of the owner; 
M.  Own or harbor any animal or fowl primarily or in part of the purpose of fighting, or any animal or fowl trained for such; or any person to place or attempt to place an animal or fowl in an enclosure or in any other place for the purpose of fighting or combat; or any person to promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, be umpire, judge, or spectator at any game, exhibition, contest, or flight in which an animal or fowl is used for the purpose of fighting, injuring, killing, maiming or destroying any other animal or fowl; 
N.  Harbor, keep or possess in any one (1) household more than a combined total of five (5) dogs and cats over the age of four (4) months; provided that no more than three (3) of such animals shall be dogs over the age of four (4) months. It is specifically provided a household may keep or possess more dogs and/or cats than permitted by this paragraph so long as: 
1.  Immediately prior to June 30, 2000, the household legally possessed more than the number of dogs and/or cats permitted by this paragraph; and 
2.  Those dogs and/or cats were licensed according to the provisions of this chapter; and 
3.  The dogs and/or cats kept or possessed are the same such animals that were kept or possessed pursuant to subsections 1 and 2 of this paragraph; or the household or an individual in the household has secured a hobbyist's exemption as provided in this chapter; 
O.  Harbor, keep, or possess domestic honeybees otherwise permitted by this chapter unless the bees are maintained as follows: 
1.  No more than four (4) hives shall be maintained for each one-quarter (¼) acre or less of lost size on any lot; and 
2.  No hive shall be maintained within twenty (20) feet of any lot line of the lot on which said hive is located; and 
3.  Between each hive and the neighboring lot in the direction of the hive entrance the hive owner shall maintain a hedge or a screening fence of at least six (6) feet in height, to be located within twenty (20) feet of such lot line, and to extend the entire length of such lot line; and 
4.  A supply of clean water must be furnished within twenty (20) feet of each hive at all times between March 1 and October 31 of each year; and 
5.  Hive owners shall inspect each hive not less than four (4) times between March 1 and October 31 of each year. A written record including the date of each such inspection shall be maintained by the owner and shall be made available to the Chief of Police upon request. 
6.  Any commercial use of the property on which bees are maintained shall be conducted in accordance with Title 42. 
P.  Violate any of the provisions of Section 4-111 herein. 
Q.  Harbor, keep, or possess a dog or cat over the age of six (6) months other than a dog owned and used by the Police Department of the City as a police dog, which has not been spayed or neutered, unless the owner has secured a hobbyist exemption permit as required in this chapter or unless the dog or cat was licensed as required by this chapter prior to June 30, 2000, and has continuously maintained such license. In the event an owner of a dog or cat over the age of six (6) months is unable to produce a current license or license tag for his dog or cat as required by this chapter, a rebuttable presumption is created that the dog or cat has not been spayed or neutered. 
R.  Harbor, keep, or possess any animal which, while not confined on the premises of its owner, does bite, chase, or attack any person or animal without provocation. Provided, this section shall not apply to any police dog while being utilized in the performance of police duties and accompanied by a police officer. 
S.  It further shall be an offense under the terms of this chapter for a releasing agency within the corporate limits of the City to release for adoption an animal that has not been surgically spayed or neutered, unless the adopting party signs an agreement to have the animal sterilized, and deposits funds with the releasing agency to ensure that the adopted animal bill be spayed or neutered. 
T.  Harbor, keep, or possess any large animal except under the following conditions: 
1.  Such large animals are confined on the premises of the owner in an enclosure of not less than one acre in area for each animal kept therein; 
2.  The enclosure of large animals is not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any living quarters or residence used for human occupancy; 
3.  The barn or shelter in which such animals are kept is not less than two hundred (200) feet from any living quarters or residence used for human occupation; and 
4.  The enclosure and/or barn or shelter is at all times kept clean and in a sanitary condition. 
U.  Harbor, keep, or possess any fowl except under the following conditions: 
1.  Fowl, not to exceed six (6) adults and fourteen (14) young under the age of eight (8) weeks, may be confined on the premises of an owner in nonagricultural zoned areas in a separate building located no closer than one hundred (100) feet to any adjoining residence, provided that the floors of such building are maintained in a sanitary condition by routine cleaning and proper disposal of droppings and the outside openings of such building are screened to prevent flies and other vermin; 
2.  Fowl may be confined on the premises of an owner of agricultural zoned property in separate buildings or pens located no closer than one hundred (100) feet to any adjoining residence or property line provided that the floors of such building are maintained in a sanitary condition by routine cleaning and proper disposal of drippings and the outside openings of such buildings or pens are screened to prevent flies and other vermin. 
V.  Harbor, keep, or possess any swine except under the following conditions: 
1.  Miniature pig is hereby defined as a pig which, at maturity, is less than twenty-two (22) inches high at the shoulder, less than thirty-two (32) inches long, weighing less than one hundred twenty-five (125) pounds, and which is registered with the North American Pot-Bellied Pig Association. 
2.  A miniature pig may be kept as normal merchandise in commercially zoned property, or may be kept as a household pet in single-family residential property under the following conditions: 
a.  Each such miniature pig shall be a pet which is kept for personal enjoyment, and not raised for human consumption. 
b.  There shall not be more than one (1) miniature pig in excess of six (6) months of age at each residence. 
c.  The miniature pig must be kept by its owner in a manner which does not violate other ordinances of the City nor create a nuisance to the neighborhood. 
d.  A miniature pig must be kept confined within the building in which it is housed or within any associated fenced yards or held by a harness and leash under the control of the owner or the owner's representative. 
3.  It shall be the duty of every resident owning or having in his charge or possession within the corporate limits of the City any miniature pig six (6) months or more of age to cause such miniature pig to be registered with the City Clerk and pay the license fees herein required. 
Upon registration, there shall be delivered to the owner metallic tags, stamped with the license number and the year in which issued. Such tags shall at all times be attached to the collar or harness worn by the animal for which the certificate was issued. If such tag is lost or destroyed, the owner shall apply in writing or in person for a new tag by presentation of the applicable registration ticket, accompanied by a fee as provided by the Master Fee Schedule. 
4.  The annual license fee for each miniature pig shall be as provided in the Master Fee Schedule, Section 4-102. 
W.  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously overdrive, overload, torture, torment, destroy or kill or cruelly beat or injure, maim or mutilate, any animal in subjugation or captivity, whether wild or tame, and whether belonging to himself or to another, or deprive any such animal of necessary food, drink or shelter; or cause, procure or permit any such animal to be so overdriven, overloaded, tortured, tormented, destroyed, or killed, or cruelly beaten or injured, maimed or mutilated, or deprived of necessary food, drink or shelter; or willfully set on foot, instigate, engage in, or in any way further any act of cruelty to any animal, or any act tending to produce such cruelty. 
X.  It shall be unlawful for any person to unjustifiably administer any poison or noxious drug or substance to any animal, or unjustifiably expose any such drug or substance with intent that the same shall be taken by an animal, whether such animal be the property of himself or another. 
Y.  Harbor, keep, or possess any dangerous dog except in compliance with the provisions of Section 4-119 of this Code. 
Z.  Harbor, keep, or possess any vicious dog. 
(Ord. 2521, 06/18/2007; Ord. 2562, 09/02/2008; Ord. 2766, 12/05/2016)  
Sec. 4-103. - Registration and rabies inoculation. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every resident owning or having in his charge or possession within the corporate limits of the City any dog or cat four (4) months or more of age to cause such dog or cat to be registered with the City Clerk and pay the license fees herein required; provided, however, that the requirements for a license fee for registration shall not apply to any dog or cat which may follow or be led by any nonresident or traveler through the City while the dog or cat is with its owner or keeper. 
B.  It shall be the further duty of every person owning or having in his charge or possession within the corporate limits of the City any dog or cat four (4) months or more of age to cause such dog or cat, within thirty (30) days after the dog or cat reaches the age of four (4) months to be inoculated as set forth below: 
1.  Inoculation must be by a person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Oklahoma or other states: 
2.  Inoculation must be with a prophylactic vaccine approved by the United States Department of Agriculture to prevent rabies. Rabies vaccine currently licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture will be recognized in the City as follows: 
a.  Three (3) year immunity. Modified live virus Flurry strain rabies vaccine or killed strain vaccine, as licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), will be recognized for three (3) years in dogs, provided that the dog is at least one (1) year of age at the time of the vaccination; if dogs under (1) year of age are vaccinated with this type of vaccine, immunity will be recognized for a period of one (1) year. 
b.  One (1) year immunity. All other rabies vaccines currently licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture are recognized for a one (1) year period. 
3.  Cats must be inoculated with vaccines specifically for cats. Ferrets must be inoculated with vaccines specifically for ferrets. The vaccines must be recognized by the United States Department of Agriculture. 
4.  Thirty (30) days shall be permitted for an owner to secure re-vaccination of his dog, cat, or ferret after the duration of immunity has lapsed. 
5.  Every veterinarian, after vaccinating a dog or cat for rabies, shall complete in triplicate a computer-generated certificate or a legible certificate. Two (2) copies shall be retained by the veterinarian, one (1) as a permanent record and one (1) as an expiration notice, and the third copy shall be retained by the animal owner to be shown to the Chief of Police or Director, upon request, and to be used to secure the license tag. Such certificate shall include the following information: 
a.  Owner's full name, address, zip code, home telephone number, daytime and/or emergency contact telephone number; 
b.  Breed, date of birth, sex, and color or marking of the dog or cat; 
c.  Type of vaccine and duration of immunity; 
d.  Signature of the veterinarian administering the vaccine; 
e.  Name of the animal, if applicable; 
f.  Permanent ID information, if any; and 
g.  Whether the animal is spayed, neutered, or unaltered.  
Sec. 4-104. - Veterinarian records and reports; reporting animal bites; animal under quarantine: Rabies suspected. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every veterinarian practicing in the City to keep a record of every dog or cat vaccinated, which record shall be made available to the Chief of Police, City Clerk, or their designated agents at any reasonable time and upon proper demand. 
B.  It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner to report to the Chief of Police the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such information as is pertinent to rabies control. It shall be the duty of any person having the knowledge of an animal bite to notify the Chief of Police of the incident and to provide such information upon request of the City Clerk as is pertinent to rabies control. 
C.  It shall be the duty of every veterinarian having an animal quarantined for a biting incident to submit a written report to the Chief of Police, in the event the animal shows positive signs of rabies, dies or is disposed of for any reason. The veterinarian shall report to the Chief of Police on the tenth day of observation as to the condition of any animal quarantined for biting incident. 
D.  It shall be the duty of every veterinarian to report immediately to the Chief of Police his diagnosis of any animal observed by his as a rabies suspect. 
E.  The Chief of Police shall notify the Director of all animal bites.  
Sec. 4-105. - License fees. 
The annual license fees for each dog or cat shall be as provided in the Master Fee Schedule. No fee will be required for the registration of a dog that is used as a guide for the blind, used as a guide for the auditory impaired, used as a support service dog for persons with disabilities, or actively involved in law enforcement activities. 
Except in cases in which three (3) year immunization has been performed, licenses for one (1) year rabies vaccinations shall expire and must be renewed on the last day of the twelfth (12th) month from when the rabies vaccination was administered as specified in this chapter. In cases of a three (3) year immunity, the license shall expire and must be renewed on the last day of the thirty-sixth (36th) month as specified in this chapter. No dog or cat may be licensed without a current valid rabies immunization certificate and, unless the owner has secured a hobbyist exemption permit as required in this chapter, proof of sterilization. 
Individuals may remit to the administering veterinarian licensing fees required by this title at the time the dog or cat is vaccinated for rabies; or individuals may obtain a license directly from and pay the required fee directly to the City Clerk upon demonstration that the animal has been properly vaccinated against rabies and, unless the owner has secured a hobbyist exemption permit as required in this chapter, has been spayed or neutered. There shall be no prorating for partial years. 
Veterinarians who voluntarily collect the licensing fee at the time of administering the rabies vaccine shall be required to remit to the City Clerk on a monthly basis all fees collected, along with a copy of the registration certificate furnished by the City Clerk for the animals licensed. Veterinarians shall be permitted to keep twenty-five (25) percent of the licensing fees collected as a handling fee. No special reporting requirements of those clients choosing to license directly with the City Clerk shall be placed upon the veterinarians. 
Animals permanently identified by means of tattoo or microchip implant may be licensed for a three (3) year period in conjunction with a three (3) year vaccination for a price of one (1) annual fee, provided that the tattoo number or the microchip code is recorded on the rabies certificate completed by the veterinarian at the time of vaccination. 
Upon registration, there shall be delivered to the owner metallic tags, stamped with the license number and the year in which issued. Such tags shall at all times be attached to the collar or harness worn by the dog or cat for which the certificate was issued. If such tag is lost or destroyed, the owner shall apply in writing or in person for a new tag by presentation of the applicable registration ticket, accompanied by a fee as provided by the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 4-106. - Proclamation of rabies. 
If at any time the Chief of Police or Director shall find that there is an epidemic of rabies among the dogs within the City, or any part thereof, then he shall certify that fact to the Mayor and specifically recommend a period, fixing the dates thereof, during which period all dogs in the City shall be confined on a premises of their owners or under leash as herein defined. 
Upon the receipt by the Mayor of written recommendation from the Director certifying the existence of any epidemic of rabies; the Mayor shall issue his proclamation, based upon recommendation of the Director, proclaiming the existence of an epidemic of rabies and fixing the dates and duration of the epidemic, which proclamation shall be published one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation and printed and published in the City. 
During the time of the epidemic, all dogs and cats within the City shall be confined on the premises of the owners or kept under leash as herein defined. The existence of an unusual number of rabid dogs and cats in the City shall be deemed an epidemic of rabies under this chapter, and the finding as to an epidemic of rabies by the Director shall be prima facie evidence of that fact.  
Sec. 4-107. - Rabies suspect. 
Any rabies-suspected animal shall be securely and separately confined for observation for a period of ten (10) days. The confinement and observation shall be at the Sapulpa Animal Shelter or, at the discretion of the owner, the animal may be confined in a veterinary hospital at the owner's expense. Boarding kennels shall not be considered proper confinement facilities. The owner must immediately surrender the rabies-suspect animal to the Chief of Police or his designee. In the event the owner wishes to have the animal held for observation at a veterinary hospital, the animal will be transported to the veterinary hospital of the owner's choice (provided the hospital is within the City limits of the City) by a representative of the City animal shelter. Any person failing to surrender a rabies-suspect animal, or any person removing the rabies-suspect animal from the City limits, is guilty of an offense. If, upon examination by a veterinarian, the animal has no signs of rabies at the end of the impoundment period, it may be released to the owner or, in case of a stray, it shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable law. In either event, the veterinarian shall make a written report of the disposition of the animal to the Chief of Police and the Director. At the end of the ten (10) day observation period, the Chief of Police shall notify any person bitten by a rabies-suspect animal whether such animal exhibited symptoms or indications of rabies; such notice shall be in the same manner as provided for service of notice under Section 4-109 of this chapter. 
Dogs owned and used by the Police Department that bit a person during the course of duty, shall be under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. The type and amount of supervision is left to the professional opinion of the supervising veterinarian who assumes responsibility for the biting animal. 
The veterinarian must regularly examine the biting animal and immediately report any changes in condition of the animal to the City-County Health Department. 
The dog must be under the control of an authorized agent of the Police Department or the veterinarian at all times during the observation period. 
The owner of any non-immunized domestic animal other than a dog or cat which has been exposed to a rabid animal shall immediately report with such domestic animal to the Director for instruction concerning the disposition of that animal. 
Any effectively immunized domestic animal which is exposed to a rabid animal shall be immediately re-immunized and restrained by leashing and/or confined on the premises of its owner or in a veterinary hospital for a period of forty-five (45) days.  
Sec. 4-108. - Vicious animal. 
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and/or Director to investigate any proper claim that an animal is vicious within the meaning of this chapter. Should the investigating official determine that a vicious animal poses an immediate threat to the public health or safety, he shall immediately seize and impound the animal, or otherwise seek an order from the court that the animal be impounded. The Chief of Police shall also refer the matter to the City Attorney for approval of a verified complaint requesting a finding by the court that the impounded animal is vicious and aid in the proceedings instituted in the Municipal Criminal Court against any person for harboring a vicious animal. 
If the court shall fail to find, upon a preponderance of the evidence presented in an evidentiary hearing, that the animal seized and impounded is a vicious animal, then the court shall order the Chief of Police to return the animal to its owner. If such animal is found by the court to be a vicious animal, the court shall order the Chief of Police to euthanize the animal. 
At the option of the owner, but subject to the approval of the Chief of Police, an animal impounded pursuant to this section may be confined in a private kennel or veterinary clinic during the pendency of the vicious animal action. The operators of the facility shall then assume full liability for the confinement and maintenance of such animal and shall not release it without first being authorized by the Chief of Police or the court. All fees for such impoundment shall be the responsibility of the owner. In no event shall the City be liable for costs or fees charged by the private facility. Further, the City may assess to the owner the cost of transporting the animal to the privately-operated impoundment facility.  
Sec. 4-109. - Animal nuisance. 
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and/or Director to investigate any proper claim that an animal is a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter. Should the investigating official determine that a nuisance exists and it is necessary to abate the nuisance or should the official have reason to believe a threat to public health or safety exists, he shall refer the matter to the City Attorney for approval of a verified complaint and an order from the court that the animal be impounded. Following the filing of such verified complaint and an evidentiary hearing, if the court finds upon a preponderance of the evidence that a nuisance existed, the court may order the animal euthanized as in the case of a vicious animal. 
In lieu of order to have the animal euthanized, the court shall, at the request of the owner, require that the owner abate and prevent such nuisance and give a good and sufficient bond within three (3) days, in an amount not greater than the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), satisfactory for a period not exceeding one (1) year. In this event, the court may order the return of such animal to the owner. However, during the pendency of such bond, upon a finding of the court that the nuisance has recurred, the court shall order the animal be impounded, euthanized and the owner's bond forfeited. If the court shall find that no nuisance existed, the court shall order the animal be surrendered to the owner. 
At the option of the owner, but subject to the approval of the Chief of Police, an animal impounded pursuant to this section may be confined in a private kennel or veterinary clinic during the pendency of the nuisance action. The operators of the facility shall then assume full liability for the confinement and maintenance of such animal and shall not release it without first being authorized by the Chief of Police or the court. All fees for such impoundment will be the responsibility of the owner. In no event will the City be liable for costs or fees charged by the private facility. Further, the City may assess to the owner the cost of transporting the animal to the privately operated impoundment facility. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the release from impoundment of any animal not properly licensed and vaccinated, or a threat to public health or safety.  
Sec. 4-110. - Notice of impoundment; reclaiming; disposal of animals; and fees. 
A.  When the owner of the animal is known, they shall be notified of the impoundment. Notice shall be attempted by telephone within a forty-eight (48) hour period from the initiation of the impoundment. Without regard to the success in giving notice by telephone, a certified letter is to be mailed to the owner's or keeper's address within the same forty-eight (48) hour period. Licensing records, including the owner's name, address, telephone number and daytime telephone number or an emergency telephone number shall be readily accessible to the official responsible for such notifications. 
B.  An animal may be reclaimed within the following times: Within five (5) days from the initial impoundment, if the animal is licensed and the owner is readily identifiable or three (3) days from notice of impoundment, whichever is longer. If the owner is not known, the animal shall be held for three (3) days before it becomes the property of the City and is disposed of as provided herein. 
C.  Requirements for reclaiming animals. An animal may be reclaimed by meeting the following requirements: 
1.  If an animal is not licensed and this chapter requires licensing, after the payment of the licensing fees and penalties as set forth herein and satisfying all other requirements of this section; 
2.  If the animal is licensed, or if a license is not required by this chapter, by paying the impoundment fees and satisfying all other requirements as set forth herein; 
3.  If the animal is not spayed or neutered and this chapter requires spaying or neutering, after signing an agreement to spay or neuter the animal within sixty (60) days or forfeit a fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit, payable at the time of reclaiming; and 
4.  If the animal must be vaccinated for rabies before release, the person reclaiming the animal shall pay all fees for the vaccination. 
D.  Fees. No animal shall be released without the payment of the fees and charges provided by the Master Fee Schedule and without satisfactory proof of ownership. The payment of these fees and charges shall not constitute a defense to any prosecution that may be instituted for the violations of the terms of this title. Provided, however, no fees shall be charged for any licensed animal surrendered to the owner on acquittal or dismissal of charges of keeping, possessing, owning or harboring such animal as a nuisance or as a vicious animal. Provided, further, no person shall be entitled to reclaim any animal found to be a nuisance, rabid, rabies-suspected, or vicious, except as provided herein. 
E.  Animals not reclaimed within time limits. Animals not reclaimed within the time limits set forth in this section shall, at the option of the Chief of Police, be euthanized or disposed of in one of the following manners: 
1.  Animals reclaimed by owners. Animals may be reclaimed by the owner upon payment of all fees and charges established by this section. 
2.  Adoption of dogs and cats. Dogs and cats may be released for adoption, provided that the adopting party pays required fees and charges as set forth by the Master Fee Schedule, and further provided that: 
a.  There shall be established at the City Animal Shelter an on-site facility for the purpose of spaying and neutering all animals adopted through the Shelter which have not previously been surgically spayed or neutered; this facility will be staffed by a licensed veterinarian and be under the Chief of Police; if the City of Sapulpa staff does not include a licensed veterinarian and if the Chief of Police determines it is not reasonable to staff the facility through donate service, a bid process shall be used to select veterinary professionals to perform the on-site sterilizations of the adopted animals; 
b.  If the licensed veterinarian described in Subsection 4-110.E.2.a or, in the absence of such veterinarian, Chief of Police determines that the animal cannot be sterilized at the time of adoption, the adopting party shall sign an agreement to have the animal sterilized pursuant to the Dog and Cat Sterilization Act, Okla. Stat. tit. 4 § 499, et seq., or as the same may be amended, and shall deposit with the Chief of Police, fifty dollars ($50.00) to ensure that the animal will be sterilized. 
3.  Fees and charges. Before an animal may be adopted, fees, and charges as required by the Master Fee Schedule must be paid. 
The Chief of Police, subject to City Council approval, shall establish policies and implement administration procedures for either the refund of adoption fees or an exchange for adopted animals which are returned. 
F.  Animals wild by nature. All animals wild by nature and not authorized by Section 4-101 herein shall be euthanized, or donated to a zoo or a museum, except that, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, certain animals wild by nature which are native to Oklahoma and which in their natural habits do not present a danger to human beings or to property may be released to their natural habitats. 
G.  Public Sale. At the option of the Chief of Police, animals, other than dogs, cats, puppies, kittens and animals wild by nature, may be sold at a public sale pursuant to procedures set forth in this section, or donated to a zoo or museum. 
H.  Release to veterinarian. The Chief of Police may, at his discretion, release animals to a licensed veterinarian if the animal is in need of veterinary care. The veterinarian must agree in writing to accept responsibility for the animal and give the animal proper veterinary care in lieu of paying fees to receive the animal. If the animal is a dog or cat, the veterinarian must sterilize the animal before releasing the animal to any subsequent owner. 
I.  Release to animal welfare organizations. The Chief of Police may, at his discretion, release animals to a nonprofit animal welfare organization incorporated as such in the State of Oklahoma. If an animal so released is a dog or cat, an authorized representative of the organization must agree in writing to have the animal sterilized before releasing it to a subsequent owner. 
J.  Release for experiments or research. No animal shall be released for experimental or research purposes. 
K.  Procedures for public sale of animals. If an animal is to be sold at public sale, the Chief of Police shall give ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of such sale by causing notices to be posted in at least three (3) public places in the City; by publishing in a copy of such notice upon the owner, if known; and by providing such other notice as the Manager may direct. The notices shall be substantially in the following form: 
The following animals (describing them), having been taken up and impounded in the Animal Shelter of the City of Sapulpa for violations of the provisions of the ordinances of the City of Sapulpa, will unless reclaimed within ten (10) days from this date, be sold for cash to the highest bidder at public auction at the Animal Shelter at ___ o'clock, ___ .m. on the ___ day of ___, A.D. (giving hour and date of sale). Dated this ___ day of ___, A.D. 
Chief of Police 
City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma 
The owner may reclaim any animal prior to the sale by payment of all fees and charges set forth in Master Fee Schedule. 
L.  Fees for treatment of sick animals. In addition to all other fees, the owner of a sick or injured animal impounded by the Chief of Police shall reimburse the City of Sapulpa or a veterinarian for any fees incurred in treating the animal. 
M.  Destruction of animals. The Chief of Police may euthanize any animal if it has been surrendered to the Shelter or if the animal is so sick or injured that its cure is considered by the Chief of Police to be impracticable or if death is imminent, and in either of such event, such destruction may be done immediately without notice or any waiting period. Anyone surrendering an animal shall provide proof of his or her identity before the animal will be accepted.  
Sec. 4-111. - Commercial animal establishments. 
A.  Each commercial animal establishment, of any type, shall keep and maintain its animals and all pens, cages, tanks, or other holding facilities in which animals are kept, in such a manner as to prevent a nuisance or health hazard to humans and to avoid injury and minimize illness to such animals. All holding areas shall be disinfected periodically to reduce disease pathogens. 
B.  All animals housed in any commercial animal establishment shall have a wholesome, adequate diet and potable water consistent with the requirements and habits of the animal's species, type, size, age, and condition and available shelter with adequate ventilation and protection from the elements. Such animal showing evidence of disease or injury shall be immediately isolated and shall receive treatment by a licensed veterinarian or euthanized by same. Euthanasia of any domestic animal shall be performed by a licensed veterinarian. The reason and the procedure used for such euthanasia shall be documented. Upon receipt of a signed report or complaint alleging animal abuse or other conditions not in compliance with this section at any commercial animal establishment, an investigation shall be made by Animal Control. Its findings shall be documented and appropriate action taken. 
C.  Commercial animal establishments (Type B). No registration papers for animals on the premises may be kept on the premises, except those when attached to a contract of sale. Vaccination and other medical care of such animals shall be current, and the purchaser shall receive complete health records. The establishment shall provide written documentation of each animal's origin, including the breeder's name and the state where the animal was born, to the purchaser at the time of sale. All operators of a Type B commercial animal establishment shall apply to the City Clerk for a permit to operate such establishment in the City. No Type B commercial animal establishment shall sell animals in the City without the permit. The Clerk shall perform a background check encompassing the past ten (10) years, to ascertain if the applicant has been convicted of animal abuse or cruelty charges in that time. Conviction of animal abuse or cruelty shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a commercial animal establishment permit. The application processing fee and annual permit fee shall be as provided by the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 4-112. - Issuance of citations; collection of fines. 
A.  Municipal Court Clerk to assist. The Municipal Court Clerk of the City is hereby authorized to work in conjunction with the Chief of Police and to assist the Municipal Criminal Court in the clerical work involved in the expedient disposition of violations. 
B.  Penalties established by judge. The judge of the municipal court shall designate the penalties to be paid for the violations of this chapter which may be satisfied by payment at the Office of the Municipal Clerk, provided that penalties are within the limits herein established for such violations. 
C.  Citations. There shall be authorized by the Municipal Judge and provided by the Municipal Court Clerk suitable serially numbered forms for the notification of violators to appear and answer charges for violating this title, which forms shall be issued and receipted by the Clerk of the Municipal Court or by duly authorized persons acting for him. 
Upon the commission of any violation of this title, the Chief of Police or his designee shall take the violator's name, address, and place of employment, and issue to the violator in writing a notice on the form authorized by the Municipal Judge and provided by the Clerk of Municipal Criminal Court, commanding the violator to answer the charge against him within ten (10) days at the place specified in the notice. The notice shall contain a description of the animal found in violation and shall specify the fine for the violation in accordance with the order issued by the Judge of the Municipal Criminal Court. The issuance of the citation may be in addition to or in lieu of impoundment of the offending animal. 
D.  Failure to answer. Failure to give the required information or answer the notice provided for in this section shall authorize the Chief of Police to immediately place the violator under arrest and in custody. Whenever the Chief of Police deems it necessary, he may follow the procedure set out herein.  
Sec. 4-113. - Police dogs and dogs trained to guide the blind and hearing impaired and support service dogs for people with disabilities. 
If the dog is vaccinated as herein provided, it shall be lawful for any dog trained to guide any blind or hearing impaired person, or for any support service dog for people with disabilities, or for any police dog owned and used by the Police Department of the City as a police dog to be admitted to any public place or vehicle when actually accompanying a blind or hearing impaired person or person with a disability, or when utilized as a police dog, when the blind, hearing impaired or disabled person, or the officer accompanying the dog, might have the lawful right to entry.  
Sec. 4-114. - Outside agencies. 
A.  The Chief of Police is authorized to impound and dispose of any animal when requested to do so by another law enforcement agency. 
B.  The fees to be paid by the outside agency for this service are set forth in the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 4-115. - Records; funds. 
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to maintain records at the Animal Shelter containing the description and date of the seizure of all animals taken under the provisions of this title, the place where impounded, the name of the owner if known, and if unknown, the date of the notice given, and all subsequent proceedings relating to the sale of the animal and the amount realized. All fees collected by the Chief of Police and the proceeds of all sales shall be paid to the City Clerk. Any amount in excess of the fees due shall be held subject to the claim of the person entitled to them who may apply in writing to the City Clerk within six (6) months. If such excess is unclaimed after six (6) months, it shall be paid into the General Fund.  
Sec. 4-116. - Unlawful removal. 
Every person who shall take out or attempt to take out of the animal shelter or any animal shelter property, any animals located therein without paying the fees prescribed by this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense.  
Sec. 4-117. - Entering property. 
The Chief of Police may impound animals which are deemed to be at large within the meaning of this chapter and which are found off the immediate premises of their owners. In multi-family residential complexes, if the property manager or agent grants access, large animals may be removed from common areas generally made accessible to occupants and their guests. This includes but is not limited to playgrounds, parking lots, and walkways.  
Sec. 4-118. - Hobbyist exemption permit. 
A.  Hobby exemption permit. The City Clerk shall maintain a register of qualified hobbyist exemption permit holders. Application shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk, who shall notify the applicant of the acceptance or denial within thirty (30) days of the application date. If the exemption permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified of the reason for the denial. An initial permit fee and renewal fee shall be charged as specified by the Master Fee Schedule. 
A holder of a hobbyist exemption permit will be permitted to own and keep, at a single-family dwelling, a number of dogs and cats that would otherwise constitute an offense under Section 4-102 of this chapter; provided, however, that a permit holder other than an owner of hunting dogs shall allow outside the residence at any one time no more than the number of cats and dogs permitted by Section 4-102. A holder of a hobbyist exemption permit shall not be required to comply with Section 4-102 of this chapter; provided, however, that an individual rescuer must comply with Section 4-102 as to those dogs and cats owned by the rescuer on a permanent basis. 
B.  Permit qualifications. Any individual or organization, not a commercial breeder, that: 
1.  Is actively involved in any nationally recognized, organized animal sport or hobby for a period of at least one (1) year prior to making application for a hobbyist exemption; or 
2.  Participates in field trials, owns nationally recognized breeds used specifically as hunting dogs, participates in hunting activities, and has held and continues to hold a current, valid State of Oklahoma hunting license for a period of a least one (1) year prior to making application for a hobbyist exemption; or 
3.  Qualifies as a rescuer according to the provisions of this chapter; and 
4.  Has not been convicted in the past ten (10) years of any offense related to: Illegal commercial breeding, brokering, dog fighting, a nuisance offense under this chapter, a cruelty offense under this chapter, a neglect offense under this chapter, a violation of the Oklahoma Wildlife Conservation Code or regulations, or two (2) or more violations of this chapter prohibiting at large dogs and cats shall qualify for a hobbyist exemption permit. 
C.  Application documents. An applicant for a hobbyist exemption permit shall submit to the City Clerk one (1) of the following: 
1.  Certificates of completion of a least two (2) training classes, dated within the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date of application; or 
2.  A show catalog including the applicant's name as an exhibitor, and not less than two (2) superintendents' conformation receipts, dated within the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date of application; or 
3.  A certificate of title(s) from a national registry for a dog or cat owned by the applicant; or 
4.  For a rescuer organization, proof that the organization is approved by the Chief of Police pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. The organization shall submit a list of individual households that are authorized to serve as rescuers under the organization's permit; or 
5.  For an owner of hunting dogs, proof that the owner hold or is exempt from holding a current and valid State of Oklahoma hunting license. 
Any activity involving the fighting or physical contact between animals or any activity otherwise illegal or dangerous to animals shall not be considered an organized sport or hobby for purposes of this section. 
D.  Renewal. A permit holder must reapply for the exemption permit every year. 
To make application, the permit holder must furnish to the City Clerk one (1) or more of the items listed above; provided, however, that such cats and dogs are harbored for no longer than ninety (90) days each while the rescuer attempts to locate the animal's home or a new home. If the rescuer must harbor an animal for longer than ninety (90) days due to its medical condition, the rescuer shall so notify the City Clerk. 
E.  Records. If applicable, the permit holder shall keep accurate records in accordance with the requirements of his associated national registry on each dog or cat owned, and on each dog or cat where ownership has been transferred. These records shall be open to the registry with which the hobbyist is affiliated. 
F.  Requirements of a rescuer. A rescuer may harbor dogs and cats in accordance with this chapter; provided, however, that such cats and dogs are harbored for no longer than ninety (90) days each while the rescuer attempts to locate the animal's home or a new home. If a rescuer must harbor an animal for longer than ninety (90) days due to its medical condition, the rescuer shall so notify the City Clerk. 
G.  Revocation. A permit holder shall have his hobbyist exemption permit or the right to serve as a rescuer under an organization's permit revoked if he has been convicted of an offense of: Illegal commercial breeding; brokering; dog fighting; a nuisance under this chapter; cruelty under this chapter; neglect under this chapter; violation of the Oklahoma Wildlife Conservation code or regulation; or two (2) or more violations of this chapter prohibiting at large dogs and cats.  
Sec. 4-119. - Dangerous dogs. 
A.  Permit and certificate of registration required. 
1.  It is unlawful for a person to own, harbor, or possess a dangerous dog without a permit and certificate of registration being issued to the owner of the dog by the City Clerk according to this chapter. This permit and certification requirement shall not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials for police work. 
2.  The owner of a dangerous dog for which a permit and certificate of registration is required shall, prior to bringing or allowing the dog to be within City limits, apply to the City Clerk, or his or her designee, for a permit and registration certificate for each dangerous dog owned by him or her. The Clerk or designated representative shall issue a permit and certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog if the owner presents sufficient evidence of compliance with Section 4-119 to the Chief of Police, or his designee. 
3.  All unregistered dangerous dogs within the City are deemed illegal animals. The person harboring or keeping an unregistered dangerous dog shall either register the dog with the City Clerk or have the animal removed from the City; and if any unregistered dangerous dog is found again unregistered in the City, the dog shall be destroyed. This section shall not apply to a dog which, upon initial notice, the owner agrees to properly register and confine the dog, or to a dog for which a hearing has been requested under this chapter to determine if it is a dangerous dog under the Code. 
4.  In addition to all other fees authorized to be assessed, the Animal Control Department may assess, and the owner or custodian of the dog must pay, the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for issuance of the permit allowing possession of a dangerous dog in the City. The permit shall be for a one (1) year period and may be renewed for additional one (1) year periods upon payment of the twenty-five dollars ($25.00) fee and compliance with other requirements of this section. 
B.  Confinement of dangerous dogs. 
1.  All dangerous dogs shall be securely confined within an occupied house or residence or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed as provided in this section. No dangerous dog may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such structure of its own volition. 
2.  All pens, kennels, or other structures designed or used to confine dangerous dogs must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides or, in lieu of a top, walls at least six (6) feet in height and at least six (6) feet taller than any internal structure within the enclosed structure. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the ground beneath the gate shall be secured by imbedded posts and the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two (2) feet so as to prevent digging under the walls by the confined dog, unless such pen has a concrete bottom, in which case the sides need only be embedded two (2) inches deep into the concrete. 
3.  All such pens or structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Any stationary pen or enclosure shall be required to be of a size at least two (2) square feet per pound of the dog so confined. Square feet per pound should be judged by the type of dog at average full-grown weight. 
4.  No person shall permit or allow a dangerous dog to go unconfined (outside its house, pen, kennel, or structure) unless such dog is securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash no longer than six (6) feet in length. The muzzle shall not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall be made in a manner sufficient to prevent the dog from biting any human or other animal. No person shall permit or allow a dangerous dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel, pen, or other structure unless both the dog and leash are under the actual physical control of a person eighteen (18) years of age or older. Dangerous dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, or any other object or structure. 
5.  The owner or person in control of a dangerous dog shall display in a prominent place on his or her premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a dangerous dog on the premises. A similar sign is required to be posted on each side of the pen, enclosure or kennel of the dog. 
C.  Confiscation of dangerous dogs. Any dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the Animal Control Department if the dog is not validly registered as required by Section 4-119, or the dog is not confined or maintained in a proper enclosure required by Section 4-119, or the dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside the proper enclosure and not muzzled and under physical restraint of a responsible person as required by Section 4-119. 
Any dangerous dog confiscated pursuant to this section and not reclaimed by its owner within five (5) days from the date of confiscation shall be deemed abandoned and, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, or his designee, humanely destroyed. Any dangerous dog which is found more than twice in any calendar year not to be confined as required by this chapter shall be, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, or his designee, permanently removed from the City or humanely destroyed. 
D.  Animal Control declaration of dangerous dog. If the Department of Animal Control has cause to believe a dog is dangerous, the department may find and declare such a dog to be a dangerous dog and the animal shall be immediately released and surrendered by the owner or custodian thereof to the Animal Control Department until a permit for the animal is obtained or an appeal filed by the owner as provided for herein. 
Dogs shall not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. The owner shall have five (5) days from delivery of the notice that a dog is deemed dangerous to comply with the provisions of this chapter by removing the dog from the City limits, taking the prescribed measures to obtain a permit for the dog to remain in the City, or to dispute the finding by filing a written appeal with the office of the municipal court clerk within five (5) days of the declaration notice, which action shall be heard on the Court's next available docket. 
Upon conclusion of a hearing, the Judge is authorized to enter a finding on the matter and if finding that the dog is a dangerous dog, may order: 
1.  The payment of court costs and fines in the maximum amount allowed by law; 
2.  The installation of fencing, restraints, or enclosures in such a manner to provide the degree of protection warranted by the danger presented; 
3.  The owner to obtain a policy of liability insurance in the amount deemed necessary to protect the public from any injuries inflicted on the public by the dangerous dog; 
4.  The removal of the dog from the City limits; or 
5.  The confiscation and/or destruction of the dog. Should the owner of the dog fail within the five (5) day period to file an appeal and/or not contact the Animal Control Department to obtain the required permit or permanently remove the animal from the City, then the dog shall be deemed abandoned and may be humanely destroyed by the Animal Control Department. No permit shall be issued for a dangerous dog until all requirements of Section 4-119 shall have been met. 
E.  Judicial declaration of dangerous dog. An officer of the City, or any citizen, may initiate a municipal court proceeding to determine whether a dog is a "dangerous" dog by filing a complaint with Municipal Court Clerk. Upon the conclusion of a hearing, the Judge of the Municipal Court is authorized to enter a finding on the complaint and, if finding that the dog is a dangerous dog, may order: 
1.  The payment of court costs and fines in the maximum amount allowed by law; 
2.  The installation of fencing, restraints, or enclosures in such a manner to provide the degree of protection warranted by the danger presented; 
3.  The owner to obtain a policy of liability insurance in the amount deemed necessary to protect the public from any injuries inflicted on the public by the dangerous dog; 
4.  The removal of the dog from the City limits; or 
5.  The confiscation and/or destruction of the dog.  
Sec. 4-120. - Vicious dogs. 
A.  Prohibited. All vicious dogs within the City are deemed illegal animals. No person shall keep any vicious dog anywhere in the City. No landlord or landlord's agent shall knowingly permit any tenant to move in a vicious dog into any building or premises owned or controlled by such landlord or agent. No landlord or landlord's agent shall knowingly permit any person to keep any vicious dog in any building or premises owned or controlled by such landlord or agent. Any landlord or agent learning of any vicious dog in any building or premises owned or controlled by such landlord or agent shall notify the person having such dog to remove the dog from the City immediately. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials for police work. 
B.  Confiscation. Any vicious dog found in the City shall be immediately confiscated and humanely destroyed as provided herein. 
C.  Animal Control declaration of vicious dog. If the Department of Animal Control has cause to believe a dog is vicious, the department may find and declare such a dog to be a vicious dog and the animal shall be immediately released and surrendered by the owner or custodian thereof to the Animal Control Department until an appeal is filed by the owner as provided for herein. 
Dogs shall not be declared vicious if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
The owner shall have five (5) days from delivery of the notice that a dog is deemed vicious to comply with the provisions of this chapter by removing the dog from the City limits, or taking the prescribed measures to appeal the determination that the dog is vicious. Should the owner of the dog not contact the Animal Control Department within the five (5) day period and permanently remove the animal from the City, then the dog shall be humanely destroyed by the Animal Control Department. To dispute the declaration that a dog is vicious, an owner shall file a written appeal with the office of the municipal court clerk within five (5) days of the notice, which action shall be heard on the Court's next available docket. Upon conclusion of a hearing, the Judge is authorized to enter a finding on the appeal and if finding that the dog is a vicious dog, may order: 
1.  The removal of the dog from the City limits; and/or 
2.  The confiscation and/or destruction of the dog. 
D.  Judicial declaration of vicious dog. An officer of the City, or any citizen, may initiate a municipal court proceeding to determine whether a dog is a "vicious" dog by filing a complaint with Municipal Court Clerk. Upon the conclusion of a hearing, the Judge of the Municipal Court is authorized to enter a finding on the complaint and, if finding that the dog is a vicious dog, may order: 
1.  The removal of the dog from the City limits; and/or 
2.  The confiscation and/or destruction of the dog. 
(Ord. 2562, 09/02/2008)  
Part 5 - BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CODES  
CHAPTER 1. - BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 5-101. - Building codes adopted. 
A.  The International Building Code as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (OUBCC), is adopted by the City for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for design, construction, quality of materials, repair, alteration, change of use or occupancy, addition or relocation of existing buildings and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the International Building Code, as well as any appendices referenced, as adopted and amended by the OUBCC are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code, said amendment, incorporation and codification occurring automatically upon (i) the publication of such later edition by the International Code Council and OUBCC; and (ii) the receipt and approval of said edition by the City Building Inspector. At least one (1) copy of the Code is to be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk or his or her designee. 
B.  The Residential Building Code as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (OUBCC), is adopted by the City for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for design, construction, quality of materials, repair, alteration, change of use or occupancy, addition or relocation of existing buildings and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the Residential Building Code, as well as any appendices referenced, as adopted and amended by the OUBCC are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code, said amendment, incorporation and codification occurring automatically upon (i) the publication of such later edition by the International Code Council and OUBCC; and (ii) the receipt and approval of said edition by the City Building Inspector. At least one (1) copy of the Code is to be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk or his or her designee. 
C.  The International Existing Building Code, as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (OUBCC), is adopted by the City for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for design, construction, quality of materials, repair, alteration, change of use or occupancy, addition or relocation of existing buildings and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the International Existing Building Code, as well as any appendices referenced, as adopted and amended by the OUBCC are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code, said amendment, incorporation and codification occurring automatically upon (i) the publication of such later edition by the International Code Council and OUBCC; and (ii) the receipt and approval of said edition by the City Building Inspector. At least one copy of the Code is to be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk or his or her designee. 
(Ord. 2494, 06/05/2006; Ord. 2742 01/19/2016.) 
State Law reference— Adoption of building codes, authorized codes, 11 O.S. § 14-107; 74 O.S. § 324.8.  
Sec. 5-102. - Permit fees. 
The applicable permit and inspection fees provided for or required by the City Building Codes are set forth in the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 5-103. - Penalty. 
A person who violates a provision of this Code or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, or removes, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, or removed a building or structure without applying for a permit and/or in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined any sum as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code, plus costs. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  
Sec. 5-104. - Fire limits defined. 
A.  The fire limits of the City are hereby fixed and established as the municipal limits of the City of Sapulpa. 
B.  All commercial buildings erected inside the City limits will comply with the restrictions placed upon buildings built in the fire limits heretofore set forth. 
(Ord. 1090, 03/02/1964; Ord. 1565, 02/07/1977; Ord. 1608, 02/09/1978)  
Sec. 5-105. - Footings and foundations. 
All footings and foundations for structures four hundred (400) square feet and larger shall meet or exceed the design and constructions guidelines in this portion of the Sapulpa Building Code. These design and construction guidelines are graphically represented in Table 5-105.1 below. 
A.  Footings and foundations shall be built on undisturbed soil or compacted fill material. Compacted fill material shall be placed in accordance with the currently adopted International Building Code of the City of Sapulpa; 
B.  The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface is permitted to have a slope not exceeding one (1) unit vertical in ten (10) units horizontal (ten (10) percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footing or where the surface of the ground slopes more than one (1) unit vertical in ten (10) units horizontal. 
C.  The minimum depth and width of all footings and foundations for structures four hundred (400) square feet and larger shall meet or exceed that standards in Table 5-105.1. 
D.  Footings shall be of Concrete type and shall meet or exceed that standards set forth in Table 5-105.1. 
E.  When a structure is being built on "fill dirt," piers may be installed as an option as long as the pier is approved by the Building Inspector and meets or exceeds the footing depth and width requirements for 1, 2, and 3 story structures set forth in Table 5-105.1. 
F.  Any footing placed on piers shall have piers to a depth equal to Table 5-105.1 for the corresponding application. Footings should be piered at every corner, change of direction, and at intervals not exceeding ten (10) feet when wall spans are in excess of ten (10) feet. 
G.  Concrete slab floors shall have horizontal bracing consisting of #4 Rebar and two (2) foot centers minimum. The horizontal bracing shall be attached to the vertical bracing rising out of the footing. 
H.  Post tension systems may be substituted for the horizontal rebar bracing when designed by a licensed engineer and the design approved by the Building Inspector. 
I.  Vertical bracing must have sufficient length to be bent to a horizontal plane and extend at least six (6) inches in the horizontal direction. 
Table 5-105.1 
Number of 
Floors 
Supported by Footing 
and 
Foundation 	Thickness of 
Foundation 
Wall 	Width of 
Footing 
(inches) 	Thickness of 
Footing 
(inches) 	Depth of 
Footing Below 
Undisturbed 
Ground 
Surface 	Rebar 
Requirements 
(horizontal) 	Rebar Vertical Requirements (up-rights for ground) 
1 	6 	16 	18 	16 	4#4's 	#4's at 2' 
2 and 1 story 
if piered 	8 	16 	18 	16 	4#5's 	#4's at 2' 
3 	10 	18 	24 	18 	6#5's 	#4's at 2' 
 
(Ord. 2396, 12/02/2002)  
Sec. 5-106. - Personal generators to produce electricity prohibited except during emergencies. 
No person, firm or entity owning, leasing, or in custody or control of any building or structure located within the City limits, which building or structure has access to available electrical service through a regulated electric utility provider, shall operate a gasoline/propane generator to produce electricity for the electrical needs of such building or structure, excepting in times of emergency when public electricity is not available to such building or structure and then only during such time of emergency. A person who violates this provision or fails to comply herewith shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of the Code. 
(Ord. 2509, 12/18/2006)  
Sec. 5-107. - Elevator/escalator requirements and inspections. 
A.  The following safety standards covers new, existing elevators, escalators and their hoistways. The current American Society of Mechanical Engineers safety code ASME A 17.1 for new elevators and escalators and ASME A 17.3 for existing elevators and escalators is hereby adopted in its entirety and incorporated by reference herein as if fully set forth. Existing installations, at a minimum, shall meet the requirements of this Code. If an existing installation does not meet the requirements of this Code, it shall be upgraded no later than six (6) months after the effective date of this Code, except that the requirement of knox box provided for herein must be in place within thirty (30) days of the passage of this Code. If an existing installation was required to meet more stringent requirements, it shall continue to meet those requirements. 
B.  Alterations, if made, shall conform to the requirements of Part XII of ASME A 17.1. The alterations in Part XII may be more stringent than the requirements of this Code. The more stringent of the two shall be adhered to. Where a requirement, because of practical difficulty, cannot be complied with literally or where it's literal application would cause undue hardship, the enforcing authority may, upon proper application, grant exceptions, but only when it is clearly evident that reasonable safety is assured. The enforcing authority may also grant exceptions or permit alternate methods where it is assured that equivalent objectives can be achieved by establishing and maintaining effective safety. 
C.  Every establishment with new and existing installation shall provide a knox box key box with an elevator drop key for Sapulpa Fire Department use only. The knox box shall be located no further than ten (10) feet from the elevator door at ground level. The Sapulpa Fire Department, Office of the Fire Marshal or his designee, being the authority having jurisdiction, will make periodic inspections during the calendar year. At any time the authority having jurisdiction, finds an unsafe condition, or the knox box with key is not provided, the authority will have the right to immediately close the installation for the safety and welfare of the public. 
D.  All installations shall be tested annually by a certified inspection company. These results shall be forwarded to the Office of the Fire Marshal at the Sapulpa Fire Department no later than December 31 of each calendar year. 
(Ord. 2374, 04/01/2002; Ord. 2375, 04/01/2002)  
Sec. 5-108. - Additions or changes to elevator code. 
The Elevator Code shall be and hereby is amended to include any later or subsequent editions of the elevator codes listed below, said amendment, incorporation and codification occurring automatically upon (i) the publication(s) of such later edition(s) by the Department of Labor (ii) the receipt and approval of said edition(s) by the City Building Inspector. 
Current Elevator Adopted Codes (by Department of Labor) 	Edition/Code Year 
Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators, A17.1/CSA B44 	2013 
Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators (Includes Requirements for Electric and Hydraulic Elevators and Escalators), A17.3 	2015 
Safety Standard for Platform lifts and Stairway Chairlifts, A18.1 	2014 
Safety Standard for Belt Man-lifts, A90.1 	2015 
ANSI/ASSE, Safety Requirements for Personnel Hoists and Employee Elevators, A10.4 	2016 
 
The Department of Labor, in order to protect public health and safety, has jurisdiction to ensure that elevators, escalators, moving sidewalks, and similar devices are installed, maintained, and regularly inspected in compliance with recognized safety standards and codes. All elevator contractors, elevator mechanics, and elevator inspectors are required to be licensed by the state.  
CHAPTER 2. - PLUMBING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 5-201. - Plumbing code adopted. 
The "International Plumbing Code" 2009 edition, including all Appendix Chapters, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City for regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as therein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out, and the same is necessarily amended so as to make the Plumbing Code fully applicable in the City. The applicable permit and inspection fees provided for or required by the Plumbing Code are set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2494, 06/05/2006)  
Sec. 5-202. - Additions or changes to plumbing code. 
The Plumbing Code shall be and hereby is amended to include any later or subsequent edition to the 2009 edition of the International Plumbing Code provided for in Section 5-201, said amendment, incorporation and codification occurring automatically upon (i) the publication of such later edition by the International Code Council and (ii) the receipt and approval of said edition by the City Building Inspector. 
State Law reference— Plumbing regulations and licensing, 59 O.S. § 1001 et seq.  
Sec. 5-203. - Plumbers' license. 
A.  No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade, or occupation of a plumbing contractor, a journeyman plumber, or a plumber's apprentice unless he possesses a current and valid license as such from the State. 
B.  Bond and insurance requirements of plumbing contractors shall meet the requirements established by state law. 
C.  No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade or occupation of a plumbing contractor, a journeyman plumber or a plumber's apprentice unless he has first registered as such with the City and paid the annual fee set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. Such registrations shall expire annually on June 30. 
State Law reference— State plumbing licenses required, cities may require registration, 59 O.S. § 1001 et seq.  
Sec. 5-204. - Garage install gas hot water tank. 
All installations of gas hot water tank/heater inside of a garage will require that the unit is installed on a raised platform with at least eighteen (18) inches of clearance. All other requirements for installation as per the existing Code will be required and inspected.  
Sec. 5-205. - Penalty. 
A person who violates a provision of this Code or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs or removes, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, or removed a building or structure without applying for a permit and/or in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined any sum as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code, plus costs. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  
CHAPTER 3. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 5-301. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
The "NFPA 70 National Electrical Code" 2008 edition, including all Appendix Chapters, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the City for regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of electrical installations and systems as therein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said electrical code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out, and the same is necessarily amended so as to make the electrical code fully applicable in the City. The applicable permit and inspection fees provided for or required by the Electrical Code are set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2494, 06/05/2006)  
Sec. 5-302. - Additions or changes to electrical code. 
The electrical code shall be and hereby is amended to include any later or subsequent edition to the 2008 edition of the National Electrical Code provided for in Section 5-301, said amendment, incorporation and codification occurring automatically upon (i) the publication of such later edition by the National Electric Code and (ii) the receipt and approval of said edition by the City Building Inspector.  
Sec. 5-303. - Electricians' license. 
A.  No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade, or occupation of an electrical contractor, journeyman electrician, or electrician's apprentice unless he holds a current license obtained from the state. 
B.  Bond and insurance requirements of electrical contractors shall meet the requirements established by state law. 
C.  No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade, or occupation of an electrical contractor, a journeyman electrician, or an electrician's apprentice unless he has first registered as such with the City and paid the annual fee set by the Master Fee Schedule. Such registrations shall expire annually on June 30. 
State Law reference— Electrical License Act, 59 O.S. §§ 1680—1696.  
Sec. 5-304. - Penalty. 
A person who violates a provision of this Code or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, or removes, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, or removed a building or structure without applying for a permit and/or in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined any sum as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code, plus costs. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  
CHAPTER 4. - GAS PIPING CODE 
 
Sec. 5-401. - Fuel gas code adopted. 
The "International Fuel Gas Code" 2009 edition, including all Appendix Chapters, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the City for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as therein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said fuel gas code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out, and the same is necessarily amended so as to make the fuel gas code fully applicable in the City. The applicable permit and inspection fees provided for or required by the fuel gas code are set forth in the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 5-402. - Additions or changes to fuel gas code. 
The Fuel gas code shall be and hereby is amended to include any later or subsequent edition to the 2009 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code provided for in Section 5-401, said amendment, incorporation and codification occurring automatically upon (i) the publication of such later edition by the International Code Council and (ii) the receipt and approval of said edition by the City Building Inspector.  
Sec. 5-403. - License. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing gas piping or gas appliances without first obtaining any license required by the state. 
B.  Bond and insurance shall be provided by the licensee in such amounts as required by the state.  
Sec. 5-404. - Penalty. 
A person who violates a provision of this Code or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, or removes, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, or removed a building or structure without applying for a permit and/or in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined any sum as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code, plus costs. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  
CHAPTER 5. - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS 
 
Sec. 5-501. - Persons must comply with code. 
The National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 58 entitled Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases, or latest edition thereof, also adopted by the Oklahoma Liquefied Petroleum Gas Board, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference and shall have full force and effect within this City. 
State Law reference— Oklahoma Liquefied Petroleum Gas Regulation Act, 52 O.S. § 420.1 et seq.  
Sec. 5-502. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate this chapter, or any section or part of section thereof, is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code.  
CHAPTER 6. - MOVING BUILDINGS INTO CITY LIMITS 
 
Sec. 5-601. - Permit required. 
A.  The moving of residential structures from one (1) location to another within the City or from a location outside the City to a location within the City is prohibited except as provided by this section. It is unlawful for any person to so move any house or building in, along, across, or over any street or alley in the City limits without first having obtained prior approval. 
B.  An application for such approval shall be made upon forms provided by the Building Inspector and shall contain the following information: (i) type and kind of building to be moved; (ii) its present location and proposed new location; (iii) the extreme dimension of the loaded length, height and width of the building; (iv) the appropriate time such buildings will be upon the streets of the City and the contemplated route that will be taken from the present to the proposed location that will be taken from the present to the proposed location; and (v) the present value of such building. The application to move such building shall be submitted to the Fire and Police Departments of the City and any utility providers and their approval of the request shall be obtained prior to issuance of any permit for such movement. 
C.  A permit to move such building or structure shall not be issued until (i) such building or structure has been inspected by the City Building Inspector and found to be in such condition that the same complies with all pertinent City Building Codes and Zoning requirements at its proposed location and may be moved with safety and in accordance with this section, and satisfy any other criteria adopted as policy by the Urban Development Department of the City, (ii) the applicant deposits with the Building Inspector a policy of insurance bond, or similar surety covering public liability for personal injuries, property damage, or death in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence; and property damage to any person by reason of the moving of such building or structure and reimburse the City for any and all damages to its streets and public ways occasioned by such moving in an amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
D.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to storage sheds moved onto a location which are not used for human occupancy. Every applicant, before being granted approval under this section shall pay all building and inspection fees and permit fee as required and set forth in the Master Fee Schedule to the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 2395-A, 02/03/2003)  
CHAPTER 7. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 5-701. - Mechanical code adopted. 
The "International Mechanical Code" 2009 edition, including all Appendix Chapters, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the City for regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as therein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said mechanical code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out, and the same is necessarily amended so as to make the mechanical code fully applicable in the City. The applicable permit and inspection fees provided for or required by the mechanical code are set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2494, 06/05/2006)  
Sec. 5-702. - Additions or changes to mechanical code. 
The mechanical code shall be and hereby is amended to include any later or subsequent edition to the 2009 edition of the International mechanical code provided for in Section 5-701, said amendment, incorporation and codification occurring automatically upon (i) the publication of such later edition by the International Code Council and (ii) the receipt and approval of said edition by the City Building Inspector.  
Sec. 5-703. - Mechanical license. 
A.  No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade or occupation of a mechanical contractor, a mechanical journeyman, or a mechanical apprentice unless he has a current and valid license issued by the state. 
B.  Bond and insurance requirements of mechanical contractors shall meet the requirements established by state law. 
C.  No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade, or occupation of a mechanical contractor, a mechanical journeyman, or a mechanic's apprentice unless he has first registered as such with the City and paid the annual fee set by the Master Fee Schedule. Such registrations shall expire annually on June 30. 
State Law reference— State mechanical licenses required, cities may require registration, 59 O.S. § 1850.1 et seq.  
Sec. 5-704. - Penalty. 
A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code.  
CHAPTER 8. - SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Sec. 5-801. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this chapter, "swimming pool" means any and every pool of water, any part of which is more than twenty-four (24) inches in depth constructed on either public or private property.  
Sec. 5-802. - Permits, fee. 
No person shall erect, construct or install a swimming pool in the City on public or private property without first making written application and obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Inspector and paying the applicable permit fee set by the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 5-803. - Barriers required. 
Before the City authorizes the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall submit to the Building Inspector plans and specifications for suitable effective barriers for preventing children and other unauthorized persons from entering the swimming pool area, including but not limited to any fence, wall, structure not less than forty-eight (48) inches in height. No person shall construct, install, erect, locate or maintain any swimming pool in the City unless the swimming pool is in an area completely enclosed or protected by a suitable effective barrier.  
Sec. 5-804. - Safety, sanitation, and conservation. 
Any person owning and operating a swimming pool shall not violate any ordinary rules of safety, sanitation or conservation of the State or City concerning the maintenance and operation of a swimming pool.  
Sec. 5-805. - Penalty. 
Violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code.  
CHAPTER 9. - FAIR HOUSING 
 
Sec. 5-901. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the City to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the City. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 9AA, as amended)  
Sec. 5-902. - Definitions. 
As used herein: 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under Section 5-904 through Section 5-906; 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended or occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof; 
Family means and includes a single individual; 
Person means and includes one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries; and 
To rent means and includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 9AA, as amended)  
Sec. 5-903. - Unlawful practice. 
Subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section and Section 5-907, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in Section 5-903 shall apply to: 
A.  All dwellings except as exempted by subsection B of this section; 
B.  Nothing in Section 5-904 shall apply to: 
1.  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner provided: That such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time. 
2.  That in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four (24) month period. 
3.  That such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time. 
4.  That the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this title only if such house is sold or rented. 
C.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
1.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection C of Section 5-904 of this chapter, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow, agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title, or 
2.  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his residence. 
D.  For the purposes of subsection B, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
1.  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
2.  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as an agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
3.  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 9AA, as amended)  
Sec. 5-904. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
As made applicable by Section 5-903 and except as exempted by subsection B of Section 5-903 and Section 5-907, it shall be unlawful: 
A.  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status; 
B.  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, sex, color, religion, national original, handicap, or familial status; 
C.  To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, sex, color, religion, or national origin, handicap, or familial status or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination; 
D.  To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; or 
E.  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, sex, color, religion, or national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 9AA, as amended)  
Sec. 5-905. - Discrimination in the financing or housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or their financial assistance, because of the race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in subsection B of Section 5-903. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 9AA, as amended)  
Sec. 5-906. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, rental or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status.  
Sec. 5-907. - Exemption. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwelling which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, sex, color, national origin, handicap, or familial status. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.  
Sec. 5-908. - Administration. 
A.  The authority and responsibility for administering this chapter shall be in the City Manager. 
B.  The City Council shall serve as the fair housing board for the City.  
Sec. 5-909. - Education and conciliation. 
Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the City Manager shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the purposes of this chapter. He shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the provisions of this chapter and his suggested means of implementing it, and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 9AA, as amended)  
Sec. 5-910. - Enforcement. 
A.  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the City Manager. Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the City Manager requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the City Manager shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who allegedly committed or about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a complaint, or within thirty (30) days after the expiration of any period of reference under subsection C, the City Manager shall investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he intends to resolve it. If the City Manager decides to resolve the complaints, he shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this chapter without the written consent of the persons concerned. Any employee of the City who shall make public any information in violation of this provision shall be (upon conviction) punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
B.  A complaint under subsection A shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and with the leave of the City Manager, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified. 
C.  If within thirty (30) days after a complaint is filed with the City Manager, the City Manager has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this chapter, the person aggrieved may, within thirty (30) days thereafter, file a complaint with the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The Manager will assist in this filing. 
D.  If the City Manager has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance within thirty (30) days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within thirty (30) days hereafter commence a civil action in any appropriate court, against the respondent names in the complaint to enforce the rights granted or protected by this chapter, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be appropriate. 
E.  In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of proof shall be on the complainant. 
F.  Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the City Manager shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary compliance. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 9AA, as amended)  
Sec. 5-911. - Investigation; subpoenas; giving of evidence. 
A.  In conducting an investigation the City Manager shall have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record, and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation; provided however, that the City Manager first complies with the provisions of the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The City Manager may issue a subpoena to compel his access to or the production of such materials, or the appearance of such persons, and may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the United States District Court for the district in which the investigation is taking place. The City Manager may administer oaths. 
B.  Upon written application to the City Manager, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the manager to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at his request. 
C.  Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the City Manager shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in United States District Courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him. 
D.  Within five (5) days after services of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the City Manager to revoke or modify the subpoena. The City Manager shall grant the petition if he finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason. 
E.  In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the City Manager or other person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in which the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts business. 
F.  Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or other evidence, if in his power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order of the manager shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. Any person who, with intent thereby to mislead the City Manager, shall make or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record, or other document submitted to the City Manager pursuant to his subpoena or other order, or shall willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full, true, and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or other documents, or shall willfully mutilate, alter, or by any other means falsify any documentary evidence, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
G.  The City Attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the City Manager participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 9AA, as amended)  
Sec. 5-912. - Enforcement by private persons. 
A.  The rights granted by Sections 5-903 through 5-906 and may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts of general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided however, that the court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section or subsection D of Section 5-910 from time to time before bringing it to trial if the court believes that the conciliation efforts of the City Manager are likely to result in satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing practice complained of in the complaint made to the City Manager and which practice forms the basis for the action in court; and provided, however, that any sale, encumbrance, or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any court order issued under the authority of this chapter, and involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant without actual notice of the existence of the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this chapter shall not be affected. 
B.  The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, and may award to the plaintiff actual damages and punitive damages as provided by law, together with court costs and reasonable attorney's fees in the case of a prevailing plaintiff. Provided, that the plaintiff in the opinion of the court is not financially able to assume the attorney's fees. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 9AA, as amended)  
Sec. 5-913. - Interference, coercion, or intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by Sections 5-903 through 5-906. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 9AA, as amended)  
Sec. 5-914. - Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases. 
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to injure, intimidate or interfere with: 
A.  Any person because of his race, color, religion, national origin, handicap or familial status and because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; 
B.  Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from: 
1.  Participating, without discrimination on account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in paragraph A of this section; 
2.  Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate; or 
C.  Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A of this section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 9AA, as amended)  
CHAPTER 10. - JOINT CODE BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Sec. 5-1001. - Creation of board, scope. 
A Joint Code Board of Appeals (board) is hereby created to hear and determine all appeals of building, electrical, fire, mechanical and plumbing code violations or decisions made by the respective code official for the City. 
(Ord. 2068, 10/07/1991)  
Sec. 5-1002. - Board members, term. 
The Joint Code Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor, and approved by the Council, as follows: 
A.  Two (2) for five (5) years; 
B.  Two (2) for four (4) years, 
C.  One (1) for three (3) years; 
D.  One (1) for two (2) years, and 
E.  One (1) for one (1) year. 
Thereafter, each member shall serve for five (5) years or until a successor has been appointed, but in no event shall a member serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term of any member in the manner set forth for appointments to a full term. A board member may be removed by the appointing commission for failure to attend three (3) consecutive regular or special meetings, or failure to attend two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the regular or special meetings held during any six-month period, or for failure to maintain their prerequisite qualifications. All members shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. 2068, 10/07/1991)  
Sec. 5-1003. - Composition, qualifications. 
A.  The board shall be composed of three (3) lay persons and one (1) person from each of the respective fields of practice as follows: 
1.  Building; 
2.  Electrical; 
3.  Mechanical; and 
4.  Plumbing. 
B.  The lay people shall be employed in or reside in the City limits and be, in the judgment of the Mayor, qualified and experienced in matters relating to code enforcement. 
C.  The building representative shall have five (5) years code experience, shall be active as an architect or professional engineer and shall keep, occupy or be employed by a company doing business in the respective professional trade, shall be knowledgeable of fire safety design and procedure and all other building codes. 
D.  The electrical representative shall have five (5) years code experience, shall be active as a registered electrical contractor or registered journeyman electrician and shall keep, occupy or be employed by a company doing business in the electrical trade. 
E.  The mechanical representative shall have five (5) years code experience, shall be active as a registered mechanical contractor or registered mechanical journeyman and shall keep, occupy or be employed by a company doing business in the mechanical trade. 
F.  The plumbing representative shall have five (5) years code experience, shall be active as a registered plumbing contractor or registered journeyman plumber and shall keep, occupy or be employed by a company doing business in the plumbing trade. 
(Ord. 2068, 10/07/1991)  
Sec. 5-1004. - Quorum, procedure. 
In order to conduct official business, a quorum consisting of five (5) members must be present. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the board may determine. The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice-chair, or acting chair may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings, deliberations, and voting of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each individual member, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. Records of board examinations and other official actions are public records which shall be kept and immediately filed in the office of the Joint Code Board of Appeals located within City Hall. 
(Ord. 2068, 10/07/1991)  
Sec. 5-1005. - Votes, conflict of interest. 
All decisions made by the board will be by majority vote of the members present. A board member shall refrain from voting on any question involving a project on which the member, or the member's firm, has been involved. In such situations, the member shall not be counted as a member present for purposes of determining the majority vote. 
(Ord. 2068, 10/07/1991)  
Sec. 5-1006. - Appeal procedures. 
A.  An appeal to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination of the City's code official in the enforcement of the respective code. 
B.  An appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days from the determination complained of by filing with the secretary of the board and with the office of the City's Code Official, who made the determination complained of, a notice of appeal, specifying in detail the grounds thereof and the specific code provision in question. The City's code official, upon receipt of notice, shall transmit to the secretary of the board and the City Clerk certified copies of all the papers constituting the record of the matter. Upon receipt of the record, the secretary shall cause an investigation to be made upon the appeal and shall set the matter for public hearing. 
C.  The board shall hold the public hearing within thirty (30) days after the timely filing of the notice of appeal. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, in accordance with the code and ordinances currently in force. To the extent of the question on appeal before the board, the board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
D.  The board shall make its decision within thirty (30) days after the final hearing, and the decision shall be in writing and filed of record in the office of the City Clerk. The concurring vote of five (5) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the City's Code Official. 
E.  Upon filing of an appeal, the appellant may request a restraining order be granted by the board or by the court of proper jurisdiction on due and sufficient cause shown. Within the Joint Code Board of Appeals, the chair, and in the absence of the chair the vice-chair, shall have authority to grant a temporary restraining order based upon sufficient cause shown. 
F.  An appeal from any action, ruling, decision, judgment, or order of the board may be taken by any person or persons aggrieved or officer, department, board, or bureau of the City to the District Court, by filing with the City Clerk and with the secretary of the board within ten (10) days from the date of such action, a notice of appeal, which notice shall specify the grounds of such appeal. No bond or deposit for costs shall be required for such appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal, the City Clerk shall transmit to the Court Clerk of the county the original or certified copies of all the papers constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision, or ruling of the board. The case shall be heard and tried de novo in the District Court of Creek County, Oklahoma. An appeal shall lie from the action of the district court as in all other civil actions. 
(Ord. 2068, 10/07/1991)  
CHAPTER 11. - OIL AND GAS WELLS 
 
Sec. 5-1101. - Drilling prohibited; exceptions. 
Drilling for oil or gas is prohibited in the City except under the following conditions: 
A.  Where the owner or owners of all lots in any one (1) block in the City consent to the drilling of a well for oil or gas, one (1) well may be drilled on such block, provided the same is located near the center of the block and at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from any residence, dwelling, house or building on any other lands within the City and outside of the block on which such well is to be located; provided, further, that in the event that the person desiring to drill such well secures the consent of the owners of as much as seventy-five (75) percent of any such block, in writing, to drill such well, and the owners of the remaining twenty-five (25) percent thereof are either nonresidents or refuse to consent thereto, such well may be drilled notwithstanding the no consent of such twenty-five (25) percent of such owners, but such owners shall be entitled to participate in the one-eighth ( 1/8 ) royalty of any oil or gas produced, saved, and sold from any such well; 
B.  The term "block" as used in this section is defined to mean a tract of land which has for its exterior boundary lines public streets, the corporate limits of the City, railway rights-of-way or unplatted tracts of land; provided, that in unplatted tracts the term "block" shall mean one continuous tract of not less than five (5) acres in area; no alley or street of less than twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be considered a boundary line of any such block; 
C.  Before any person shall commence operations for the drilling of a well for oil or gas in the City, there must be filed with the City Clerk an application showing the name of the operator, the description and ownership of the block on which the well is to be drilled, and showing the exact location of the hole; 
D.  Upon the filing of such application, the City Council of the City shall then fix the amount of the bond necessary to be filed, which must be filed with the City Clerk; the amount of such bond as fixed by the City Council shall be based upon the value of the real estate and improvements immediately surrounding the well to be drilled. Such bond shall be executed by some bonding or indemnity company authorized to do business in the State, running in the name of the City, and conditioned that the party drilling and operating such well will discharge any liability imposed by law on account of injury to property either private or public, or bodily injury including death, received or suffered by any person, persons, firm or corporation and resulting from the drilling, operating or maintenance of such well; such bond shall be for a period of not less than one (1) year and a new bond shall be furnished at the expiration of any existing one if the operation of such well covered thereby is continued; and 
E.  Upon filing of such application and the approval of such bond, the City Council shall by resolution permit the drilling of such well. 
(Ord. 356, 04/29/1914; Ord. 690, 06/07/1937)  
Sec. 5-1102. - Amendments. 
This chapter shall be amended from time to time when, in the discretion of the City council, the circumstances necessitate any such amendment. In the event oil or gas is found and produced, the production of the same shall be subject to such rules and regulations which may be deemed proper by the City Council to be hereafter prescribed. 
(Ord. 690, 06/07/1937)  
Sec. 5-1103. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code, and each day that any provision of this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 356, 04/29/1914; Ord. 690, 06/07/1937)  
CHAPTER 12. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 
 
Sec. 5-1201. - Definitions and terms. 
Residential manufactured home means transportable, factory built, detached single-family residential dwelling built in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standard of 1995. 
Residential manufactured home subdivision means an exclusive family residential housing subdivision for manufactured homes and modular housing units in which the home or housing unit owner owns the property upon which the home is situated.  
Sec. 5-1202. - Use conditions. 
All units in a residential manufactured home subdivision shall meet with no variance the following use conditions: 
A.  All residential manufactured housing subdivisions shall be platted according to the adopted subdivision regulations meeting all requirements therein with no variances from the SMAPC or Council. A building permit is required prior to installation or construction on any lot. Application for a building permit requires a site plan, footing, and foundation plan and show a front and side view of the manufactured house as it will appear after installation, demonstrating architectural compliance with this chapter. No RMH-S shall be located next to RS-1 and RS-2 zoned property. 
B.  The unit must bear a seal certifying compliance with the Federal Manufactured Construction and Safety Standards as revised on April 1, 1995. In addition, the structure must comply with the wind safety standard provisions for Wind Zone 1, as set forth in said standards. 
C.  The unit is dual or triple sectional with a minimum front width of twenty-four (24) feet and a minimum floor area of twelve hundred (1,200) square feet. 
D.  Every manufactured home must have a site plan, and footing plan. Footing and foundation/stem-wall installation shall be inspected by the Building Inspector prior to installation of a manufactured home to insure conformance with the regulations of this chapter. The unit must be attached to a continuous concrete or concrete block foundation that complies with the building code. The foundation must be an excavated and back filled foundation, enclosed at the perimeter with the finished floor being a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches above the exterior grade of the lot. Due to differences in construction between manufactured and modular HOMES the method of attachment to the foundation will differ, Manufactured housing, shall use method described in Attachment "A", Modular housing may use methods described by Attachment "A" or "B". If the dwelling is multi-leveled, the lowest finished floor above exterior shall meet this requirement. The manufactured unit shall have a brick or rock wainscot to the bottom of the windows. No metal will be allowed. Transport axles and towing tongue must be removed. 
E.  The roof must be a gable or hip type construction with at least Class C fire resistant shingle roofing material. No dwelling shall have a roof covered with continuous rolled metal. The roof slope must have a minimum vertical rise of three (3) inches for every twelve (12) inches of horizontal run with a minimum eave projection and roof overhang of twelve (12) inches, which may include guttering. 
F.  Front and rear porches and site-built steps must be constructed with exterior materials matching the structure. All units must have an attached two (2) car garage. The exterior covering material used on the garage shall be the same as exterior covering material used on a substantial portion of the dwelling and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The same roofing material shall be used on the garage and the dwelling. 
G.  The exterior finish must be comparable to and compatible with site-built houses on the block face. No bare metal siding or roofing is allowed. 
H.  No residential manufactured home can be sited adjacent to any structure designated as a historic landmark or within a locally designated historic district. 
I.  Items A thru H of this section as listed above may not be waived, modified, or otherwise altered by the Board of Adjustment or City Council except by amendment of this section.  
Sec. 5-1203. - RMH Zoning District—General description. 
The purpose of this district is to provide a grouping of home sites within the setting of a residential subdivision for manufactured and modular housing. This district provides for individual lots which allow the manufactured home owner to own the property on which the home is situated. A minimum subdivision size is established to assure that a desirable residential environment is created, and to provide separation from neighboring conventional housing areas. 
The "RMH" zone will allow the maximum amount of freedom possible in the design of the homes in the area, and will provide for related recreational, commercial and other service facilities for the planned residential developments. The requirements established in this district are intended to afford adequate design planning and utilization of the land, provide for open and pedestrian space, to encourage site and development plans which will maximize compatibility between manufactured home developments and developments on adjoining land, and to protect and enhance the manufactured home site and its environs. Occupied manufactured or mobile homes are not permitted within the City except in districts zoned for such use.  
Sec. 5-1204. - Uses permitted in RMH District. 
Property in the residential manufactured home subdivision district shall be used exclusively for the following purposes: 
A.  Single-family detached dwellings, modular homes, and residential-design manufactured homes; 
B.  Public facilities such as parks, playgrounds, community centers, churches, schools, libraries, and noncommercial facilities such as golf courses, shuffleboard courts, swimming pools, and tennis courts; and 
C.  Accessory buildings and uses customary and incidental to any of the above uses when located on the same lot.  
Sec. 5-1205. - Special exceptions. 
Since the manufactured home subdivision district is an exclusive district, only municipal uses, public buildings, and public utilities which hold the right of eminent domain may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment as special exceptions.  
Sec. 5-1206. - Area requirements. 
In order to ensure adequate light, air, fire safety, convenience, and amenities for the residents in the manufactured home subdivision development, the following area requirements shall apply: 
A.  The manufactured home subdivision district shall not be allowed on tracts of land less than five (5) contiguous acres; 
B.  Front yard setback: All manufactured homes shall be set back from the front property line a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. When a lot has double frontage, the front yard setback shall be provided on both streets; 
C.  Side yard setback: All manufactured homes shall be set back from the side yard property line a minimum distance of ten (10) feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use shall be set back from the side yard property line and other buildings a minimum distance of five (5) feet. On any corner lot, dwellings, manufactured homes and accessory buildings shall be set back from the side property line a distance of fifteen (15) feet when a lot is back to back with another corner lot, and a distance of twenty (20) feet in all other instances; 
D.  Rear yard setback: All manufactured homes shall be set back from the rear yard property line a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard, but shall be set back at least five (5) feet from alley line or rear property line and clear of utility easements.  
Sec. 5-1207. - Intensity of use. 
A.  For each individual manufactured home site, there shall be a minimum lot area of not less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet. Each lot will have a minimum of eighty (80) feet of front lot width. 
B.  Individual manufactured home site lots on cul-de-sacs and exterior curve radiuses shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than forty (40) feet. 
C.  Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date of these regulations, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches, permitted by these regulations. 
D.  For churches and main accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to the dwelling, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking areas required in Chapter 10 et seq. of this Code. 
E.  There shall be no more than one (1) dwelling unit and one (1) use per lot in the "RMH" Manufactured Home Subdivision District.  
Sec. 5-1208. - Coverage. 
A.  Maximum density in any manufactured home subdivision development shall not exceed four and eight tenths (4.8) units per gross acre for all single-family dwellings. For purposes of these regulations, gross acreage is to be computed as all usable land area within the exterior boundaries of the property, including streets, common open space, lands occupied by recreational facilities, community buildings, manufactured homes and utility easements. No manufactured housing shall be allowed in a designated floodplain. 
B.  Manufactured home dwelling units and their accessory uses shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the total usable lot area on interior lots, and thirty-five (35) percent of the lot area on corner.  
Sec. 5-1209. - Height. 
No building shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. In no instance shall the height be increased on the manufactured or modular home nor shall the manufactured or modular home be structurally altered, modified, enlarged or added to in any way which will increase the height of the dwelling or structurally alter the roof of the dwellings; however, accessory use structures may be modified, enlarged, altered or added to upon review. It shall be permissible to enhance the outward appearance of the manufactured home dwelling so long as its structural integrity is not compromised.  
CHAPTER 13. - PENALTY 
 
Sec. 5-1301. - Penalty. 
Any person who engages in any business, trade, or vocation for which a license, permit, certificate, or registration is required by this part, without first having a valid license, permit, certificate, or registration as required, or who shall fail to do anything required by this part or by any code adopted by this part, or who shall otherwise violate any provision of this part, or of any code adopted by this part, or who shall violate any lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers provided in this part, shall be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  
Sec. 5-1302. - Relief in the courts. 
No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this part shall interfere with the right of the City also to apply to the proper courts of the State for mandamus, an injunction, or other appropriate action against such person.  
CHAPTER 14. - BURGLARY ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 5-1401. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage burglary alarm users to assume increased responsibility for maintaining the mechanical reliability and the proper use of burglary alarm systems, to prevent unnecessary police emergency response to false alarms and thereby to protect the emergency response capability of the City.  
Sec. 5-1402. - Definitions. 
A.  Terms which are not defined in this chapter shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply. 
B.  When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not directory. 
C.  For the purpose of this chapter, each of the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein: 
1.  Alarm response shall mean an actual police response to the location of a burglary alarm system resulting from the activation of any burglary alarm signal except those signals specifically excluded by subsection 1410.A. 
2.  Burglary alarm system shall mean any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
3.  Burglary alarm user shall mean and include the person or persons owning or leasing a burglary alarm system. 
4.  Chief of Police shall mean the duly appointed, qualified or acting Chief of Police of the City of Sapulpa or his authorized representative. 
5.  Chief Administrative Officer shall mean the duly appointed, qualified or acting City Manager of the City of Sapulpa or his authorized representative. 
6.  Director of Finance shall mean the duly appointed, qualified or acting Director of the Finance Department of the City of Sapulpa or his authorized representative. 
7.  Person shall mean every natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.  
Sec. 5-1403. - Gender. 
Words used in the masculine gender comprehend as well the feminine gender and neuter.  
Sec. 5-1404. - Burglary alarm user permits required. 
A.  Every burglary alarm user shall obtain a burglary alarm user's permit for each burglary alarm system from the Director of Finance before the system becomes operative. Only one (1) permit shall be required for any burglary alarm system, provided that all burglary alarm users shall be listed on a single permit. The permit shall be issued in the names of the burglary alarm users and shall be issued to the specific address/location of the burglary alarm system. The permit shall not be transferable to any other burglary address/location. Applications for a burglary alarm user's permit shall be filed with the Director of Finance and accompanied by a permit fee necessary to defray the cost of issuing the permit and overseeing the number of alarm responses made to the burglary alarm system. Each permit shall bear the signature of the Director of Finance and shall be valid for a five (5) year period immediately following issuance of the permit. 
B.  The permit fee established for issuing a burglary alarm user's permit and necessary for regulation of alarm responses shall be twenty dollars ($20.00), or as reflected by the Master Fee Schedule to the Code, whichever is greater. The permit fee after expiration of the burglary alarm user's permit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00), or as reflected by the Master Fee Schedule to the Code, whichever is greater. Any permit fee paid pursuant to any previous enactment of this section shall satisfy any requirement of a permit fee, provided that the user's permit is in good standing and has not expired. Any burglary alarm user's permit renewed before expiration shall be renewed at no charge to the burglary alarm user provided that user's permit is in good standing with the City and all alarm response fees have been paid. 
C.  The Director of Finance shall not issue a burglary alarm user's permit to any person indebted to the City of Sapulpa for any past alarm response fees.  
Sec. 5-1405. - Operating a burglary alarm system without a user's permit. 
It shall be an offense for any burglary alarm user to operate, use, or maintain a burglary alarm system without a burglary alarm user's permit issued by the Director of Finance. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by Section 1-108 of the Code; provided, however, that any person charged with violation of this section shall have two (2) working days to present proof to the court that a burglary alarm user's permit has been obtained, in which case said charge shall be dismissed upon payment of court costs. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offence.  
Sec. 5-1406. - Alarm response fees. 
A.  Every burglary alarm user shall be charged alarm response fees after the third alarm response occurring within one (1) year of the date of the first alarm response to the user's burglary alarm system. The alarm response fees shall be charged by the Director of Finance as follows: 
1.  Fourth through fifth alarm responses: Fifty dollars ($50.00) each; 
2.  Sixth and any additional alarm responses: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) each. 
For the purpose of this section, each burglary alarm user shall begin at zero alarm responses one (1) year from the date of the user's first alarm response for that one (1) year period. 
B.  The Director of Finance, or other designated and authorized City employee, shall mail a Notification of Alarm Response Fee Charge to the burglary alarm user. The Notification shall be sent by First Class, U.S. Mail, to the mailing address that appears on the permit application. The Notification shall clearly state the amount of the alarm response fee due the City and shall notify the user of the consequences of the failure to pay the alarm response fee. The Director of Finance shall also inform the user of its right to appeal the validity of the alarm response fee, as provided in Section 5-1409. 
C.  No alarm response fee shall be collected for any alarm response caused by: 
1.  Natural catastrophe, including tornadoes, floods, earthquakes or similarly sudden, violent conditions; 
2.  Telephone line outage; or 
3.  The testing of a local/audible burglary alarm system by a licensed alarm business agent or employee who is present at the area protected by the system and who is servicing, repairing or installing the alarm system. 
D.  No alarm response fee shall be collected in any case where the burglary alarm user can demonstrate that the activation of the burglary alarm signal was caused by the act of a person or persons engaged in the commission of a felony as defined by the laws of the State of Oklahoma. 
E.  An alarm user may present evidence that successive alarm activations were caused by a common cause, which could not have been reasonably corrected before subsequent activations occurred, in which case, the activations shall be counted as a single activation. This provision shall only apply to commonly caused activations occurring within a sixty (60) hour period, commencing with the first commonly caused activation, provided that the responsible alarm user has documented, to the Director of Finance, the action taken to rectify the cause and there are no additional activations of the alarm system from the documented cause within thirty (30) days from the documented cause. 
F.  In any case where the Director of Finance has determined that the provisions of subsection 5-1406.C or 5-1406.D apply, in addition to not collecting the alarm response fee, the Director of Finance shall expunge the alarm response from the burglary alarm user's record with the City.  
Sec. 5-1407. - Payment of alarm response fees—Suspension of user's permit for non-payment. 
A.  Every burglary alarm user shall pay its alarm response fees within sixty (60) days of the day the notification of alarm response fee was mailed by the Director of Finance. A burglary alarm user's failure to pay the alarm response fees within sixty (60) days shall be grounds for the suspension of the user's permit by the Director of finance pursuant to subsection B of this section. 
B.  If a burglary alarm user fails to make full payment within the sixty (60) day period, and there is no appeal pending on the validity of the alarm response fee, the Director of Finance shall serve upon the user a notice of suspension of permit either by personal service or by certified mail. The notice of suspension shall inform the burglary alarm user of its right to appeal the validity of the suspension, as provided in Section 5-1409. The suspension of the burglary alarm user's permit shall commence ten (10) days after service of the notice of suspension unless an appeal has been made pursuant to Section 5-1409. The notice of suspension shall inform the user that its burglary alarm user's permit shall be suspended ten (10) days after service of the notice unless an appeal has been made pursuant to Section 5-1409. 
C.  An application for reinstatement of a suspended burglary alarm user's permit and a reinstatement fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be filed with the Director of Finance before reinstatement of a suspended user's permit. The Director of Finance shall reinstate a suspended burglary alarm user's permit upon the following: 
1.  The filing of a completed application for reinstatement of a suspended burglary alarm user's permit; 
2.  The payment of a reinstatement fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00); and 
3.  The payment of all due and past due alarm response fees by the user seeking reinstatement of its permit.  
Sec. 5-1408. - Operating a burglary alarm system under a suspended user's permit. 
It shall be an offense for any burglary alarm user to operate, use or maintain a burglary alarm system when its burglary alarm system user's permit has been suspended by the Director of Finance. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by Section 1-108 of the Code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.  
Sec. 5-1409. - Appeals. 
A.  A burglary alarm user who wants to appeal the validity of an alarm response fee may appeal for a hearing. The appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the Director of Finance within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notification of alarm response fee notice to the user. Failure to appeal the alarm response fee within the required time period shall result in a determination that the alarm response fee was valid. 
B.  A burglary alarm user who wants a hearing before the suspension of its user's permit for non-payment of alarm response fees may appeal for a hearing. The appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the Director of Finance within ten (10) days of service of the notice of suspension upon the user. Failure to appeal the suspension within the required time period shall result in the suspension of the permit. 
C.  If a hearing is requested, written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the user by the Director of Finance, either by personal service or certified mail, at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing, which date shall not be more than twenty (20) nor less than ten (10) days after the filing of the request for hearing. 
D.  All hearings shall be conducted before the Chief Administrative Officer. All hearings shall be conducted in an informal manner; however, each party has the right of cross examination. The City shall have the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence at all hearings. 
E.  For appeals contesting the validity of an alarm response fee, the Chief Administrative Officer shall issue written findings expunging or sustaining the entry of an alarm response on a user's record as appropriate. If the alarm response fee is sustained after appeal, the Director of Finance shall mail a notice of alarm response fee after denial of appeal to the burglary alarm user. The notice shall be sent by first class, United States Mail, to the mailing address that appears on the permit application. The notice shall clearly state the amount of the alarm response fee due the City and shall notify the user of the consequences of the failure to pay the alarm response fees. 
F.  For appeals contesting the validity of the suspension of a user's permit, the Chief Administrative Officer shall issue written findings. If the Chief Administrative Officer determines that the user's permit shall be suspended, the Director of Finance shall serve upon the user, either by personal service or by certified mail, a notice of suspension of permit after denial of appeal. The suspension of the burglary alarm user's permit shall be effective ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice upon the user. 
G.  The Chief Administrative Officer may appoint another person to hear appeals and to render judgment. 
H.  A burglary alarm user may appeal any adverse decision of the Chief Administrative Officer to the City Council by filing a written request for a hearing with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the service upon the user of any adverse decision rendered by the chief Administrative Officer. Appeals to the Council shall, when timely filed, be docketed on the Council's next available agenda and notice of the date and time of hearing shall be given to all parties concerned. At such hearing, the Council shall receive any evidence it deems appropriate and, shall either affirm, reverse or modify the Chief Administrative Officer's decision.  
Sec. 5-1410. - Exclusions. 
A.  No provision within this chapter shall be construed as to apply to panic buttons, manually activated buttons or robbery alarm systems which elicit an immediate police response to their activation. 
B.  No provision within this chapter shall be construed as to apply to any building, structure, or facility owned, controlled or occupied by the United States of America, the State of Oklahoma, or any governmental subdivision of the State of Oklahoma.  
Part 6 - COURTS  
CHAPTER 1. - MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
Sec. 6-101. - Organization of Municipal Court. 
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the Municipal Criminal Court of the City of Sapulpa as put into operation by resolution duly passed on February 3, 1969, and filed in accordance with law as authorized by Sections 27-101 and 27-102 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any ordinance of this City, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-13) 
State Law reference— Municipal courts not of record, organization, rules, and procedures, 11 O.S. §§ 27-101—27-131.  
Sec. 6-102. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Court means the Municipal Criminal Court of the City of Sapulpa; 
Judge means the judge of the Municipal Criminal Court, including any acting judge or alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this State, the City Charter and this chapter; 
Clerk means the Clerk of this City, including any deputy or member of the office staff of the Clerk while performing duties of the Clerk's office; 
Chief of Police means the peace officer in charge of the police force of the City; and 
This judicial district means the district court judicial district of the State of Oklahoma wherein the government of this City is situated. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-14)  
Sec. 6-103. - Jurisdiction of court. 
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of this City is charged, including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance with applicable law. 
(Prior code, Sec. 2-15)  
Sec. 6-104. - Judge; qualifications. 
There shall be one (1) judge of the court. The judge shall be licensed to practice law in the State. He may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he shall not accept employment inconsistent with his duties as judge, or arising out of facts which give rise to or are connected with cases within the jurisdiction of the court, pending therein or which might become the subject of proceedings therein. If no attorney licensed to practice law in the state resides or offices in the county who is willing to accept the appointment as judge, the mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may appoint a suitable and proper person as judge. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-17)  
Sec. 6-105. - Term of judge. 
The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years, ending on April 30 of each even numbered year. Each judge, unless sooner removed for proper cause, shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-18, as amended)  
Sec. 6-106. - Alternate judge. 
There may be appointed, for each judge of the court, an alternate judge possessed of the same qualifications as the judge. He shall sit as acting judge of the court in any case if the judge is absent from the court, unable to act as judge, or disqualified from acting as judge in the case. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-19)  
Sec. 6-107. - Acting judge. 
If at any time there is no judge, duly appointed and qualified, available to sit as judge, the Mayor shall appoint some person, possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the judge, who shall preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of pending matters until such time as a judge shall be available. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-19)  
Sec. 6-108. - Appointment of judge and alternate judge. 
Judges shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. The City Council may make any rules or regulations deemed proper in connection the procedure for the appoint of such judge. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 12-8, as amended) 
Charter reference— Article 5, Section 2.  
Sec. 6-109. - Salary and payments to judges. 
The judge of the Municipal Court shall receive a monthly salary of three thousand three hundred eighty-eight dollars and thirty-three cents ($3,388.33) to be paid in the same manner as the salaries of other officials of the City. 
The acting judge shall be paid a sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day devoted to the performance of his duties in the Municipal Courtroom and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per day for all arraignments conducted other than in the Municipal Courtroom; except, that the total payments to him for any one (1) month shall not exceed the sum of the monthly salary established for the Municipal Judge. If the acting judge shall sit for an entire month, he shall receive only the amount established as the salary of the Municipal Judge. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-20, Ord. 2474, 11/07/2005)  
Sec. 6-110. - Removal of judge. 
Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the City Council as provided in the City Charter, or for the causes prescribed by the Constitution and laws of this State for the removal of public officers. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-21, as amended)  
Sec. 6-111. - Vacancy in office of judge. 
A vacancy in the office of judge shall be filled as provided by the Charter or laws of the State. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-22, as amended)  
Sec. 6-112. - Disqualification of judge. 
In prosecutions before the court no change of venue shall be allowed; but the judge before whom the case is pending may certify his disqualification or he may be disqualified from sitting under the terms, conditions, and procedure provided by law for courts of record. If a judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an alternate or acting judge appointed as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-23)  
Sec. 6-113. - Chief of Police. 
All writs or processes of the court shall be directed, in his official title, to the Chief of Police of this municipality, who shall be the principal officer of the court. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-24)  
Sec. 6-114. - Clerk of the court duties. 
The City Clerk, or a deputy designated by the Clerk, shall be ex officio Clerk of the Court. The Court Clerk shall: 
A.  Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in preparing writs, processes, and other papers; 
B.  Administer oaths required in proceedings before the court; 
C.  Enter all pleadings, processes, and proceedings in the dockets of the court; 
D.  Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of the court as the judge shall direct; 
E.  Receive and receipt for forfeitures, fines, deposits, and sums of money payable to the court; 
F.  Pay to the Treasurer of this municipality all money so received by the Clerk, except such special deposits or fees as shall be received to be disbursed by the Clerk for special purposes. All money paid to the Treasurer shall be placed in the General Fund of the municipality, or in such other funds as the governing body may direct, and it shall be used in the operation of the municipal government in accordance with budgetary arrangements governing the fund in which it is placed; 
G.  Upon verification that a named defendant was in fact a validly licensed driver at the time and place of issuance of a citation for the offense of no driver's license in possession, administratively dismiss prosecution of said charge upon payment of all applicable costs and excuse the named defendant from any further appearance in connection with the prosecution of said charge; and 
H.  Upon verification that a named defendant was in fact insured by presentation of a valid security verification form that was in effect at the time and place of issuance of a citation for the offense of no security verification form/no insurance, administratively dismiss prosecution of said charge upon payment of all applicable costs and excuse the named defendant from any further appearance in connection with the prosecution of said charge. 
(Ord. 2431, 02/02/2004)  
Sec. 6-115. - Prosecuting attorney; duties; conflict of interest. 
The attorney for this municipality, or his duly designated assistant, may be prosecuting officer of the court. He may also prosecute all alleged violations of the ordinances of the City. He shall be authorized, in his discretion, to prosecute any alleged violation and resist appeal proceedings in error and review from this court to any other court of the state, and to represent this municipality in all proceedings arising out of matters in this court. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-27)  
Sec. 6-116. - Bond of Court Clerk. 
The Court Clerk of the Court shall give bond, in the form provided by Section 27-111 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes, in a sum to be determined by the City Council. When executed, the bond shall be submitted to the governing body for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the Clerk of this City and retained in the City archives. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-26)  
Sec. 6-117. - Rules of court. 
The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with the ordinances of this City, for the proper conduct of the business of the court. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-28)  
Sec. 6-118. - Enforcement of rules. 
Obedience to the orders, rules, and judgments made by the judge or by the court may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison for direct or indirect contempt committed as to him while holding court, or committed against process issued by him, in the same manner and to the same extent as the District Courts of this State. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-29)  
Sec. 6-119. - Written complaints to prosecute ordinance violations. 
All prosecutions for violations of ordinances of this City shall be styled "The City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma vs. (naming defendant or defendants)". Except as provided hereinafter, prosecution shall be initiated by the filing of a written complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making complaint, and setting forth concisely the offense charged. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-30)  
Sec. 6-120. - Traffic ordinance violations; procedures for issuing citation; custody, arrest. 
A.  If a police officer observes facts which he believes constitute a violation of the traffic ordinances of this municipality, in lieu of arresting such a person, he may release the person on personal recognizance in accordance with Section 6-121 of this Code, or take his name, address, operator's license number, and registered license number of the motor vehicle involved and any other pertinent and necessary information and may issue him in writing in form prescribed by the City, a traffic citation embracing the above information, and also stating the traffic violation alleged to have occurred, and notifying him to answer to the charge against him at a time, not later than the date specified in the citation. The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator, endorsed on the citation to answer as specified, may then release the person from custody. If the person to whom a citation is issued fails to answer as prescribed in the citation, complaint shall be filed and the case shall be prosecuted as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  If the alleged traffic violation is committed by a nonresident or resident of this municipality, the police officer may: 
1.  Release the person after obtaining sufficient information as set out in subsection A of this section pending his appearance on a day certain in court, as specified in the citation; 
2.  Take the person in custody and demand that bond for the offense charged be posted according to the provisions of this chapter; or 
3.  Take the person into custody under arrest. The arrested person either shall be taken immediately before the judge for further proceedings according to law or shall have bail fixed for his release in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon providing bail as fixed, and upon giving his written promise to appear upon a day certain, as provided in subsection A of this section, the person shall be released from custody. 
C.  If the alleged offense be a violation of an ordinance restricting or regulating the parking of vehicles, including any regulations issued under such an ordinance, and the operator be not present, the police officer shall place on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to come to the notice of the operator, a citation conforming substantially to that prescribed in subsection A or B of this section, with such variation as the circumstances require, the operator of this vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the citation as if it had been issued to him personally under subsection A or B of this section. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-31, in part)  
Sec. 6-121. - Traffic bail bond procedures. 
A.  In addition to other provisions of law for posting bail, any person, whether a resident of this state or a nonresident, who is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a state traffic law or municipal traffic ordinance shall be released by the arresting officer upon personal recognizance if: 
1.  The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a motor vehicle by this state, another state jurisdiction within the United States, or any party jurisdiction of the Nonresident Violator Compact; 
2.  The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the arrested person; 
3.  The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided for on the citation; and 
4.  The violation does not constitute: 
a.  A felony; 
b.  Negligent homicide; 
c.  Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating substances; 
d.  Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer; 
e.  Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid driver's license, or while the license is under suspension, revocation, denial or cancellation; 
f.  An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant; 
g.  A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in subparagraphs a through f of this subsection; 
h.  An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit exceeding the authorized permit weight; or 
i.  A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous materials. 
B.  If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal recognizance as provided for in subsection A of this section, then the arresting officer shall: 
1.  Designate the traffic charge; 
2.  Record information from the arrested person's driver's license on the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal description, type of driver's license, driver's license number, issuing state, and expiration date; 
3.  Record the motor vehicle make, model, and tag information; 
4.  Record the arraignment date and time on the citation; and 
5.  Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear as provided for in the citation. 
The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal recognizance based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall contain a written notice to the arrested person that release upon personal recognizance based upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is conditional and that failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in the suspension of the arrested person's driver's license in this state, or in the nonresident's home state pursuant to the Nonresident Violator Compact. 
C.  Procedures for arraignment, continuances and scheduling, timely appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo contendere, posting bail, payment of fines and costs, issuance of arrest warrants, and requests for suspension of driver's license, shall be required in state law, Sections 1115.1 through 1115.5 of Title 22 of the Oklahoma Statute. 
D.  A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before he is required to appear for arraignment by indicating such plea on the copy of the citation furnished to him or on a legible copy thereof, together with the date of the plea and his signature. The defendant shall be responsible for assuring full payment of the fine and costs to the Court Clerk. The defendant shall not use currency for payment by mail. If the defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere as provided for in this subsection, such plea shall be accepted by the court and the amount of the fine and costs shall be as prescribed by Appendix B hereto for the violation charged or as prescribed by the court. 
E.  If, pursuant to the provisions of subsection D of this section, the defendant does not timely elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere and fails to timely appear for arraignment, the court may issue a warrant for the arrest of the defendant, and the Municipal or District Court Clerk, within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days from the date the citation was issued by the arresting officer, shall notify the State Department of Public Safety that: 
1.  The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon personal recognizance after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment as provided for in the citation; 
2.  The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good cause shown; 
3.  The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine, or made any other arrangement with the court to satisfy the citation; and 
4.  The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law. 
The Court Clerk shall request the State Department of Public Safety to either suspend the defendant's driver's license to operate a motor vehicle in this state, or notify the defendant's home state and request suspension of the defendant's driver's license in accordance with the provisions of the Nonresident Violator Compact. Such notice and request shall be on a form approved or furnished by the State Department of Public Safety. The Court Clerk shall not process the notification and request provided for in this subsection if, with respect to such charges: 
A.  The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was jailed, or otherwise settled the case; 
B.  The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon a signed written promise to appear as provided for in this section or if released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for arraignment; 
C.  The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight violation, an overweight permit, or the transportation of hazardous materials; or 
D.  A period of one hundred twenty (120) calendar days or more has elapsed from the date the citation was issued by the arresting officer. 
E.  The Court Clerk shall maintain a record of each request for driver's license suspension submitted to the State Department of Public Safety pursuant to the provisions of this section. When the court or Court Clerk receives appropriate bail or payment of the fine and costs, settles the citation, makes other arrangements with the defendant, or otherwise closes the case, the Court Clerk shall furnish proof thereof to such defendant, if the defendant personally appears, or shall mail such proof by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the defendant at the address noted on the citation or at such other address as is furnished by the defendant. Additionally, the court or Court Clerk shall notify the home jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on the citation, if such jurisdiction is a member of the Nonresident Violator Compact, and shall in all other cases, notify the State Department of Public Safety of the resolution of the case. The form of proof and the procedures for notification shall be approved by the State Department of Public Safety. Provided however, the court or Court Clerk's failure to furnish such proof or notice in the manner provided for in this subsection shall in no event create any civil liability upon the court, the Court Clerk, the state or any political subdivision thereof, or any state department or agency or any employee thereof but duplicate proof shall be furnished to the person entitled thereto upon request.  
Sec. 6-122. - Creation of traffic violations bureau. 
A.  A traffic violations bureau is established as a division of the office of the Clerk of the Court, to be administered by the Clerk, or by subordinates designated by him for that purpose. Persons who are cited for violation of one of the traffic regulatory ordinances of this municipality may elect to pay a fine in the traffic violations bureau according to the schedule of fines set forth in Appendix B to this Code. 
B.  The court may adopt rules to carry into effect this section. Payment of a fine under this section shall constitute a final determination of cause against the defendant. If a defendant who has elected to pay a fine under this section fails to do so, prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 6-123. - Summons for arrest. 
A.  Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any ordinance, the judge, unless he determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the person charged, specifying his address or place of residence, if known, stating the offense with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in the court on a certain day after the summons is served upon him, and including such other pertinent information as may be necessary. 
B.  The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant personally. If he fails to appear and to answer the summons within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as provided by this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-32)  
Sec. 6-124. - Form of arrest warrant. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of this municipality, upon the filing of a complaint approved by the endorsement of the attorney of this City or by the judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in substantially the following form: 
The City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma to the Chief of Police of the Municipal Court of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant) that the offense of (naming the offense in particular but general terms) has been committed and accusing (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefor forthwith to arrest the above named defendant and bring _______ before me, at the municipal courtroom. 
Witness my hand this ___ day of _______, 20___. 
  
________________________ 
Judge of the Municipal Court 
Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
B.  It is the duty of the Chief of Police, personally, or through a duly constituted member of the police force of this City, or through any other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a warrant as promptly as possible. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-33)  
Sec. 6-125. - Procedures for bail or bond. 
Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation or summons, or at any time before trial, before or after arraignment, the defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his appearance in an amount prescribed by Appendix B and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the judge, who shall prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail. In case of arrests made at night or under other conditions of emergency or when the judge is not available, the rules shall authorize the Chief of Police, or his designated representative, to accept a temporary cash bond of not less than the amount indicated in Appendix B for the violation(s) charged, nor more than the maximum monetary penalty provided by ordinance for the offense charged. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-34)  
Sec. 6-126. - Forfeiture, district court. 
A.  If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the terms or conditions of his bond, either for hearing, arraignment, trial or judgment, or upon any other occasion when his presence in court or before the magistrate may be lawfully required, the judge may direct that fact to be entered upon the court minutes, thereby declaring the bond to be forfeited. Without advancing court costs, the judge may then cause the forfeiture to be certified to the District Court of the county where situs of government is situated, where it shall be entered upon the judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of a District Court Judgment. At such time as the forfeiture is entered upon the District Court Judgment Docket, the District Court Clerk shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1331, 1332, 1333, and 1335 of Title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes and a surety shall have all remedies available under the provisions of Sections 1108 of Title 22 and Sections 1301 through 1340 of Title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Court costs shall be collectable from the proceeds of the bond. 
B.  A prosecution in a court provided for herein shall be a bar to prosecution in another court for the same or a lesser included offense.  
Sec. 6-127. - Arraignment and pleadings by defendant. 
Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant shall be arraigned. The judge, or the attorney of the City, shall read the complaint to the defendant, inform him of his legal rights, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and sentence, continuing the matter for subsequent disposition or defer sentence upon whatever terms or conditions the court may impose. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is not for jury trial, the court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for hearing at a later date. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-35)  
Sec. 6-128. - Trials and judgments. 
A.  Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof. 
B.  The defendant must be present in person at the trial. 
C.  In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter, or by the statutes relating to municipal criminal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by the Supreme Court of Oklahoma, the procedure applicable in trials of misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply to the extent that they can be made effective. 
D.  If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after the trial, the court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly. 
E.  At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered immediately by the judge who shall cause it to be entered in his docket. 
F.  If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be detained for any other legal cause, he must be discharged at once. 
G.  A judgment that defendant who is financially able but refuses to pay a fine may also direct that he be imprisoned until the fine is satisfied at the rate of one (1) day imprisonment for each five dollars ($5.00) of fine. 
H.  If the defendant is without means to pay the fine or costs, the municipal judge may direct the total amount due to be entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the district court of the county wherein the status of government is situated where it shall be entered upon the district court judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of a district court judgment. Thereupon the same remedies shall be available for the enforcement of the judgment as are available to any other judgment creditor. 
(Prior Code, Secs. 2-36 to 2-42 in part)  
Sec. 6-129. - Witness fees. 
Witnesses in any proceeding in the Court other than the police officers or peace officers shall be entitled to a fee as set by the City per each day of attendance as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule, plus mileage for each mile actually and necessarily traveled in going to and returning from the place of attendance if their residence is outside the limits of the municipality. However, no witness shall receive fees or mileage in more than one (1) case for the same period of time or the same travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with the Clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one (1) day of attendance for each witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting out: 
A.  The name of no more than three (3) witnesses; 
B.  That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to provide the fees and mileage allowed by law; 
C.  That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and 
D.  That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper defense. 
The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the municipality. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-40)  
Sec. 6-130. - Suspension of sentence. 
A.  After conviction and sentence, the Judge may suspend sentence, in accordance with the provisions of, and subject to the conditions and procedures imposed by Sections 27-123 and 27-124 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. 
B.  The judge of the court in imposing a judgment and sentence, at his discretion, is empowered to modify, reduce or suspend or defer the imposition of such sentence or any part thereof and to authorize the person to be released upon his own recognizance for a period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of the sentence, under such terms or conditions as the judge may specify. The judge may, with the consent of the defendant, defer further proceedings, after a verdict, finding or plea of guilty, but before passing a judgment of guilt and imposing a fine, and place the defendant on probation for a period not to exceed six (6) months, under such terms and conditions as prescribed by the court, which may include, but not be limited to, work on the streets, parks, or other City-owned or maintained projects, with proper supervision. 
C.  A defendant is not entitled to a deferred sentence if the defendant has been previously convicted of a felony. 
D.  Upon a finding of the court that the conditions of release have been violated, the municipal judge may enter a judgment of guilty and may cause a warrant to be issued for the defendant. 
E.  Upon the issuance of the warrant or judgment of guilty being entered, the person shall be delivered forthwith to the place of confinement to which he is sentenced and shall serve out the full term or pay the full fine for which he was originally sentenced as may be directed by the judge. 
F.  The judge may continue or delay imposing a judgment and sentence for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of the sentence. At the expiration of such period, the judge may allow the City Attorney to amend the charge to a lesser offense. 
G.  If a deferred sentence is imposed, an administrative fee as set forth in Appendix B to this Code may be imposed as costs in the case. The court may make payment of the fee a condition of granting or continuing the imposition of a sentence, if the defendant is able to pay. 
H.  The court may also require restitution and in the event there was damage done to public or private property during the commission of the offense, the court may require the defendant to repair or replace such damaged property as a condition to a deferred sentence as may be directed by the court. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-44, in part) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-123.  
Sec. 6-131. - Failure to appear, court costs, penalty. 
A.  Any person who files a complaint in the municipal court against another person or persons and fails to appear to prosecute or testify on the complaint so filed, or moves to dismiss the same without court approval, is liable for, and shall be assessed and pay all court costs, fees and assessments incurred in the matter and shall stand committed until the costs, fees, and assessments are paid. 
B.  When application is made by any person to commence prosecution in the court, the municipal judge or the acting judge may, at his discretion, before such proceeding is commenced, require the person making such application to give good and sufficient security for costs in the event the prosecution shall fail because of the nonattendance of such complaining witness, after proper notice, at the trial of such cause. The security shall be given before any proceeding shall be commenced. 
C.  Any defendant failing to appear as required shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 2-44.1; Ord. No. 2706, 09/15/2014)  
Sec. 6-132. - Fines, costs, fees and assessments. 
A.  Court costs. Court costs are those monies assessed by the court for general operating expenses necessary to the continued functioning of the court in the final adjudication of any offense charged. Unless otherwise provided by law or unless such costs are suspended by a judge of the Municipal Court, pursuant to Title 11 Oklahoma Statutes, Section 27-126, court costs for each offense shall be assessed against and collected by the Court Clerk or the appropriate finance official of the City from all parties convicted of violations of the Sapulpa City Code and from all parties ordered to pay Court costs in those cases pending before the court in amounts as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. As used in this section, conviction includes any final adjudication of guilt, including all parties pleading guilty to such violations, all parties pleading nolo contendere or no contest, and parties entering a plea on a suspended, continued or deferred judgment. 
B.  Administrative fee on deferred sentences. As authorized by Title 11 Oklahoma Statutes, Subsection 27-122.1(D), if a deferred sentence is imposed by the court, an administrative fee for each offense as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule may be imposed as costs in the case, in addition to any deferral fee. 
C.  Deferral fee. As authorized by Title 11 Oklahoma Statutes, Subsection 14-111(C), for any deferred sentence imposed by the court, a deferral fee in an amount not to exceed the maximum fine that may be imposed upon conviction of that offense may be assessed by the court against a defendant and collected by the Court Clerk or the appropriate finance official of the City. 
D.  Remittal to defray costs of enforcement of alcohol related enforcement. Pursuant to Title 11 Oklahoma Statutes, Subsection 14-111(C), the court shall remit an amount as reflected and set forth in the Master Fee Schedule for each alcohol related offense fine or deferral fee, to be placed into a fund which can be used to defray the cost of enforcing laws relating to juvenile access to alcohol, other laws relating to alcohol and other intoxicating substances, and traffic-related offenses involving alcohol or other intoxicating substances. 
E.  DUI specimen collection court costs. Pursuant to Title 47 Oklahoma Statutes, Subsection 752(G), the court shall be authorized to assess as court costs against any person convicted of any offense involving the operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of or while impaired by alcohol or an intoxicating substance, or both, an amount equal to the costs incurred by the City resulting from the collection of blood, breath, saliva, or urine specimens for the purpose of determining the presence of alcohol or other intoxicating substances thereof, by or at the direction of a law enforcement officer of the City. 
F.  Court technology fee. Unless suspended by the court, as authorized by Title 11 Oklahoma Statutes Section 27-126, a fee in an amount as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule for each offense shall be assessed against and collected by the Court Clerk or the appropriate finance official of the City from all parties convicted of violations of the Sapulpa City Code and from all parties ordered to pay court costs in those cases pending before the court. This fee shall be assessed for the purpose of defraying the cost of purchasing, operating, and maintaining computerized, digital, communications and other electronic systems specially necessary to the efficient operation of the Municipal Court. 
G.  CLEET fee. Pursuant to Title 20 Oklahoma Statutes, Subsection 1313.2(B), upon conviction or bond forfeiture, a Council on Law Enforcement Education and Training (CLEET) penalty assessment in an amount as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule shall be collected on each offense punishable by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) or more or by incarceration, including traffic offenses, but excluding parking or standing violations. This assessment, which shall be in addition to any fines and costs imposed, shall be forwarded monthly by the Court Clerk to the Council on Law Enforcement Education and Training, as provided in Title 20 Oklahoma Statutes, Subsection 1313.2(D). 
H.  BNDE marijuana and drug paraphernalia fee. Pursuant to Title 20 Oklahoma Statutes, Subsection 1313.2(F), any person entering a plea of guilty, nolo contendere or no contest, or who is found guilty of the crime of misdemeanor possession of marijuana or drug paraphernalia shall be ordered by the court to pay an amount as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule for each such offense, which shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any fines and penalties otherwise provided for such offense. The Court Clerk shall cause five dollars ($5.00) of this fee, as collected, to be remitted on a monthly basis directly to the Bureau of Narcotics Drug Education (BNDE) Revolving Fund. 
I.  AFIS fingerprinting fee. Pursuant to Title 20 Oklahoma Statutes, Section 1313.3, in addition to fines and costs, upon conviction or bond forfeiture of any offense, including traffic offenses, but excluding parking and standing violations, punishable by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) or more or by incarceration, an Automated Fingerprinting Identification System (AFIS) penalty assessment in an amount as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule shall be collected by the court. The Court Clerk shall cause nine dollars ($9.00) of this fee, as collected, to be remitted on a monthly basis directly to the state's AFIS Fund and the balance shall be deposited in the general revenue fund of the City, all as provided in Title 20 Oklahoma Statutes, Sections 1313.2 and 1313.3. 
J.  Forensic science improvement assessment. Pursuant to Title 20 Oklahoma Statutes, Section 1313.4, in addition to fines and costs, upon conviction or bond forfeiture of any offense, including traffic offenses, but excluding parking and standing violations, punishable by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) or more or by incarceration, a Forensic Science Improvement Assessment in the amount as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule for each offense shall be collected by the court. This assessment shall be collected and remitted on a monthly basis in the same manner as fees provided in Title 20 Oklahoma Statutes, Sections 1313.2 and 1313.3. The Court Clerk or the appropriate finance official of the City is authorized to retain five (5) percent of the assessment collected for deposit in the general revenue fund of the City. The Court Clerk or the appropriate finance official of the City shall send this assessment, as collected, to the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation for deposit into the state's Forensic Science Improvement Revolving Fund. 
K.  Laboratory analysis fee. Pursuant to Title 20 Oklahoma Statutes, Subsection 1313.2(C), upon conviction, the defendant shall be required to pay a laboratory analysis fee in an amount as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule on each offense for which forensic science or laboratory services are rendered or administered by the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation, by the Toxicology Laboratory of the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner or by any municipality or county in connection with the case. This fee shall be in addition to and not a substitution for any and all fines and penalties otherwise provided for by law for the offense. The Court Clerk shall cause this amount, as collected, to be remitted as required in Title 20 Oklahoma Statutes, Section 1313.2, on a monthly basis. 
L.  City retainage for collection of State assessments and fees. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, pursuant to Title 11 Oklahoma Statutes, Section 14-111.1, whenever the court collects a penalty assessment or other state fee from a defendant pursuant to state law, the City may retain an amount as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule of such penalty assessment or state fee and may also retain all interest accrued thereon prior to the due date for deposits as provided in state law. 
M.  Incarceration costs fee. Any person entering a plea of guilty, nolo contendre or no contest, or who is found guilty of an offense shall be ordered to pay, in addition to any fines or costs imposed, a fee for each day said person is incarcerated or sentenced to incarceration in the Sapulpa City Jail as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2706, 09/15/2014)  
Sec. 6-133. - Penalty assessments. 
Repealed by Ordinance No. 2706 dated 09/15/2014.  
CHAPTER 2. - MUNICIPAL JUVENILE COURT 
 
Sec. 6-201. - Establishment of a Municipal Juvenile Court; designation and operation of the Municipal Juvenile Court. 
There is hereby established a Municipal Juvenile Court under the provisions of 10 O.S. 7303-1.2 which is designated as the Municipal Juvenile Court of the City of Sapulpa.  
Sec. 6-202. - Jurisdiction generally. 
A.  The Municipal Court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a violation of any provision of the Code or other ordinance of this municipality is charged, including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance with applicable law. 
B.  The Municipal Juvenile Court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a child under the age of eighteen (18) years is charged with violating the following municipal ordinances of the City of Sapulpa: Illegal possession of firearms; vandalism; shoplifting; trespassing, assault, battery; assault and battery; truancy, curfew, possession of an alcoholic beverage as defined in Section 1-103 of Title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes; disorderly conduct, public intoxication and failure to appear for a court appearance or comply with a court order and any other municipal ordinances.  
Sec. 6-203. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to curb the increasing problem of juvenile crime; to educate and reform juvenile offenders; to punish juvenile offenders; and to create an environment whereby adults and juveniles take responsibility for the actions of juveniles. It is further intended by this chapter to continue to hold neglectful or careless parents to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall not be a defense to the committing of any violation of any offense contained in this chapter that a parent, guardian or any other person whose responsibility it is to exercise control over a minor, was completely unaware or indifferent to the activities, conduct, or whereabouts of such minor.  
Sec. 6-204. - Definitions. 
In this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the following meanings: 
City is the City of Sapulpa, Creek County, Oklahoma. 
Curfew hours are those hours during the period ending at 6:00 a.m. all days of the week, and beginning at 12:00 midnight on Sunday through Thursday and 1:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday night. 
Minor is any person under eighteen (18) years of age, unless otherwise emancipated. Furthermore, the term minor shall by synonymous with the term juvenile. 
Parent is any person having legal custody of a minor (i) as a natural or adoptive parent; (ii) as a legal guardian; (iii) as a person who stands in loco parentis; and (iv) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a court. 
Public place shall mean any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. 
Remain means to stay behind, to tarry, to stay unnecessarily and to linger, to fail to leave when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of any public place. 
Street is a way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the case of a sidewalk, for pedestrian travel. The term street includes the legal right-of-way, the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. 
Time of night is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, generally observed at that hour by the public. 
Year of age continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth (17th) to (but not including the day of) the next, such as the eighteenth (18th) birthday.  
Sec. 6-205. - Original jurisdiction of Municipal Court in certain juvenile cases. 
A.  The Municipal Court of the City may elect to have and possess original jurisdiction to hear and adjudicate the offenses of illegal possession of firearms, vandalism, shoplifting, trespassing, assault, battery, assault and battery, truancy, curfew, possession of an alcoholic beverage committed by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years of age and penalize juveniles found guilty as allowed by Title 10A of the Oklahoma Statutes, Section 2-2-102. 
B.  The Municipal Court of the City may elect to have and possess original jurisdiction to hear and adjudicate any offenses committed by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years of age and penalize juveniles found guilty as allowed by Title 10A of the Oklahoma Statutes, Section 2-2-102.  
Sec. 6-206. - Curfew for minors. 
It shall be unlawful for: 
A.  Any person under eighteen (18) years of age to be or remain in or upon the streets or any public place within the City of Sapulpa at night, during curfew hours; 
Any parent of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, allow a minor to remain in any public place or street within the City during curfew hours; or 
Any owner, operator, or employee of a public place to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of any public place during curfew hours. 
It is a defense to subsection A above if the minor is: 
1.  Accompanied by a parent of such minor, or when accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area; 
2.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; 
3.  On an errand at the specific direction of the minor's parent, without any detour or stop; 
4.  Involved in an emergency; 
5.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not object to a police officer; 
6.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
7.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
8.  Attending or traveling between home and an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; or 
9.  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with state law. 
B.  It is a defense to subsection A.2 above for the parent of a minor if the minor would qualify for any defense listed above. 
C.  It is a defense to subsection A.3 above title owner, operator, or employee of a public place promptly notifies the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the public place during curfew hours and remained after being asked to leave. 
D.  Any person convicted of violating any provision in this section shall be punished by a fine as indicated in Appendix B, plus costs, or by the penalty provided in Section 1-108.  
Sec. 6-207. - Allowing or encouraging a minor to commit offenses; penalty. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully aid, abet, allow, encourage or, by omission of a duty, encourage, or assist a minor to commit any municipal, state, or federal offense. 
B.  Any person convicted of violating any provision in this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 or by a fine as indicated in Appendix B, plus costs.  
Sec. 6-208. - Parental responsibility; failure to control; penalty. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any parent to fail to control a minor that is under the parent's supervision, by, after notification of a prior offense committed by the minor, failing to prevent the minor from committing the same offense or more than one (1) other offenses within one (1) year of the date the minor committed the first offense. 
B.  Any person convicted of violating any provision in this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 or by a fine as indicated in Appendix B, plus costs.  
Sec. 6-209. - Commission of a crime in the presence of minors; penalty. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any municipal, state, or federal offense in the presence of any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
B.  Any person convicted of violating any provision in this section shall be punished as provided by Section 1-108 or by a fine as indicated in Appendix B, plus costs.  
Sec. 6-210. - Permitting crimes or disorderliness on premises; penalty. 
A.  No owner, operator, proprietor, manager, or employee of any place shall permit minors who have congregated on the premises to commit any offense, or to carouse, make unnecessary noises, disturb, disrupt, or annoy the people residing or carrying on business in the immediate neighborhood or so as to disturb the peace. Furthermore, no owner, operator, proprietor, manager, or employee of any place shall not permit any minor to loiter, litter or cause any disturbance on the property of a neighboring resident or business. 
B.  Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided by Section 1-108 or by a fine as indicated in Appendix B, plus costs.  
Sec. 6-211. - Truancy; penalty. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor who is over the age of six (6) years and under the age of eighteen (18) years, to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such minor to attend and comply with the rules of a public, private, or other school of the parent's choosing in which the minor is enrolled. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any minor who is over the age of six (6) and who has not finished four (4) years of high school work, to neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private, or other school, or receive an education by other means for the full term of the schools of the district in which the minor attends are in session. 
Provided, that this section shall not apply: 
1.  If any such minor is prevented from attending school by reason of mental or physical disability, as determined by the Board of Education of the district upon a certificate of the school physician or public health physician or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and practicing physician; 
2.  If any such minor is excused from attendance at school, due to an emergency, by the principal of the school in which the minor is enrolled, at the request of the parent of the minor; 
3.  If any such minor is excused from attending school by: 
a.  The administrator of the school or district where the minor attends school, and 
b.  The parent of the minor; provided, further, that no minor shall be excused from attending school by such joint agreement between a school administrator and the parent of the minor unless and until it has been determined that such action is in the best interest of the minor and/or the community, and that said minor shall thereafter be under the supervision of the parent until the minor has reached the age of eighteen (18) years; and 
4.  If any such minor is observing religious holy days prior to the absence and the parent of the minor submits a written request for the absence, the school district shall excuse a student pursuant to this subsection for the days on which the religious holy days are observed and for the days on which the student must travel to and from the site where the student will observe the holy days. 
C.  Any parent convicted of violating any provision in this section shall be punished as provided by Section 1-108 or by a fine as indicated in Appendix B, plus costs. Each separate day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
D.  Any minor convicted of violating any provision in this section shall be punished as provided by Section 1-108, or, on the first offense by a fine as indicated in Appendix B, plus cost, and by a fine as indicated in Appendix B for each subsequent violation, plus cost. Each separate day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.  
Sec. 6-212. - Furnishing tobacco products to minors; minors in possession of tobacco products; penalty. 
A.  Any person who shall furnish to any minor by gift, sale, or otherwise any cigarettes, cigarette papers, electronic cigarettes also known as "e-cigarettes', vapor products, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco, or tobacco in any other form, or nicotine in any other form, shall be guilty of an offense. 
B.  It shall be an offense for any minor to be in possession of any cigarettes, cigarette papers, electronic cigarettes also known as "e-cigarettes", vapor products, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco, or tobacco in any other form or nicotine in any other form. 
C.  Any person convicted of violating any provision in this section shall be punished as provided by Section 1-108 or by a fine as indicated in Appendix B to the Sapulpa City Code. 
(Ord. 2716, 02/15/2015)  
Part 7 - FINANCE AND TAXATION  
CHAPTER 1. - FINANCE AND BUDGET ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 7-101. - Deposits of revenue and funds; service charge. 
All revenue, public funds and other sums of money received by the City or being in the custodial care of the City shall be deposited by the treasurer of the City at the highest available interest rate, according to the class and length of money deposit, as equally as practically possible among the banks, located within the City, whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. With respect to any particular class of deposit account, as determined by the nature of the use of such account and by the length of the time of the deposit, the treasurer of the City shall give preference to any bank or banks offering the highest rate of interest for such class of money deposit. However, such preference given for deposits shall not affect the equal deposits of other funds upon which equal interest rates are paid by such banking institutions. There is imposed a service fee in the amount reflected by the Master Fee Schedule upon any person or organization who presents a negotiable instrument for payment of any obligation to the City and for which payment is not received on the negotiable instrument when appropriate demand for payment is made by the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 9A-1; Ord. 2273, 12/21/1998)  
Sec. 7-102. - Definition of contracts. 
The term "contractual services", for the purpose of this chapter, means services performed for the City by persons not in the employment of the City, and may include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in connection with such services under express or implied contract. Contractual services includes travel; freight; express; parcel post; postage; telephone; telegraph; utilities; rents; repairs, alterations, and maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets, and bridges, and other physical facilities of the City; and other services performed for the City by persons not in the employment of the City.  
Sec. 7-103. - By whom made. 
All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, and contractual services for the offices, departments, and agencies of the City government shall be made by the City Manager or by other City personnel in accordance with purchase authorizations issued by the City Manager.  
Sec. 7-104. - Procedure. 
The City Manager, subject to any regulations which the City Council may prescribe, shall contract for and purchase all supplies, material, and equipment for the offices, departments, and agencies of the City. Every such contract or purchase exceeding an amount set by the City Council by ordinance, motion, or resolution shall require the prior approval of the City Council. The City Manager may also transfer to or between offices, departments, and agencies, or sell surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, and equipment.  
Sec. 7-105. - Obsolete or surplus supplies. 
The City Manager may sell obsolete or surplus supplies, materials, or equipment, subject to regulations of the City Council. The City Manager may sell the same at either public auction or private sale by public bids or sealed quotations on all items for sale or otherwise dispose of such property as allowed by law. 
State Law reference— Public competitive bidding 61 O.S. §§ 101—138.  
CHAPTER 2. - SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 7-201. - Citation and codification. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "City of Sapulpa Sales Tax Ordinance." 
(Prior Code, Chapter 26) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy (sales) taxes for municipal purposes, 68 O.S. § 2701; State Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.  
Sec. 7-202. - Definitions. 
The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, Section 1352 of Title 68 and in Sections 576 and 593 of Title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 26)  
Sec. 7-203. - Tax collector defined. 
The term "tax collector" as used in this chapter means the department of the City or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law or contract, and authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax levied in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 26)  
Sec. 7-204. - Classification of taxpayers. 
For the purpose of this chapter the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 26)  
Sec. 7-205. - Subsisting state permits. 
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional City permit for the same purpose. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 26)  
Sec. 7-206. - Effective date. 
This chapter became effective after approval of a majority of the registered voters of the City voting on the ordinance in the manner prescribed by Section 16-112 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 26)  
Sec. 7-207. - Ordinances. 
The City has adopted the following ordinances setting forth the applicable sales tax regulations and provisions operative in the City: 
Ordinance No. 1205: Effective 04/01/1967. 
Ordinance No. 2229: Effective 04/01/1998. 
Ordinance No. 2427: Effective 06/30/2004. 
Ordinance No. 2475: Effective 11/21/2005. 
Ordinance No. 2739: Effective 01/01/2017. 
Each of these ordinances and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and are applicable in the City as fully as if set out at length herein. A copy of each of the ordinances and amendments are on file in the office of the City Clerk.  
CHAPTER 3. - TELEPHONE EXCHANGE TAX 
 
Sec. 7-301. - Fee levied on telephone exchanges. 
There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each and every person, firm, or corporation operating a telephone exchange in the City in an amount equal to two (2) percent of the gross revenues for each current year for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the City to compensate the City for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulations, and police control of the construction of lines and equipment of the telephone company in the City. The inspection fee and charge shall be on a calendar year basis and shall be due and payable to the City on or before June 1 in each year for the whole of the calendar year next preceding the date and shall be paid into and appropriated and expended from the general revenue fund of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 27-1) 
State Law reference— City powers to levy utility tax on gross receipts, 68 O.S. § 2601 et seq.  
Sec. 7-302. - Fee to be in lieu of other fees, taxes. 
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this chapter by the owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall be and continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license, privilege, and permit fees, or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes. However, it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any existing arrangement whereby the City is permitted to use underground conduit, duct space, or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm or police calls systems of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 27-2)  
Sec. 7-303. - 9-1-1 Emergency telephone tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax of five (5) percent on the tariff charges for exchange telephone service of the local exchange telephone company or companies providing service within the City limits. 
B.  No such tax shall be imposed upon more than one hundred (100) exchange access lines or their equivalent at one (1) location per service user. 
C.  The tax shall be collected monthly by the local exchange company and forwarded, within thirty (30) days of the close of the month in which such taxes were collected, to the City Clerk of the City. 
D.  The funds collected from this tax shall be spent for engineering, installation, administration and other recurring or one-time costs necessary to implement, administer, operate and maintain emergency Nine-One-One (911) telephone service in the City. 
E.  The City Manager or his designated representative are hereby authorized to administer the emergency Nine-One-One (911) telephone service in the City. 
F.  The City Manager or his designated representative is hereby authorized to cooperate with other governing bodies who may impose a similar tax and who wish to participate in the City's emergency Nine-One-One (911) telephone service. 
G.  The local exchange company or companies providing exchange telephone service within the City shall be entitled to retain as administrative fee three (3) percent of the tax imposed and collected pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 1977, 01/19/1988; Ord. 2067, 09/03/1991; Ord. 2135, 10/17/1994; Ord. 2183, 06/17/1996)  
CHAPTER 4. - EXCISE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Revenue and Taxation, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-401. - Citation and codification. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "City of Sapulpa Use Tax." 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-402. - Definitions. 
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Use Tax Code, Section 1401 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. In addition thereto, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma; 
Tax collector means the department of the municipality government or the official agency of the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of the tax herein levied; 
Transaction means sale; and 
Use tax means an excise tax charged on the sale of tangible personal property purchased from outside Oklahoma and brought into the state for consumption or use. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-403. - Excise tax on storage, use, or other consumption of intangible, personal property levied. 
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using, or otherwise consuming within the municipality tangible, personal property purchased or brought into this municipality, an excise tax on the storage, use or other consuming within the municipality of such property at the rate of four (4) percent of the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the municipality, tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the municipality. The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property within the municipality and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside Oklahoma; provided, that the tax levied herein shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended solely for use outside the municipality, but which is stored in the municipality pending shipment outside the municipality or which is temporarily retained in the municipality for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance, or other service. Any person liable for payment of the tax authorized herein, may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by the municipality had been levied on the sale of such goods or services. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994; Ord 2244, 03/16/1998)  
Sec. 7-404. - Purpose of revenues. 
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the municipality, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the governing body of the municipality for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-405. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply: 
A.  In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property brought into the municipality by a nonresident individual visiting in this municipality for his or her personal use or enjoyment while within the municipality; 
B.  In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for resale before being used; 
C.  In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property on which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and the City use tax, has been paid by the person using such tangible, personal property in the municipality, whether such tax was levied under the laws of Oklahoma or some other state or municipality of the United States. If any article of tangible, personal property has already been subjected to a tax by Oklahoma or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and City use tax, the provision of this chapter shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and the City use tax, and the rate by which the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed. Provided, that no credit shall be given for taxes paid in another state or municipality, if that state or municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in Oklahoma and the municipality; 
D.  In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the municipality, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons to the operation of manufacturing plants already established in the municipality. Provided, this exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under the sales tax code of the municipality. The term "manufacturing plants" means those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such; 
E.  In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now specifically exempted from taxation under the sales tax code of the municipality; 
F.  In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property brought into the municipality by an individual with intent to become a resident of this municipality where such personal property is for such individual's personal use or enjoyment; 
G.  In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property used or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads; or 
H.  In respect to livestock purchased outside Oklahoma and brought into this municipality for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-406. - Time when due, returns, payment. 
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the State Use Tax under the Use Tax Code of the State of Oklahoma. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-407. - Tax constitutes debt. 
Such taxes, penalty, and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-408. - Collection of tax by retailer or vendor. 
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state, and making sales of tangible, personal property from a place of business outside this state for use in this municipality shall at the time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this chapter from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefore in the manner and form prescribed by the Tax Commission, if the Tax Commission shall, by regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the Tax Commission the name and address of all his agents operating in this municipality and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of business in the City. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-409. - Collection of tax by retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within State or both within and without State, permits. 
The Tax Commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible, personal property for use in this municipality and by the out-of-state place of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without this state and making sales of tangible, personal property such out-of-state place of business for use in this municipality. Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes by the Tax Commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his knowledge for use within this municipality. Such authority and permit may be cancelled when at any time the Tax Commission considers that such tax can more effectively be collected from the person using such property in this municipality. Provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the purchaser within this municipality by the retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable municipality sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-410. - Revoking permits. 
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter of the Oklahoma Use Tax Code or any orders, rules or regulations of the Tax Commission, the Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in Section 1408 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, by order revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized to do business in this state may, after notice and hearing above provided, cancel the corporation's license to do business in this state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the obligations under this chapter, the Oklahoma Use Tax Code, or any orders, rules or regulations of the Tax Commission. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-411. - Remunerative deductions allowed vendors or retailers of other states. 
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to the Tax Commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma Use Tax Code; and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the code for the collection of state use taxes. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-412. - Interest and penalties, delinquency. 
Section 217 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as herein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter. Provided, that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-413. - Waiver of interest and penalties. 
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the municipality tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the State Use Tax provided in Section 227 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and to accomplish the purposes of this section the applicable provisions of Section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-414. - Erroneous payments, claim for refund. 
Refund of erroneous payment of the municipality use tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the State use tax as set forth in Section 227 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of Section 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-415. - Fraudulent returns. 
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and costs. Each day of noncompliance with this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-416. - Records confidential. 
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the municipality use tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of Section 205 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, of the State Use Tax Code, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the municipality use tax as is herein set forth in full. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-417. - Classification of taxpayers. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma Use Tax Code. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-418. - Subsisting state permits. 
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Use Tax Code are for the purpose of this chapter hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional municipality permit for the same purpose. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
Sec. 7-419. - Provisions cumulative. 
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the City's ordinances. 
(Ord. 2011, 03/20/1989; Ord. 2125, 03/24/1994)  
CHAPTER 5. - UTILITY FEE 
 
Sec. 7-501. - Utility tax levied. 
There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of two (2) percent upon the gross receipts from residential and commercial sales of power, light, heat, gas, electricity, or water within the City of Sapulpa, which tax shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax levied by the City, in accordance with the provisions of 68 O.S. §§ 2601—2605 (1981), as amended and supplemented, and other applicable provisions of state law. 
(Ord. 2428, 01/20/2004)  
Sec. 7-502. - Not to apply to franchises. 
The tax levied under this chapter shall, when levied, apply to all persons, firms associations or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing power, light, heat, gas, electricity, or water within the City of Sapulpa municipal limits, except it shall not apply to any person, firm association or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the City granted pursuant to Article 18, Section 5(a) of the Oklahoma Constitution, nor shall it apply to those entities exempt from taxation under applicable provisions of state law.  
Sec. 7-503. - Payment of tax. 
The tax levied under this chapter shall be levied for a term of not less than one (1) year and shall be payable quarterly, on or prior to the tenth (10th) day of the months of January, April, July, and October of each year, as applicable, and the proceeds thereof shall be placed in the general revenue fund of the City.  
Sec. 7-504. - Failure to pay tax. 
Any person firm, association or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from such City and in addition thereto, an action may be maintain against such person, firm, association, or corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting same, including reasonable attorney's fees.  
Sec. 7-505. - Tax constitutes lien. 
The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets location within the City of any person, firm, association or corporation engaged in the business of selling utility services within the municipal limits of the City.  
Sec. 7-506. - Record of sales. 
It shall be the duty of any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the tax levied hereunder to keep and maintain records as to the amount of gross receipts of sales of power, light, heat, gas, electricity, or water within the City, and such records shall be subject to review and audit by the City upon reasonable request. In addition, a summary of such sales for the preceding calendar quarter, including the number of customers served, the number of customers exempt from taxation under applicable Oklahoma sales tax laws, the number of units of gas, electricity, or water (cubic feet, kilowatt hours, or gallons, respectively) sold to exempt and non-exempt customers, and the amount of sales tax charged and collected with respect to such sales, shall be provided unto the City at the time of payment of the tax pursuant to Section 7-503 hereof.  
CHAPTER 6. - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX 
 
Sec. 7-601. - Citation and codification. 
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be known and cited as the City of Sapulpa Hotel/Motel Ordinance of 2006, and is hereinafter referred to as "chapter." 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-602. - Subsisting state permits. 
All valid and subsisting permits to do business by the Oklahoma Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the purposes of this chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional City permit for the same purpose. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-603. - Effective date and termination. 
This chapter shall become and be effective on July 1, 2006, subject to approval of a majority of the registered voters of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma voting on the same in the manner prescribed by law; provided that upon approval of the voters as required above, this chapter shall remain in effect and not be repealed unless repealed by a majority of the registered voters of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, voting to repeal same in the manner as required by its approval. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-604. - Definitions. 
Hotel or motel means any building or buildings, structures, trailer, or other facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in which three (3) or more rooms are used for the accommodation of transient guests whether such rooms are in one (1) or several structures. The term shall include hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, bed and breakfast inns, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, apartments, and sleeping room not occupied by "permanent residents," and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping accommodations or space are furnished for a consideration. The term shall not include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, university dormitories, or other educational or charitable institutions. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel or the right to use or possession of the furnishings, or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or rooms. 
Occupant means a person who for a consideration uses, possesses, or has the right to the use of, possess any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in this City, including, but not limited to, the owner, proprietor lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Room means any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel which is available for or let out for use or possessed for any purpose other than a place of assembly. As used herein, "place of assembly" means a room or space which is not capable of being occupied for lodging purposes and which is used for educational, recreational, or amusement purposes and shall include: Dance halls, cabarets; night clubs; restaurants; any room or space for public or private banquets, feasts, socials, card parties, or wedding; lodge and meeting halls or room; skating rinks, gymnasiums; swimming pools; billiards, bowling, and table tennis rooms; halls or rooms used for public or private catering purposes; funeral parlors; markets, recreation rooms; concert halls, broadcasting studios; and all other places of similar type of occupancy. 
Tax means the tax levied pursuant to this chapter. 
Treasurer shall mean the Treasurer of the City of Sapulpa. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-605. - Allocation and use of funds. 
Funds collected pursuant to the provision of this chapter shall be set aside and used exclusively for the following three (3) purposes: 
A.  Thirty-seven and one-half (37.5) percent of the funds shall be used to fund an Economic Development Department of the City of Sapulpa. Funds shall be earmarked for funding the salary and benefits of an Economic Development Director and the costs of operating said department. 
B.  Eighteen and seventy-five hundredth (18.75) percent of the funds collected shall be used for the sole purpose of encouraging, promoting and fostering conventions, conferences, and tourism development in the City of Sapulpa. 
Eligible tourism promotion expenditures shall consist of those expenditures made for the preparation, printing, publication, and distribution of media advertising in brochures, news and publicity materials, travel posters, mailing pieces, newspapers, magazines, television, radio, billboards, and the Internet, and advertising and promotional specialties, exhibit space and displays at trade shows and conventions and the expense of manning such exhibits, the cost of travel agent, tour broker and tour operator familiarization tours into the City of Sapulpa for the purpose of attracting tourists to our community and for local, regional, national, and international tourism conferences. Tourism promotion shall also include festivals, sites, and events concerning ethnic history and ethnic events. For purposes of this paragraph, "ethnic" means of or relating to races or large groups of people classed according to common traits or customs. Tourism promotion also includes the costs of providing a computerized consumer-oriented traveler response information program. 
C.  Eighteen and seventy-five hundredth (18.75) percent of the funds collected shall be used by the City to make off-site and on-site capital improvements to public parks now belonging to, or hereafter acquired by, the City of Sapulpa. As used herein, off-site capital improvements shall include and mean the design, construction, extension and/or maintenance of any public utility service, including specifically water and sanitary sewer, to a public park, including acquisition of any necessary right-of-way for the same. 
Funds shall be deposited into a City fund entitled the "Parks Development Fund" and used to acquire public park lands and/or construct park facilities for the purpose of attracting tournaments and sporting events to our community. 
Park development funds shall not be used to pay for Park Department salaries and operations and maintenance expenses. 
D.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the funds collected shall be used by the City for the three (3) enumerated purposes as directed by the governing body. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-606. - Tax levied. 
There is hereby levied a five (5) percent tax on the gross rental receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code upon the service of furnishing rooms by hotels or motels within the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
This tax shall be in addition to any existing sales taxes imposed by the City of Sapulpa or the State of Oklahoma. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-607. - Exemptions. 
Officers, agents, representatives, or employees of any government, corporation, organization, or association that are legally exempted from Oklahoma Sales Taxation or City of Sapulpa Taxation and whose occupancy of the room is required in connection with the official business or affairs of said government, corporation, organization, or association, shall be exempt from the tax levied by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-608. - Proof of exemption required. 
Any person claiming to be exempt from the tax pursuant to Section 7-607 shall display proof of exemption and tax identification number certifying that the corporation, organization, or association with which he is affiliated is exempt from the tax. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-609. - Tax to be designated. 
The operator shall separately designate, charge, and show all taxes on all bills, statements, receipts, or any other evidence of charges or payment of rent for occupancy issued or delivered by the operator. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-610. - Operator responsibility for collection. 
The operator shall be responsible for the collection of the tax from the occupant and shall be liable to the City for the tax. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-611. - Discount. 
In order to compensate an operator for keeping tax records, filing reports, and remitting the tax when due, a discount equal to that allowed by the Oklahoma Tax Commission for the collection of sales tax shall be allowed upon all taxes paid prior to the time they become delinquent. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-612. - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator required to make a return and pay any tax under this chapter to keep and preserve suitable records of the gross daily rentals together with other pertinent records and documents which may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due hereunder and such other records as will substantiate and prove the accuracy of such returns. All records shall remain in the City and be preserved for a period of three (3) years, unless the Treasurer, in writing, has authorized their destruction or disposal at an earlier date, and shall be open to examination at any time by the Treasurer or by any of his duly authorized agents. The burden of proving that a sale was not a taxable sale shall be upon the operator who makes the sale. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-613. - Returns. 
The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable to the Treasurer on the first day of each month, except as herein provided, by any person liable for the payment of any tax due under this chapter. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of the tax payable under this chapter, it shall be the duty of all operators, on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of each month, to deliver to the Treasurer, upon forms prescribed and furnished by him, returns, under oath, showing the gross receipts or gross proceeds arising from rents received from occupancy of hotel rooms during the preceding calendar month. Such returns shall show such further information as the Treasurer may require to correctly compute and collect the tax herein levied. In addition to the information required on returns, the Treasurer may request and the operator shall furnish any information deemed necessary for a correct computation of the tax levied herein. Such operator shall compute and remit to the Treasurer the required tax due for the preceding calendar month. The remittance or remittances of the tax shall accompany the returns herein required. If not paid on or before the (15th) of such month, the tax shall be delinquent after such date; provided, that no interest or penalty shall be charged on such return filed on or before the twentieth (20th) day of such month. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-614. - Payment of tax. 
At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall pay to the Treasurer the tax imposed by this chapter upon the rents included in such return, as well as all other monies collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-615. - Bond required. 
Where the Treasurer believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave the State, or remove or dissipate assets, or for any other similar reason he deems it necessary in order to protect revenues under this chapter, he may require such operator to file with the City a bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this State in such amount as the Treasurer may fix to secure the payment of any tax or penalties and interest due, or which may become due, from such operator. In the event that the Treasurer determines that an operator is to file such within five (5) days after receiving such notice unless within such five (5) days the operator shall request in writing a hearing before the City Council at which time the necessity and amount of the bond shall be determined by the City Council. Such determination shall be final and shall be complied with within fifteen (15) days thereafter. In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the Treasurer or cash in such amount as he may prescribe may be deposited with the Treasurer, who may at any time after five (5) days' notice to the depositor apply them to any tax and/or any penalties due, and for that purpose the securities may be sold at private or public sale. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-616. - Assessment and determination of tax. 
If a return required by this chapter is not filed, or if a returned when filed is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the Treasurer from such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such as number of rooms, location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types of accommodations and services, number of employees, or other factors. Written notice of such assessments shall be given to the person liable for the collection and payment of the tax. Such assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine the tax unless the person against whom it is assessed, within ninety (90) days after the giving of notice of such assessment, shall apply in writing to the City Council for a hearing or unless the Treasurer upon his own initiative shall reassess the same. After such hearing the City Council shall give written notice of its determination to the person against whom the tax is assessed and such determination shall be final. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-617. - Refunds. 
A.  Procedure. The Treasurer shall refund or credit any tax erroneously, illegally, or unconstitutionally collected if written application to the Treasurer for such refund shall be made within ninety (90) days from the date of payment thereof. For like causes and in the same period, a refund may be made upon the initiative and the order of the Treasurer. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing. Such application may be made by the person upon whom such tax was imposed and who has actually paid the tax. Such application may also be made by the person who has collected and paid such tax to the Treasurer provided that the application is made within ninety (90) days of the payment by the occupant to the operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator until he has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund is made. The Treasurer, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow credit therefor on payments due from the applicant. 
B.  Determination and hearing. Upon application for a refund the Treasurer may receive evidence with respect thereto, and make such investigation as he deems necessary. After making a determination as to the refund, the Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the applicant. Such determination shall be final unless the applicant, within ninety (90) days after such notice, shall apply in writing to the City Council for a hearing. After such hearing, the City Council shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-618. - Notices. 
Any notice provided for under this chapter shall be deemed to have been given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or deposited in the United States Mail addressed to the last-known address of the operator. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-619. - Remedies exclusive. 
The remedies provided in this chapter shall be exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability imposed by the chapter. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-620. - Treasurer—Powers. 
In addition to all other powers granted to the Treasurer, he/she is hereby authorized and empowered: 
A.  To make, adopt, and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the collection of taxes pursuant to this chapter; 
B.  To extend for cause shown the time for filing any return for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days; and, for cause shown, to waive, remit, or reduce penalties or interest; 
C.  To delegate his functions hereunder to an assistant or other employee or employees of the City; 
D.  To assess, reassess, determine, revise, and readjust the taxes imposed by this chapter; 
E.  To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-621. - Registration certificates—Certificates of authority. 
Every operator shall file with the Treasurer a registration certificate in a form prescribed by said Treasurer within ten (10) days after the effective date of this chapter or, in the case of operators commencing business or opening new hotels after such effective date, within three (3) days after such commencement or opening. The Treasurer shall, within five (5) days after the filing of such certificate, issue without charge to each operator a certificate of authority empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant and duplicates thereof for each additional hotel. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificates shall be non-assignable and non-transferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the Treasurer upon the cessation of business at the hotel, or upon its sale or transfer. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-622. - Administration. 
One (1) percent of the gross receipts derived from taxes collected pursuant to this chapter shall be retained by the Office of the Treasurer for the purpose of administering and collecting the tax. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-623. - Penalty and interest. 
If any tax levied by this chapter becomes delinquent, the person responsible and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid tax at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) percent per month on the unpaid balance from the date of delinquency until said unpaid balance is paid in full. In addition, if any tax levied by this chapter becomes delinquent, the person responsible and liable for such tax shall pay a penalty on such unpaid tax at the amount set by the Oklahoma Tax Commission for delinquent sales tax payments. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-624. - Records confidential. 
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the tax is legislatively recognized and declared; and to protect the same, the provision of 68 O.S. (1981) § 205 of the State Sales Tax Code, and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of this chapter as if herein set forth. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-625. - Fraudulent returns. 
The willful failure or refusal of any operator to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false or fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or a portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter shall be an offense against the City of Sapulpa. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-626. - Amendments. 
The people of Sapulpa, by their approval of this chapter at the election herein provided, hereby authorize the City Council, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administering and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the qualified voters of the City as provided by law. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-627. - Provisions cumulative. 
The provision hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of City ordinances. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-628. - Provisions severable. 
The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence, or clause hereof. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
Sec. 7-629. - Payment of legal fees. 
In the event a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction is caused to be filed, either on behalf of or against the City of Sapulpa, and said cause is the direct result of the conditions, stipulations, or requirements hereinbefore set forth, an amount necessary to pay all legal fees incurred by the City, as well as fines or penalties imposed against it, shall be set aside from the monies authorized to be collected hereby in payment thereof, regardless of whether said cause was for the purpose of enforcing or defending the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2485, 03/06/2006)  
CHAPTER 7. - ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 
 
Sec. 7-701. - Authorization for acceptance of credit cards, debit cards, and electronic commerce. 
All City departments are authorized to accept credit cards, debit cards, and electronic commerce for payment of City taxes, licenses, fees, permits, fines, court costs, and charges, provided for by this Code, unless specifically disapproved of by the Director of Finance. 
(Ord. 2655, 11/21/2011)  
Sec. 7-702. - Convenience fee imposed. 
A convenience processing fee is imposed and applied to each credit or debit card transaction, or to any payment made electronically as authorized by Section 7-701 in an amount set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2655, 11/21/2011)  
Part 8 - HEALTH AND NUISANCES  
CHAPTER 1. - WEEDS AND TRASH 
 
Sec. 8-101. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Administrative Officer means the City Manager or his designee; 
Cleaning means the removal of trash from property; 
Owner means the owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the County Treasurer; 
Trash means any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials, rubbish, offal, waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for, discarded, or abandoned; and 
Weed includes but is not limited to poison ivy, poison oak, or poison sumac and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which: 
A.  Exceeds twelve (12) inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs, or produce for human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden unless such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the mowing of the weeds; 
B.  Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or accumulation of refuse or trash; 
C.  Harbors rodents or vermin; 
D.  Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors; 
E.  Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or 
F.  Is dead or diseased. 
The term "weed" does not include tended crops on land zoned for agricultural use which are planted more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22, in part; Ord. 2087, 10/19/1992) 
State Law reference— Cleaning and mowing of property, procedures, and powers 11 O.S. Section 22-111.  
Sec. 8-102. - Accumulation of trash or weeds unlawful. 
A.  It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot, tract, or parcel of land situated wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the City to allow trash or weeds to grow, stand, or accumulate upon such premises. It is the duty of such owner or occupant to remove or destroy any such trash or weeds. 
B.  No owner or occupant of land or lots shall: 
1.  Knowingly permit the throwing or dumping upon his premises of any refuse, rubbish, or trash; or 
2.  Permit such materials to remain on his premises for more than ten (10) days after being notified to remove them by the City or the County Health Department whether or not the owner or occupant knew of or permitted such throwing or depositing. 
In addition to a penalty for violation of this section or Section 8-203, the City may abate as a public nuisance any condition prohibited herein pursuant to this chapter, any other law or ordinance, all of which shall be cumulative.  
Sec. 8-103. - Duty of owner, occupant to maintain private property. 
No person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any private property or premises shall maintain or keep any refuse, rubbish, trash, or similar material except dirt thereon; nor shall such person allow the accumulation of any such material; nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which the premises are located. No prosecution may be undertaken under this section until such person shall have been given ten (10) days' notice by the City of the condition and an order to fully abate the alleged deficiency. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22, in part) 
Cross reference— See also Sections 8-510 and 8-511 of this Code for similar provisions on accumulations of litter on private property.  
Sec. 8-104. - Reports of accumulation of grass, weeds or trash on property. 
Any officer or employee of the City who discovers an accumulation of trash or the growth of grass and weeds, or both these conditions, upon any premises within the limits of the City, shall report the condition to the administrative officer if, as a result of the accumulation or growth, the premises appear to be: 
A.  Detrimental to the health, benefit, and welfare of the public and the community; 
B.  A hazard to traffic; 
C.  A fire hazard to property; or 
D.  Any two (2) or more of these conditions. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22, in part)  
Sec. 8-105. - Cleaning and mowing, notice, consent, hearing, abatement, lien and payment. 
The City Manager is authorized to cause property within the City to be cleaned of trash and weeds, or grass to be cut or mowed, and the nuisance to be abated in accordance with the following procedure: 
A.  The administrative officer may determine whether the accumulation of trash, growth of weeds or grass, or other nuisances has caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit or welfare of the public and the community or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of the property; 
B.  At least ten (10) days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property by mail at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the County Treasurer's office before the hearing provided for herein or before action may be taken. The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate, and the notice shall state that unless the work is performed within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the work shall be done by the City and a notice of lien shall be filed with the County Clerk against the property for the costs due and owing the City; 
C.  At the time of mailing of notice to the property owner, the City shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. However, if the property owner can not be located within ten (10) days from the date of mailing the same, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication, as provided by Section 102.8 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes, one (1) time not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action; 
D.  If the City anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in accordance with the provisions as herein provided, the notice, whether by mail or publication, shall state: That any accumulations of trash or excessive weeds or grass growth on the owner's property occurring within six (6) months after the removal of trash or cutting or mowing of weeds or grass on the property pursuant to the notice may be summarily abated by the City; that the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner; and that a lien shall be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further notice to the property owner. At the time of each summary abatement the City Clerk shall notify the property owner of the abatement and costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may request a hearing within ten (10) days after the date of mailing the notice. Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected as provided in this section. However, these summary abatement procedures shall not apply if the records of the County Clerk show that the property was transferred after the notice was given pursuant to this section; 
E.  The owner of the property may give his written consent to the City authorizing the removal of the trash or the mowing of the weeds or grass. By giving his written consent, the owner waives his right to a hearing by the City; 
F.  A hearing may be held by the administrative officer to determine whether the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit or welfare of the public and the community or a hazard to traffic or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property. The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the City Manager, except that if the City Manager conducts the initial hearing, then the right of appeal is to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the administrative order is rendered; 
G.  If the administrative officer finds the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or hazard and that the property would be benefitted by the removal or such conditions, the administrative officer shall direct the clearing or cleaning be done by one of the following methods: 
1.  By the City; or 
2.  On a private contract basis, in which case it shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder; 
The agents of the City are granted the right of entry on the property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or grass, cleaning and performance of necessary duties as a governmental function of the City. Immediately following the cleaning or mowing of the property, the City Clerk shall file a notice of lien with the County Clerk describing the property and the work performed by the City, and stating that the City claims a lien on the property for the cleaning and mowing costs, and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing of the notice; 
H.  After the property has been cleaned, the administrative officer shall determine the actual cost of such cleaning and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith, including the cost of the notice and mailing. The City Clerk shall forward by mail to the property owner specified in this section a statement of the actual cost and demanding payment; 
I.  If payment is not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the County Treasurer of the county in which the property is located, and the same shall be levied on the property and collected by the County Treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. The cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the cost is certified to the County Treasurer and shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid; 
J.  At any time prior to the collection as provided herein, the City may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and the interest thereon. Upon receiving payment, if any, the City Clerk shall forward to the County Treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the lien or part thereof; and 
K.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property used for agricultural purposes. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22, in part)  
Sec. 8-106. - Unlawful to deposit rubbish. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any rubbish, trash, slop, garbage, filthy substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush, or any other refuse or waste matter in any street, avenue, alley, or in any ditch or watercourse, or upon the premises of another, or upon any public ground in this City. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22, in part)  
Sec. 8-107. - Removal of dead animals. 
The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in this City, shall within twenty-four (24) hours after the death of such animal, remove its carcass, and failure so to do shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Section 4-101 of this Code.  
Sec. 8-108. - Unlawful to litter. 
A.  For the purpose of this chapter, "littering" is defined as any trash, refuse, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, abandoned appliances, paper wrappings, cigarette butts, cardboard, yard clippings, leaves, wood, grass, bedding, waste paper, tin cans, bottles, or any other object or substance. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to litter upon the public streets, alleys, roadways, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks of the City, except in public receptacles, or upon any real property owned or occupied by another. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22, in part)  
Sec. 8-109. - Unlawful to litter from automobiles. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw from any automobile or motor vehicle being operated and driven upon and over the streets, alleys, and roadways of the City any litter, trash, waste paper, tin cans, or any other substance or refuse whatever. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22, in part)  
Sec. 8-110. - Litter not to accumulate on property. 
A.  It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, occupying any real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow trash, waste paper, litter, bottles, tin cans or any other used or disposed of objects to accumulate upon such real property or premises or on the sidewalk in front of such property or premises. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation occupying any real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow accumulated trash, waste paper, litter, bottles, tin cans or any other used or disposed of objects to be carried from the occupied premises, either by the wind, elements, or otherwise to any adjoining or other real estate not so owned or occupied by the offender. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 22, in part)  
Sec. 8-111. - Political advertising on rights-of-way prohibited. 
A.  A political advertising sign is defined as any sign, poster or placard printed, painted, made or designed for the purpose of furthering or advertising the candidacy of any person who is or intends to become or may be a candidate for the election to any public office, whether such public office be in the local, state, or federal government, or any subdivision thereof. 
B.  No person, firm, or corporation shall erect or display any political advertising sign on any street or alley right-of-way, or upon any public utility easement within this City. 
C.  No person, firm, or corporation shall place, tack, nail, staple, or glue any political advertising sign on any telephone, telegraph, electric, or street lighting pole within this City. 
D.  Any political advertising sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the provisions hereof shall be a public nuisance. No property right shall exist in such sign erected, placed, or displayed in violation of the provisions of this section.  
Sec. 8-112. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or shall allow the premises occupied to become unsanitary, or who shall in any manner violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code.  
CHAPTER 2. - FOOD AND RESTAURANTS 
 
Sec. 8-201. - Food service regulations adopted. 
A.  The latest edition of the "Oklahoma State Department of Health Rules and Regulations Pertaining to Food Establishments" is hereby adopted and incorporated in this Code by reference. At least one (1) copy of the rules and regulations shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk. The rules and regulations shall govern the definitions; inspection of food service establishments; the issuance, suspension, and revocation of permits to operate food service establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of adulterated or misbranded food or drink and the enforcement of this section. 
B.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. In addition thereto, any person convicted of violation may be enjoined from continuing the violation. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 11-1, as amended) 
State Law reference— State food regulations, see 63 O.S. § 1-1101 et seq.  
Sec. 8-202. - Milk ordinance adopted. 
The production, transportation, processing, handling, sampling, examination, grading, labeling, and sale of all milk and milk products sold for the ultimate consumption within the City, or its police jurisdiction; the inspection of dairy herds, dairy farms, and milk plants; the issuing and revocation of permits to milk producers, haulers, and distributors shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of the "Milk Ordinance — Recommendations of the Public Health Service Revised to Comply with Oklahoma State Statutes," a copy of which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. Sections 9 and 16 of the unabridged ordinance shall be replaced, respectively by Sections 8-205 and 8-206 of this Code. 
State Law reference— 63 O.S. § 1-1301 et seq.  
Sec. 8-203. - Grades of milk which may be sold. 
Only certified pasteurized and Grade A pasteurized, and certified raw or Grade A raw milk and milk products, shall be sold to the final consumer, or to restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores, or similar establishments. However, in an emergency, the sale of pasteurized milk and milk products which have not been graded, or the grade of which is unknown, may be authorized by the health authority; in which case, such milk and milk products shall be labeled "ungraded".  
Sec. 8-204. - Enforcement by whom. 
All sampling, examining, grading, and regrading of milk and milk products and all inspections, and issuing and suspension of revocation of permits shall be done by the Director of the County Health Department or his authorized representative, who shall be a registered professional sanitarian.  
Sec. 8-205. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the standards or codes adopted herein shall be punished and, upon conviction, as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code.  
CHAPTER 3. - ABANDONED PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 8-301. - Definitions. 
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Abandoned property means wrecked or derelict personal property, including but not limited to, wrecked, inoperative or partially dismantled motor vehicles, trailers, boats, machinery, refrigerators, washing machines, stoves, hot water heaters and other household appliances, plumbing fixtures, and furniture; 
Private property means real property not owned or used by a governmental body in the City, but does not include any place licensed or permitted under the Zoning Code to be used as a junkyard or salvage yard; and 
Public property means real property owned or used by any governmental body in the City, and includes buildings or portions thereof under governmental use, parks, streets, sidewalks, right-of-way, easements, and vacant or undeveloped land owned or leased by any governmental body. 
(Ord. 2084, 04/06/1992)  
Sec. 8-302. - Enforcement. 
A City police officer, Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or other authorized City official shall enforce this chapter, and references herein to Building Inspector include such authorized officials. 
(Ord. 2084, 04/06/1992)  
Sec. 8-303. - Abandoned property and related acts prohibited. 
No person shall: 
A.  Place, leave, or cause to be placed or left on public property or outside any building, enclosed porch, areaway, or other portion of a building or dwelling on private property any abandoned property; 
B.  Obstruct the Building Inspector in the discharge of his duties under this chapter; 
C.  Remove any notice affixed to abandoned property under this chapter without the Building Inspector's consent; or 
D.  Allow any abandoned property to remain on any private property which they own. 
(Ord. 2084, 04/06/1992)  
Sec. 8-304. - Notice of abandoned property. 
A.  Notice on private property. Whenever the Building Inspector finds abandoned property which is located on private property; and 
B.  He can reasonably ascertain the person responsible for placing, leaving, or causing the placing or leaving of the abandoned property on the private property, he may serve upon such person a notice of abandoned property, in a form prescribed by the Building Inspector, stating that the property (which shall be described) appears to be abandoned property under this chapter, that the person receiving the notice (who shall be named) appears to be responsible for placing, leaving or causing the placing or leaving of the abandoned property under this chapter, that the person receiving the notice (who shall be described with reasonable particularity), that he has fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice in which to remove the abandoned property and that, in the event of such person's not removing the abandoned property within the fifteen (15) day period, it may be removed by the City and the cost of such removal assessed against the real property from which the abandoned property was removed or against the person receiving the notice where authorized by state law or the building code. 
The notice shall also state that the person may within the fifteen (15) day period, request a hearing as to the necessity of removal and the place where the person may make his request and, in prominent language, that failure by the person to request a hearing within the fifteen (15) day period will act as a waiver of his right to a hearing and may result in the assessment of the cost of such removal against him personally. The person receiving the notice shall sign the notice as an acknowledgment that he has received a copy of the notice and a copy of the notice shall be provided to such person. If the person is not served personally, notice shall be given by certified mail with return receipt requested at the last known address. 
If with due diligence the address cannot be ascertained or the return receipt shows that the person cannot be located, notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation one time no less than fifteen (15) days prior to any removal. A notice shall also be served or sent to the private property owner upon which the abandoned property is located; and 
C.  He cannot ascertain the person responsible for placing or leaving or causing the placing or leaving of the abandoned property on the private property, a notice may be mailed by certified mail to the owner, per the county assessor's office, of the real property upon which the abandoned property is located. A removal notice shall also be placed on or near the abandoned property as required by Section 8-305 and the Building Inspector shall proceed under Section 8-307. 
D.  Failure or refusal to sign notice. If any person required by this section to sign a notice of abandoned property willfully fails or refuses to do so, the Building Inspector shall note this fact on the face of the notice, which shall constitute prima facie evidence of delivery or service of notice as required by the section. 
E.  Building Inspector may cause complaint to be filed. Provided that nothing herein shall limit the Building Inspector's ability to file a criminal complaint upon the person responsible for the placing or leaving or causing the placing or leaving of the abandoned property on private or public property. This shall be in addition to any other remedies provided herein or by any other City ordinance or state law. 
(Ord. 2084, 04/06/1992)  
Sec. 8-305. - Removal notice. 
Whenever the Building Inspector finds abandoned property which is located on private property, and regardless of whether a notice of abandoned property is served pursuant to Section 8-304, Subsection A or Subsection B, the Building Inspector may cause a notice to be placed on the abandoned property. If the Building Inspector cannot attach the removal notice to the abandoned property itself, he shall attach the notice to a substantial object as close to the abandoned property as possible, and this shall be deemed compliance with the posting requirement of this section. 
(Ord. 2084, 04/06/1992)  
Sec. 8-306. - Hearing. 
Request for hearing. If the person who received a notice of abandoned property under Section 8-304, subsection A or subsection B, or his agent, timely requests a hearing on the necessity for removal of the abandoned property, as provided in Section 8-305, a date shall be set, not more than ten (10) days after the date of the request, for the hearing before the Administrative Officer. The timely filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of further action by the City under the chapter, until a decision is reached by the Administrative Officer. 
(Ord. 2084, 04/06/1992)  
Sec. 8-307. - Procedure for disposition of abandoned property. 
A.  Return of Building Inspector. When abandoned property is found by the Building Inspector, he shall make a return thereof to the City Attorney. The return shall: 
1.  Contain a description of the abandoned property; 
2.  Give in detail the facts and circumstances under which it was found; and 
3.  List all individuals, partnerships, corporations, and unincorporated organizations known to the Building Inspector to be interested in the abandoned property. If the Building Inspector has served a notice of abandoned property pursuant to Section 3-304, and if he has caused the abandoned property to be stored, this shall be stated on the return, with necessary particulars. 
B.  Proceedings for disposition. If the abandoned property has not been disposed or removed within the time allowed, the Building Inspector may cause the property to be disposed of in accordance with state law or the applicable building codes. 
(Ord. 2084, 04/06/1992)  
Sec. 8-308. - Abandoned property declared to be public nuisance. 
Abandoned property on private property is declared to be a public nuisance and the owner, custodian, or occupant of the private property, as well as the owner, custodian, bailee, or person entitled to possession of the abandoned property, shall not permit such public nuisance to arise or continue. The City Attorney, at the request of the City Manager or his designee, shall institute a civil action in the district court to: 
A.  Apply for an injunction or restraining order, whether temporary or permanent, to prevent any person from maintaining or continuing to maintain a public nuisance contrary to the provisions of this section, or from failing or refusing to remove, terminate, or abate any public nuisance; 
B.  Enjoin and abate a public nuisance declared by this section; 
C.  Compel the performance of any act specifically required of any person to remove, terminate, or abate any public nuisance; and 
D.  Empower the Building Inspector, or a private contractor on behalf of the City, to enter upon any private property whereon a public nuisance exists or is maintained for the purpose of removing, terminating, or abating such nuisance and prevent the person in possession of the private property from interfering with the City's representative while exercising this power in accordance with the court's order. Both the owner, custodian, bailee, or person entitled to possession of the abandoned property shall be responsible for the removal, termination, or abatement of the public nuisance. 
(Ord. 2084, 04/06/1992)  
Sec. 8-309. - Violations. 
Any person who: 
A.  Commits any of the prohibited acts listed in Section 8-303, or aids in, procures or acquiesces in the commission of any of such prohibited acts; or 
B.  Permits the creation, maintenance or continuation of a public nuisance contrary to Section 8-308, shall be guilty of an offense against the ordinance of the City. 
(Ord. 2084, 04/06/1992)  
CHAPTER 4. - NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 8-401. - Nuisance defined; public nuisances; private nuisances. 
A.  A nuisance is unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or is anything or condition which either: 
1.  Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 
2.  Offends decency; 
3.  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property; or 
4.  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of property. 
B.  A public nuisance is one which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal. 
C.  Every nuisance not included in subsection B above is a private nuisance. 
State Law reference— Power to define and abate nuisances, 50 O.S. § 1.  
Sec. 8-402. - Persons responsible. 
No person in charge or control of any property in the City, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow a nuisance to exist on the property. Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it.  
Sec. 8-403. - Time does not legalize. 
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual obstruction of public right.  
Sec. 8-404. - Remedies against public nuisances. 
The remedies against a public nuisance are: 
A.  Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court; 
B.  Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate court; 
C.  Civil action; or 
D.  Abatement: 
1.  By person injured as provided in Section 12 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes; or 
2.  By the City in accordance with law or ordinance.  
Sec. 8-405. - Remedies against private nuisances. 
The remedies against a private nuisance are: 
A.  Civil action; and 
B.  Abatement: 
1.  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of property. By person injured as provided in Sections 14 and 15 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes; or 
2.  By the City in accordance with law or ordinance.  
Sec. 8-406. - City has power to define and summarily abate nuisances. 
As provided in Section 16 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the City has power to determine what is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and, for the protection of the public health, the public parks, and the public water supply, outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the City has the power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner and an opportunity for him to be heard, if this can be done.  
Sec. 8-407. - Certain public nuisances in the City defined. 
In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of this Code or law, the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
A.  The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink; or the keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made; 
B.  The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in violation of the state law or ordinances of the City; or keeping of a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale, or furnished in violation of the state law or ordinances of the City; 
C.  The exposure, display, sale, or distribution of obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects; or the keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold, or distributed; 
D.  The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot machines, punchboards, or otherwise; 
E.  The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual intercourse, or other immoral acts are practiced; 
F.  The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law or ordinance are practiced or carried on; 
G.  The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the ordinances of the City; or the keeping of a place where such dances are held; 
H.  The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease; 
I.  The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises; 
J.  The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which materially or unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others; 
K.  Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or ordinance; 
L.  Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk; 
M.  All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety; 
N.  Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse, or other things, which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin, or disease germs; and the premises on which such exist; 
O.  Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health or safety because of damage, decay, or other condition; 
P.  Any pit, hole, or other thing which is so constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety; 
Q.  Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety; 
R.  Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace, health, morals, safety, or welfare; 
S.  Any motor vehicle (whether in operating condition or not) or any trailer without a current vehicle plate and current safety inspection sticker as required by law for vehicles used on the public highways, when stored or kept in a residence district; 
T.  Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become obnoxious or annoying to any resident of this City, by reason of any noise or noises made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation, is hereby declared to be a nuisance; and 
U.  Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and dangerous from fire, decay, or other cause, or shall become hazardous from fire, by reason of age, decay, or construction, location or other cause, or shall be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of this City or its inhabitants from any cause, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
The above enumeration of certain public nuisances shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions of law or ordinances defining public or private nuisances either in more general or more specific terms. 
Cross reference— See also Animals (§ 4-101 et seq.).  
Sec. 8-408. - Summary abatement of nuisances. 
A.  Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of one (1) or more persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to require the City Manager or other appropriate officer or agency of the City government to take immediate and proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement. 
B.  The Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief of Police, the City Attorney, the Health Officer, the Building Inspector, the Electrical Inspector, the Plumbing Inspector, or any other officer subordinate to the City Manager, or any Councilor or resident, may submit through or with the consent of the City Manager to the Code Enforcement Officer, a statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by the ordinances of the City or law, and a request or recommendation that it be abated. 
C.  Upon receiving the complaint or observing the nuisance himself, the City Manager or his designee will investigate the alleged nuisance. If he determines that a public nuisance exists, he will notify the person responsible for the nuisance. Such notice to the owner and other persons concerned shall be given in writing, by mail or by service by a police officer if their names and addresses are known; but, if the names and addresses are not known, and the public peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare would not be unduly jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation within the City. Such notice shall provide not less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days, at the discretion of the City Manager or his designee, in which to abate such nuisance or to request a hearing as hereinafter set forth. 
D.  If the person receiving the abatement notice wishes a hearing, he must request it in writing within ten (10) days and mail or file it with the City Clerk. The hearing on his request will be before the City Manager and will be held as soon as possible after the request is filed. The City Manager shall render his decision by written memorandum and file the same with the City Clerk, who shall thereupon mail a copy to the person or persons requesting the hearing at the last known mailing address. 
E.  If the person responsible for a nuisance wishes to appeal the City Manager's decision, he may request a hearing before the City Council. Such request must be in writing and submitted to the City Clerk within five (5) days after notice of the decision of the City Manager is mailed to him. 
F.  The City Council shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a nuisance in fact. For the purpose of gathering evidence on the subject, the City Council shall have power to subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers and other effects. 
G.  If the City Council finds that a nuisance does in fact exists, it shall direct the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance to abate it within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare of the person or persons or public adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If such peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate it within the specified time, the City Council shall direct the City Manager to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as authorized by Section 16 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes. The City Clerk shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just under the circumstances, if the names and addresses are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to the City, collectible as other debts of the City may be collected.  
Sec. 8-409. - Abatement by suit in District Court. 
In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the City may bring suit in the district court of the county where the nuisance is located, as provided in Section 17 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes.  
Sec. 8-410. - Cost of abatement. 
If the person responsible for the nuisance is unable to pay for its removal, the work may be done by the employees of this City under supervision of the City Manager, or it may be let by contract to the lowest and best bidder, after appropriate notice, in the manner for letting other contracts.  
Sec. 8-411. - Cost to be determined, statement of cost to be sent. 
Upon the completion of the work ordered to be performed under Section 8-408 of this Code, the City Manager shall prepare a report on the cost thereof. Such report shall be itemized as to each tract, as follows: Labor, machinery rental or depreciation, fuel and supplies, cost of notice, and other costs. The City Manager shall determine the total actual costs of the work, and shall direct the City Clerk to forward a statement and demand payment thereof by certified mail with return receipt requested to the owner of the property at the address shown by the current tax rolls in the office of the treasurer of the county in which the property lies. If the statement is not paid within twenty (20) days after such statement is mailed, the City Council may direct the City Attorney to institute action to establish its lien against the property on which such work was done and to request the court to cause such property to be sold and the lien paid.  
Sec. 8-412. - Failure to pay costs, costs to be certified to County Treasurer. 
In the event the City does not elect to proceed by legal action as set forth herein, then six (6) months from the date of mailing the notice prescribed by Section 8-410 hereof, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of such costs to the County Treasurer of the county in which the property upon which the work was done is located, to be levied upon the property and to be collected by the County Treasurer in the manner prescribed by the laws of this state.  
Sec. 8-413. - Nuisance unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person, including but not limited to any owner, lessee, or other person to create or maintain a nuisance within the City, or to permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his control within the City.  
Sec. 8-414. - Damages and prosecution for public offense. 
The fact that the City has abated and removed a nuisance shall in no way excuse the party responsible therefor from any damages which may have resulted prior thereto. Neither shall the order of abatement prevent the Chief of Police or other person from filing a complaint where the nuisance constitutes a public offense. The Chief of Police may file complaint in each and every instance where the nuisance amounts to a public offense, and the person responsible therefor shall be prosecuted on such complaint; on determination of guilt, he shall be punished as provided for punishment of public offenses.  
Sec. 8-415. - Health nuisances; abatement. 
A.  Pursuant to authority granted by Section 1-1011 of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the Health Officer shall have authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in the City to remove from such premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health, within twenty-four (24) hours, or within such other time as may be reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute an offense. Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the Health Officer or by a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant, or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant, or agent is unknown, or is without the state, the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises, or by publication in at least one (1) issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the City. 
B.  If the order is not complied with, the Health Officer may cause the order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified to the City Clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be added to the water bill or other City utility bill of the owner or occupant if he is a user of water from the City water system or such other utility service. The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it is added, and shall become due and payable, and be subject to the same regulations relating to delinquency in payment, as the utility bill itself. If such owner or occupant is not a user of any City utility service, such cost, after certification to the City Clerk, may be collected in any manner in which any other debt due the City may be collected. 
State Law reference— Power to abate health nuisances, 63 O.S. Section 1-1011.  
Sec. 8-416. - Toilet facilities required; sewage lagoons prohibited; nuisance. 
A.  For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them herein: 
1.  "Human excrement" means the bowel and kidney discharge of human beings; 
2.  "Sanitary water closet" means the flush type toilet which is connected with a sanitary sewer line of such capacity and construction as to carry away the contents at all times; and 
3.  "Sanitary pit privy" means a privy which is built, rebuilt, or constructed so as to conform with the specifications approved by the State Health Department. 
B.  Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans reside, are employed, or congregate within this City shall install, equip, and maintain adequate sanitary facilities for the disposal of human excrement by use of a sanitary water closet. The closets and toilets hereby required shall be of the sanitary water closet type when located within two hundred (200) feet of a sanitary sewer and accessible thereto, and of the sanitary water closet type (notwithstanding a greater distance from a sanitary sewer) or the water closet type emptying into a septic tank system. A septic tank system or a pit privy may be used in such cases only if it meets the standards of and is approved by the State Health Department. 
C.  All human excrement disposed of within this City shall be disposed of by depositing it in closets of the type provided for in this section. It is unlawful for any owner of property within the City to permit the disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner, or for any person to dispose of human excrement within the City in any other manner. 
D.  Any privy shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and the covers of the seats of privies shall be kept closed at all times when the privies are not being used. No wash water, kitchen slop, or anything other than human excrement and toilet paper shall be emptied into a privy. No excrement from any person suffering from typhoid fever, dysentery, or other serious bowel disease shall be deposited in any sanitary water closet until it is disinfected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the Health Officer. 
E.  All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner different from that required by this section, and all privies and closets so constructed, situated, or maintained as to endanger the public health, are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and may be dealt with and abated as such. Any person maintaining any such nuisance is guilty of an offense, and each day upon which any such nuisance continues is a separate offense. 
F.  Active water supply to toilet facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or allow to be occupied any residential structure for more than two (2) hours in a twenty-four (24) hour period that has had the active water supply removed, disconnected, or discontinued, for any reason, from the toilet facilities of the structure. Any interruptions to the water supply caused by malfunctions or repairs by authorized City of Sapulpa personnel are excluded from this provision. 
(Ord. 2671, 08/2/2012)  
Sec. 8-417. - Procedure cumulative. 
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative on to any other penalties or procedures authorized.  
Sec. 8-418. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or shall allow the premises occupied to become unsanitary, or who shall in any manner violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code.  
CHAPTER 5. - DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 8-501. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter: 
Administrative Officer means the City Manager or his designee; 
Boarding and securing or "boarded and secured" means the closing, boarding or locking of any or all exterior openings so as to prevent entry into the structure; 
Cleaning or cleaned means the removal of trash or weeds from the premises; 
Dilapidated building means the neglect of necessary repairs to a building or allowing it to fall into a state of decay or allowing it to fall into partial ruin to such an extent that the building is a hazard to the health or safety or welfare of the general public; and 
Unsecured building means a structure which through neglect or injury lacks necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. 2087, 10/19/1992) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 11 O.S. Sections 22-112, 22-112.1.  
Sec. 8-502. - Report to be made. 
Any officer or employee of this City who discovers or receives a report of a dilapidated building which has become detrimental to the health, benefit, and welfare of the public and the community or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property, shall report such conditions to the administrative officer.  
Sec. 8-503. - Condemnation, boarding, and securing of dilapidated buildings, notice, removal, lien, payment. 
The administrative officer may cause dilapidated buildings within the City limits to be torn down and removed, or boarded or secured, in accordance with the following procedure: 
A.  At least fifteen (15) days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property before the City takes action or holds a hearing as provided herein. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to be affected. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent by mail to the property owner at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the County Treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to any mortgage holder as shown by the records in the office of the County Clerk to the last-known address of the mortgagee. At the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, the City shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property, or by publication, as defined by Section 1-102 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Such notice may be published once not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action to be taken pursuant to this section; 
B.  A hearing shall be held by the administrative officer to determine whether the property is dilapidated and has thereby become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property, or needs to be boarded and secured; 
C.  If the administrative officer finds that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or a hazard, and that the property would be benefitted by the removal of such conditions, or by its boarding and securing, the administrative officer may cause the dilapidated building to be torn down and removed, and boarded and secured, and shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement and completion of the work. The City Clerk shall immediately file a notice of lien with the County Clerk describing the property, the findings of the administrative officer at the hearing, and stating that the City claims a lien on the property for the destruction and removal, boarding, and securing costs and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing of the notice; 
D.  The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the City Manager from an order of the administrative officer, or if the order is rendered by the City Manager, then the right to appeal is to the City Council. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the administrative order is rendered; 
E.  If the work is not performed by the property owner within the dates fixed by the administrative officer, the administrative officer shall direct the tearing down and removal, or boarding and securing, be done by one of the following methods: 
1.  By the City; or 
2.  On a private contract basis, in which case it shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. 
F.  After the building has been torn down and removed, or boarded and secured, the administrative officer shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings, or the boarding and securing, and any other expenses as may be necessary in conjunction therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The City Clerk shall forward a statement of such actual cost attributable to the dismantling and removal or boarding and securing and a demand for payment by mail to the property owner at the address specified in this section. In addition, a copy of the statement shall be mailed to any mortgage holder at the address specified in this section. At the time of mailing of the statement of costs to any property owner or mortgage holder, the City shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee; 
G.  If payment is not made within six (6) months from the date of the mailing of the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the County Treasurer of the county in which the property is located. The City shall have a lien on the property for such costs, together with interest thereon, and the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid; 
H.  When payment is made to the City for costs incurred, the City shall file a release of lien or part thereof; 
I.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes; and 
J.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the City from otherwise abating a dilapidated building as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. 
State Law reference— 11 O.S. Section 22-112, removal of dilapidated buildings.  
Sec. 8-504. - Clearing up of premises from which buildings have been removed. 
In all cases in which: 
A.  A house or building has been removed before the taking effect of this chapter; or 
B.  A house or building is torn down or demolished pursuant to order of the State Fire Marshal or one of his assistants or the sheriff of the county or the Chief of the Fire Department as provided by state law or as provided in this chapter; and in which any of the following conditions exist; 
C.  The premises have not been cleaned up; 
D.  The premises are cleaned up, and all lumber, brick, concrete, cement, plaster, nails, wire, and other material have not been removed; 
E.  The materials removed but the cellar space and excavations have not been filled; 
F.  A cistern or well has not been filled or safely and securely closed and all openings to sanitary sewer have not been plugged to meet the requirements of the City Plumbing Inspector and securely closed; and 
G.  The lot or lots have not been leveled and left entirely free from trash or the same be not immediately done, then the owner or owners of the lot or lots and the person, firm, or corporation who tore down the house or building shall immediately comply with the provisions of this chapter by having all of the things done.  
Sec. 8-505. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall tear down or begin the tearing down of any house or building within the City limits of the City without having first procured permit therefor as herein provided shall be guilty of an offense against the City and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code.  
CHAPTER 6. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY 
 
Sec. 8-601. - County Health Department designated to enforce health ordinances. 
Anywhere in this chapter where the word or words "Health Officer" are used it may be construed to mean the director of the City-County Cooperative Health Department or his duly designated representative unless another person is designated by the manager of the City. It is the intent and purpose of the City Council to delegate the enforcement of the health ordinances of this City as set out in this section and any such decisions rendered under this section shall be subject to review by the governing City Council upon an appeal from an offender.  
Sec. 8-602. - Obstructing Health Officer. 
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct or interfere with any Health Officer or officer charged with the enforcement of the health laws of this City.  
Sec. 8-603. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any law or code adopted by reference in this chapter is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from continuing such violations.  
CHAPTER 7. - TOBACCO REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-701. - Tobacco use in City parks prohibited. 
A.  The use of tobacco is a public nuisance, is dangerous to the health of both adults and children, and sets an unhealthy example for the City of Sapulpa's youth and children. Therefore, the use of tobacco product in any form is hereby prohibited in all City-owned parks. The use of tobacco product in any form shall also be prohibited in and around all public restrooms located in City-owned parks, and in and around all parking lots adjacent to City-owned parks. 
B.  For purposes of this section, a "city-owned park" shall be defined as any parcel of open land which is owned by the City of Sapulpa and used for recreational activities, including, but is not limited to, dog parks, parks, picnic areas, gardens, playgrounds, walking paths, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, skateboard parks, and fields used for sporting practice or events. However, the provisions of this ordinance shall not be applicable to the Sapulpa Municipal Golf Course, Sahoma Lake, or Pretty Water Lake. 
C.  Any person who knowingly violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imposition of a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) excluding costs, fees, and assessments. Any second or subsequent conviction shall be punished by imposition of a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) excluding costs, fees, and assessments. 
(Ord. 2765, 12/15/2016)  
Sec. 8-702. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tobacco product means any product that contains or is derived from tobacco and is intended for human consumption excluding drugs or devices approved for cessation by the United States Food and Drug Administration. This includes cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, smokeless tobacco, e-cigarettes and vapor products, with or without nicotine; 
Vapor product means noncombustible products that may or may not contain nicotine, that employ a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce a vapor in a solution or other form. "Vapor products" shall include any vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. "Vapor products" do not include any products regulated by the United States Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. 
(Ord. 2765, 12/15/2016)  
Part 9 - LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS  
CHAPTER 1. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES 
 
Sec. 9-101. - License defined; levy. 
A license is the written authority of the City, issued by its duly authorized agent, employee, or officer, conferring permission on some person to pursue and exercise a trade, occupation, or business, including the receipt or delivery of gas through use of any City franchise holder's distribution system located in the public ways of the City, for a definite period of time within the limits of the City, under the conditions prescribed by ordinance. A license fee is hereby levied on every person engaging in, exercising, or pursuing any business, profession, trade, occupation, or privilege in this City, for the annual amount as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2770, 12/19/2016; Ord. 2791, 03/19/2018) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to tax and regulate occupations, 11 O.S. Sections 22-106, 22-107.  
Sec. 9-102. - Administration. 
The issuance of all licenses, collection of all license fees, inspection of all licenses, and the enforcement of license conditions and revocation of licenses shall be under the jurisdiction of the City Clerk, except where such duties are placed elsewhere by the ordinance prescribing the particular license. 
(Ord. 2770, 12/19/2016)  
Sec. 9-103. - License required. 
It shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, either as principal, officer, agent, servant or employee or any corporation, partnership, limited liability company and/or other business entity formed for the purpose of engaging in any trade, profession, business or occupation, to engage in any calling, trade, profession or occupation without first procuring from the City a license and paying to the City the fee required as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2770, 12/19/2016)  
Sec. 9-104. - Issuance of license. 
A.  All licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk. No license shall be issued until all conditions prescribed by ordinance have been complied with by the applicant. All applicants for a license shall make application upon such forms as may be prescribed by ordinance or by the City Clerk. 
B.  In order to receive a license under this chapter, all persons, principals, officers, agents, servants, employees, corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, or other business entities, which are subject to collection and payment of sales or use taxes in connection with their business activities, are required to possess a valid and current state sales tax permit. A copy of this permit shall, upon obtaining or renewing the license from the City required herein, be presented as a part of the application or renewal request. 
C.  Upon making proper application to the City Clerk, the payment of the license fee and fulfillment of any other condition which may be prescribed by law or ordinance, the City Clerk shall issue a license therefor. Such license fees shall be credited to the General Fund of the City. 
D.  The City Clerk shall keep a record of each license issued under the ordinances of this City, showing the date of issuance of each license, to whom issued, the time for which the license is issued, the amount paid to the City Clerk, the receipt number, and the nature of the license. 
E.  Any person who shall engage in more than one (1) business, trade or occupation on which any license fee is required shall pay the license fee required for each of such business, trade or occupation, the same as if each were maintained, operated, or exercised independently and exclusively of all others. Businesses housed or located on separate premises shall be considered as separate businesses for the purpose of levying this fee. 
(Ord. 2770, 12/19/2016)  
Sec. 9-105. - License period. 
Annual licenses shall expire on April 30 of each year except as may be otherwise provided. When an annual license is issued after May 1 for the remainder of the year to a person just beginning to engage in, exercise, or pursue a business, profession, trade, occupation, or privilege, the fee collected shall be a fractional part of the annual fee equal to the fraction of the year remaining, with a minimum amount as set by the Master Fee Schedule. Any license issued between March 1, 2017 and April 30, 2017 shall not be prorated and shall be valid until April 30, 2018. 
(Ord. 2770, 12/19/2016)  
Sec. 9-106 - License to be displayed. 
Every holder of a license to engage in, exercise, or pursue a business, profession, trade, occupation, or privilege, shall conspicuously display the license at all times in some part of his place of business or activity where a person who has entered the place may readily see it; or, if he has no particular place of business or activity, shall carry the license and shall display it to any person who requests to see it. In lieu of the manner of displaying such licenses provided above, when licenses are required for coin-operated music or amusement devices, vending machines, and similar devices and equipment, the license may be placed on or attached to such device or equipment in such position and manner that it will be clearly visible, and shall be so placed or attached if the license so states on its face. It is unlawful to fail or refuse to display the license as required in this section. 
(Ord. 2770, 12/19/2016)  
Sec. 9-107. - Transfer of license prohibited. 
No license shall be sold or otherwise transferred. Each and every license is for a particular business or person and is issued on consideration of the peculiar fitness to pursue the occupation, as determined by previous examination or inspection, and the same shall not be transferred. 
(Ord. 2770, 12/19/2016) 
State Law reference— License may not be transferred, 11 O.S. Section 22-107.  
Sec. 9-108. - Duplicate license. 
Whenever any license to engage in, exercise, or pursue a business, profession, trade, occupation, or privilege, has been lost or destroyed without any wrongful act or connivance by the holder, the City Clerk, on application, will issue a duplicate license for the unexpired time. Before the duplicate is issued, the holder shall make and file with the City Clerk an affidavit that the license has not been transferred, that it has been lost or destroyed without any wrongful act or connivance by the holder, and that, if believed lost, he has made diligent search for it and has been unable to find it. The fee for every duplicate license issued, payable to the City Clerk, is set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2770, 12/19/2016)  
Sec. 9-109. - License may be revoked. 
All licenses issued by the City shall be subject to revocation by the duly authorized officer of the City Council upon any breach of any condition prescribed by ordinance for the regulation of such licensed occupation, including Ordinance No. 2787, or if the licensee operates the licensed occupation or business in violation of the laws of the City or the State or in violation of any law or regulation of the United States government. The duly authorized officer shall mean the City Clerk in all instances except when some other person or board is given the authority by ordinance to revoke or suspend the particular license. The duly authorized officer shall either give written notice, by personal service or by mail, to the licensee, of the revocation of his license or the suspension of the same, which notice, if mailed, shall be mailed to the address given on the application or license. 
(Ord. 2770, 12/19/2016, Ord. 2791, 03/19/2018)  
Sec. 9-110. - Appeals. 
The license shall stand revoked or suspended from the time of the giving of such notice; provided, that any licensee may appeal to the City Manager from such decision within ten (10) days after the aforesaid notice by filing a written request with the City Clerk for a hearing. 
A.  The hearing shall be held by the City Manager within ten (10) business days following the filing of the notice of appeal, but may be continued from day to day. 
B.  The appealing licensee may be represented by counsel. 
C.  The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner, but no license shall be revoked or suspended except upon a preponderance of the evidence. 
D.  The City Manager may affirm, modify, or vacate the order of revocation or suspension, and its decision shall be final. 
E.  No suspension shall be in excess of sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. 2770, 12/19/2016)  
Sec. 9-111. - Penalty. 
Any person who engages in any business, profession, trade, or occupation, or exercises any privilege, for which a license is required by this chapter, without a valid license as thereby required, or who shall violate any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. Violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for revocation or suspension of license granted. 
(Ord. 2770, 12/19/2016)  
CHAPTER 2. - OUTDOOR SELLERS 
 
Sec. 9-201. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and phrases used shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Outdoor seller means any person offering or exposing for retail sale, or making retail sales of, any foodstuffs, beverages, goods, products, wares or merchandise or other personal property of any type, at any fixed outdoor business location. "An outdoor seller" also means and includes all persons, firms or corporations, as well as their agents and employees who engage in temporary or transient business in the City of selling or offering for sale any goods or merchandise, or exhibiting the same for sale or exhibiting the same for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof and who for the purpose of carrying on such business or conducting such exhibits thereof either hire, rent, lease or occupy any room or space in any building, structure, other enclosure, vacant lot or any other property whatever in the City in, through, or from which any goods or merchandise may be sold, offered for sale, exhibited for sale or exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof. 
Public right-of-way means any street or highway and property adjacent to streets and highways which is dedicated to public use and over which the Federal, State or municipal government, or any agency, department or subdivision thereof, exercises control and dominion; or any bridge, alley, sidewalk, canal, plaza, pedestrian bridge, pedestrian way, stairs or elevator which is dedicated to public use and over which the Federal, State or municipal government, or any agency, department or subdivision thereof, exercises control and dominion. 
Retail sale or sales means any sale or sales transactions of foodstuffs, beverages, goods, products, wares, merchandise or other personal property, except as made by a person engaged in selling such personal property at wholesale to dealers in such property. 
Temporary as used in the definition of "outdoor seller", means any such business transacted or conducted in the City for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least one hundred (100) days, in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
Transient as used in the definition of "outdoor seller", means any such business of any such vendor as may be operated or conducted by persons, firms or corporations, or by their agents or employees who reside away from the City or who have fixed places of business in places other than the City or who move stocks of goods or merchandise or samples thereof into the City with the purpose or intention of removing them, or the unsold portion thereof, away from the City before the expiration of one hundred (100) days. 
Exceptions : The term "outdoor seller" shall not include or be construed to include merchants who ordinarily and regularly offer such items for retail sale within permanent structures located on the same premises, nor a vendor of fireworks who has been permitted for such sales under the Code. In addition, the term "outdoor seller" shall not include a vendor who offers items for retail sale at a "special event" licensed and permitted under the Code. In addition, the term "outdoor seller" shall not include or be construed to include anyone engaged in interstate commerce nor anyone upon which the provisions of this chapter would impose a direct and unlawful burden on interstate commerce.  
Sec. 9-202. - Use of public right-of-way; prohibition; exception. 
No outdoor seller shall engage in business within any portion of any public right-of-way; provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply to a landowner who has expressly reserved in a written easement agreement with the City the right to use defined portions of any public right-of-way for his or her business purposes or to the lawful successor(s) or assign(s) of any such landowner.  
Sec. 9-203. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, subject to the penalty provided in Section 1-108. Every act of outdoor selling without a license or otherwise in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.  
Sec. 9-204. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of outdoor seller within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk.  
Sec. 9-205. - License application procedure. 
A.  Contents of application. Applicants for a license under this section shall file with the City Clerk, a verified application on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk, which shall contain the following information: 
1.  The full name, description, and birth date of the applicant. 
2.  The applicant's address, both legal and physical location. 
3.  A brief description of the business to be conducted, items to be sold, and the legal description and address of any fixed outdoor location desired for business. 
4.  The time period for which the applicant desires to do business. 
5.  The license number and description of any vehicle to be used (if applicable). 
6.  A verification that the applicant or the applicant's employer is a vendor registered with the Oklahoma Tax Commission, or other proof that sales tax has been or is being paid on the items sold; or proof that the applicant or the applicant's employer is exempt from the payment of sales tax. 
7.  The content of any signs to be used. 
8.  A site plan depicting the fixed outdoor location desired, if any, and the location of any structure, vehicle, sign or display to be used while conducting the business at such fixed location. 
9.  A written notarized statement by the legal owner of the land upon which any fixed outdoor business location shall be located authorizing the use of the land for the purposes desired by the applicant. 
10.  If employed by another, the name and address of the applicant's employer, together with a brief description of credentials showing the exact relationship. 
B.  Along with the written application, the applicant shall obtain from the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation and provide to the City Clerk a current Oklahoma criminal history information report. The criminal record is considered current if it is dated no more than thirty (30) days prior to the date on which the applicant submits a completed application to the City Clerk.  
Sec. 9-206. - License application fee. 
Any person making application for a license required by the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the City Clerk an application fee as established in the Master Fee Schedule. Any application on file with the City Clerk which results in approval of a license hereunder shall be valid for two hundred forty (240) days and may be used without an additional application fee to justify issuance of another license hereunder to the same applicant for the same location provided that (i) no alteration in the site plan on file is required, (ii) applicant verifies as correct the matters attested to in the original application, and (iii) in the event ninety (90) days or more has elapsed since issuance of the prior license, applicant submits a current criminal history report with the request for a subsequent license.  
Sec. 9-207. - Application review and investigation. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for a license and criminal history information as required by this chapter, the City Clerk shall make or cause to be made any inquiry or investigation that may be necessary to determine whether the applicant's proposed activity is or will be in compliance with the provisions of all laws and ordinances applicable to outdoor selling as well as other applicable provisions of this Code. 
B.  Upon completion of any investigation as provided for by this section, the City Clerk shall review the application to ensure: 
1.  That the applicant or the applicant's employer is a vendor registered with the Oklahoma Tax Commission for the payment of sales tax, or that he or she has otherwise demonstrated that sales tax has been or is being paid on the items sold, or that the applicant or the applicant's employer is exempt from payment of such tax; 
2.  That the applicant or the applicant's employer is aware of the responsibility to collect and pay sales tax, unless exempt; 
3.  That the site chosen for any fixed outdoor business location is appropriately zoned for such a land use, is otherwise in full compliance with Chapter 12 of the City Code, and that the said location does not extend onto any portion of the public right-of-way; 
4.  That the applicant's character or business responsibility is not "unsatisfactory" (as defined in subsection D of this section); 
5.  That the applicant's proposed signs and locations therefor comply with all of the provisions of the Sapulpa Zoning Code § 12-201 et seq.; and 
6.  That the application and proposed use otherwise complies with all other provisions of this Code. 
C.  Within twenty (20) business days after receipt of the application, the City Clerk shall either approve or disapprove of the application. Grounds for disapproval shall be the following: 
1.  A finding that the application is incomplete; 
2.  Nonpayment of the application fee; 
3.  Failure of the applicant to verify that he or she, or the applicant's employer, is a vendor registered with the Oklahoma Tax Commission for the payment of sales tax; or that sales tax has been or is being paid on items sold; or that he or she, or the applicant's employer, is otherwise exempt from payment of sales tax; 
4.  A finding that the site chosen for a fixed outdoor business location is not properly zoned for the proposed land use or that said site extends onto a portion of the public right-of-way; 
5.  A finding that the applicant's proposed signs and locations therefor are not in compliance with the applicable Sapulpa City Code; 
6.  A finding that the application is not in conformance with other applicable provisions of this Code or other state law; or 
7.  A finding that the applicant's character or business responsibility for an outdoor seller license is "unsatisfactory" (as defined in subsection D of this section); or if the application is approved, the City Clerk shall issue the permit. If the application is disapproved, the City Clerk shall state in writing and with specificity the reason(s) for disapproval. The City Clerk shall immediately notify the applicant of such disapproval. Mailing a copy of the letter of disapproval to the address shown on the application shall be deemed to be adequate notification of the applicant. 
D.  For the purpose of this section, "unsatisfactory character or business responsibility" of an applicant shall be defined as follows: 
1.  A finding that the applicant has been convicted of two (2) or more violations of the provisions of this chapter within the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
2.  A finding that a previous license held by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter was revoked within the previous twelve (12) months; or 
3.  A conviction, within the previous ten (10) years, of either a felony or misdemeanor offense involving fraud or dishonesty, including but not limited to larceny, burglary, robbery, embezzlement, crimes involving fraud, etc.  
Sec. 9-208. - Compliance with site plan; amended site plan; fee. 
A.  All outdoor sellers shall comply with the site plan submitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in regard to the fixed outdoor location specified therein, and in regard to the location of any structure, vehicle, sign, or display to be used while conducting business at such fixed outdoor location. 
B.  An outdoor seller who desires a different fixed outdoor location for conducting business, or who desires to otherwise amend the submitted site plan, shall file an amended site plan prior to deviating from the site plan then on file with the City Clerk. 
C.  Upon the filing of an amended site plan, the City Clerk shall review it to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this Code. If the amended site plan is approved, the City Clerk shall amend the license to indicate any new fixed outdoor location for the conduct of the business. 
D.  Failure of an outdoor seller to comply with the original or amended site plan on file with the City Clerk shall constitute a violation of this chapter subject to the penalty specific in this chapter. 
E.  Outdoor sellers who file amended site plans shall pay to the City Clerk a fee as provided in and by the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 9-209. - Site plan requirements; review criteria. 
A.  The site plan to be submitted by the applicant shall contain the following information: 
1.  A plan which shows the location of existing and proposed structures, access, equipment, customers service areas, display areas, existing and proposed utilities, and parking (customer and employee); 
2.  Type of operation to be conducted, including the particular type of service, goods, wares, or merchandise to be sold; 
3.  A description of the design of any vehicle, cart, kiosk, table, chair, stand, box, container, or other structure or display device to be used in the operation by the applicant, including the size and color, together with any logo, printing, or sign which will be utilized by the applicant; and 
4.  The proposed period, hours, and days of operation. 
B.  The site plan shall be reviewed and a determination made as to whether the issuance of a license would be compatible with the public interest. In making such a determination, the following factors shall be considered to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public: 
1.  The degree of congestion of any public right-of-way which may result from the proposed use, design, and location, including the probable impact of the proposed use on the safe flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Factors considered shall include but not be limited to the width of streets and sidewalks, the volume of traffic, and the availability of off-street parking; 
2.  The proximity, size, design, and location of existing street fixtures and furniture at or near the proposed location, including but not limited to sign posts, lampposts, bus stops, benches, telephone booths, planters, and newspaper vending devices; 
3.  The probable impact of the proposed use on the maintenance, care, and security of the proposed location; 
4.  The recommendations of the Assistant City Manager, Urban Development Director, City Fire Marshall, and Chief of Police, insofar as the proposed location may affect the operation of those service areas, based upon the factors recited herein; and 
5.  The conformance of the proposed use to the requirements of the Zoning Code and the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance as applied to the subject location.  
Sec. 9-210. - Issuance of license; bond; fee; fixed location. 
An applicant determined to be in compliance with this chapter shall be issued an approved license by the City Clerk upon payment of the fee set forth in the Master Fee Schedule and provision of a Certificate of Insurance for a general liability insurance policy issued by a company authorized to do business in the state and insuring the outdoor seller activities and location by providing coverage in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The Certificate shall require thirty (30) days advance notice be provided to the City Clerk before expiration or cancellation of coverage. The approved license shall be effective for thirty (30), sixty (60), or ninety (90) days as applicable and shall automatically expire thirty (30), sixty (60), or ninety (90) days after the date of issuance as applicable, unless sooner revoked or renewed under the terms of this chapter. The City Clerk shall specify on the face of each approved license the address of the fixed outdoor location desired for business by any outdoor seller. The outdoor seller shall engage in business only at the fixed outdoor location specified on the face of the license.  
Sec. 9-211. - Appeal to City Manager. 
An applicant who has been determined not to be in compliance and denied a license under this chapter by the City Clerk may appeal such denial to the City Manager within ten (10) days from notice of denial.  
Sec. 9-212. - Display of license. 
Outdoor sellers are hereby required to exhibit and display their licenses or authorized evidence thereof at all times whenever they are engaged in outdoor selling.  
Sec. 9-213. - Revocation. 
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked for reasons that include, but are not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement contained in the application for the license. 
B.  Conviction of the licensee of a felony. 
C.  Conviction of a misdemeanor involving fraud or dishonesty including, but not limited to, fraud, larceny, burglary, robbery, embezzlement, etc. 
D.  A conviction of the licensee for one (1) or more violations of the provisions of this chapter within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
E.  A finding that the licensee has conducted the business for which the license was issued in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace.  
Sec. 9-214. - Surrender upon expiration or revocation. 
When a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter expires, or is revoked, its holder shall surrender it to the City Clerk and the license shall become the property of the City. Upon expiration or revocation of a license issued under this chapter, another license cannot be issued hereunder for the same use at the same location until a period of thirty (30) days has passed from the date of expiration or revocation of the prior license.  
Sec. 9-215. - Renewal of license. 
The holder of any expiring license in good standing issued under this chapter may apply for a thirty (30) day renewal with the City Clerk by submitting a completed renewal request to the City Clerk upon an approved form and payment of the fee established by the Master Fee Schedule. The renewed license shall expire thirty (30) days from issuance. 
(Ord. 2607, 02/01/2010)  
CHAPTER 3. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
 
Sec. 9-301. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Coin-operated amusement device means any and all non-gambling mechanical or electronic machines which, upon the payment or insertion of a coin, token, or similar object, provide music, games as pool, phonographs, video television, shooting galleries, pinball, fooseball, bowling, shuffle board, or any other amusement device with or without a replay feature which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law; 
Coin-operated music device means any such music device which is operated, motivated, released, or played by or upon the payment or insertion of a coin, token, or similar object, whether there is one (1) or more boxes or devices in the premises for the reception of such coin, tokens, or similar objects; coin-operated radio or television receiving sets in hotels, motels, or tourist cabins for the use and benefit of the guests and visitors of such hotels, motels, or tourist rooms or cabins shall be included in such definition; 
Music device means any and all mechanical devices which render, cause to sound, or release music where the same may be heard by one (1) or more public patrons, and each separate loudspeaker, phonograph, juke box, or outlet from which such music emits shall each be construed to be a separate "music device" as herein defined; except in the case where the music emits from more than one (1) speaker transmitting from the same music-producing mechanism, in which case the several outlets or speakers in each place of business shall be collectively considered one such music device; and 
Person means any individual, partnership, association, or corporation. 
(Ord. 2120, 2/7/94)  
Sec. 9-302. - Amount of fee, in lieu of sales tax, special decal. 
A.  Every person who owns and has available to any of the public for operation, or who permits to be operated in or on his place of business, coin-operated devices shall pay for such privilege an annual fee as set by the Master Fee Schedule. Said fee shall be required for each machine, regardless of the number of coin slots, if the machine, upon insertion of a coin, token or similar object, provides music, amusement or entertainment or dispenses one (1) or more products separate and apart from any other provider of music, amusement or entertainment or dispenser of one (1) or more products. The test to determine whether the machine can operate separate and apart from any other shall be whether the provider or dispenser can still function if separated from the others to which it is attached. When multiple machines are placed on a single stand, a decal shall be required for each machine. 
B.  The annual fee required by this section shall be in lieu of sales tax. 
C.  In those instances where it is shown to the satisfaction of the City that a coin-operated device, upon which an annual fee is imposed, will be placed available for use by the public for a definite but limited period of time less than one (1) year, such as where displayed in connection with fairs, carnivals, and places of amusement that operate only during certain seasons of the year. The City may issue a special decal therefor. Such special decal may be issued for any number of thirty (30) day periods less than a full year, and shall indicate that it is a special decal; and shall be for one (1) or more thirty (30) day periods and shall state the precise dates for which issued and shall not be transferred from one machine to another. The fee shall be computed and paid on the basis of one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of the annual rate for the type of device operated, for each thirty (30) day period for which such special decal is issued. In the event the mechanical device is made available to the public for a period beyond that for which the special decal is issued, then a full year's fee and penalty, as set out in the Master Fee Schedule shall be due. 
(Ord. 2120, 2/7/94)  
Sec. 9-303. - Exempted devices. 
The following coin-operated vending devices shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  All coin-operated vending devices owned by and located in a public or private school, a church, or a governmental entity; 
B.  All coin-operated vending devices which dispense only newspapers or periodicals; 
C.  All coin-operated vending devices which dispense only postage stamps; and 
D.  All coin-operated vending devices installed on federal military bases. 
(Ord. 2120, 2/7/94)  
Sec. 9-304. - Application and issuance of decal, display. 
Any person owning a coin-operated device or operating the premises where the same is to be operated or exposed to the public, shall apply to the City for a decal for such device and shall, at the same time, pay to the City the annual fee provided for by the Master Fee Schedule. The City shall, upon receipt of such payment and approval of such application, issue a decal for the type of coin-operated device covered by such application and payment. The decal and application provided for herein shall be prescribed by the City, and shall contain such information and description as shall be required by rule of the City. Any number of coin-operated devices may be included in one (1) application. Before any coin-operated device is put in operation or placed where the same may be operated by any of the public, and at all times when the same is being operated or available to any of the public for operation, a decal shall be firmly affixed to the coin-operated device covered thereby, and plainly visible to and readable by the public. 
(Ord. 2120, 2/7/94)  
Sec. 9-305. - Taxable year, decal for remainder of year. 
For the purpose of the decal issued under this chapter, the fee year shall begin on July 1st and end on the last day of the following June; and shall be divided into two (2) halves. The City shall in each instance issue decals for the remainder of the fee year upon payment of the fee on the bases of the current and remaining half of such fee year. Any product purchased for resale, through a vending machine where fees have been paid and decals affixed, shall not be subject to sales tax. 
(Ord. 2120, 2/7/94)  
Sec. 9-306. - Operation without decal, fee and penalty. 
Any owner of a coin-operated device who places such device in operation or in a place available to the public for operation, and any person who permits a coin-operated device to be in operation or accessible to the public for operation in his place of business, without a decal affixed as required, shall be liable for the fee on such device at the full annual rate as herein levied by the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2120, 2/7/94)  
Sec. 9-307. - Seizure and forfeiture of devices without decal affixed. 
Where any coin-operated device as hereinbefore defined is placed on location, or, after having been placed on location is there left without the decal affixed thereon as herein provided, the device, including all cash in the receptacle thereof, shall be considered forfeited to the City, and may be sealed until released by the City or seized by any authorized agent of the City, or any sheriff, constable, or other peace officer of this state, and upon so being seized shall, together with the cash, if any, contained in the receptacle of such device, forthwith, be delivered to the City. The City shall then proceed to hear and determine the matter of whether or not the device and cash, if any, should, in fact, be forfeited to the City. The owner of the device shall be given at least ten (10) days' notice of the date of the hearing. In the event the City finds that the device including the cash contents, if any, should be forfeited to the City, it shall make an order forfeiting the same to the City, and directing the sale of such device. The device shall be sold in the county where seized after ten (10) days' notice, which notice shall be by posting five (5) notices in conspicuous places in the county where the sale is to be made, one of which notices shall be posted on the bulletin board at the county courthouse of the county. The sale shall be for cash, and the proceeds thereof shall be applied as follows: 
A.  To the payment of the costs incident to the seizure and sale; 
B.  To the payment of any taxes, including penalties, that may have accrued against the device; and 
C.  The balance, if any, shall be remitted to the owner. 
The cash contained in any device and forfeited under the provisions of this section shall be forfeited as an additional tax penalty and shall be in addition to this title. The order of the City, declaring a forfeiture of the device including the cash contents thereof, if any, and directing the sale of such device shall be a final order and may be appealed from as provided for in the Uniform Tax Procedure Act. It shall be the duty of all sheriffs, constables and other peace officers to cooperate with the City in the enforcement of the seizure and forfeiture provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 2120, 2/7/94)  
Sec. 9-308. - Operating device without decal affixed, punishment. 
Any owner of a coin-operated device who places such device in operation or in a place available to the public for operation, and any person who permits a coin-operated device to be in operation or accessible to the public for operation in his place of business, without attaching the decal herein provided for, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2120, 2/7/94)  
CHAPTER 4. - TAXICABS 
 
Sec. 9-401. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driver means one who is authorized by a taxicab company as an operator of a taxicab for public hire. 
Driver's license shall mean the permission granted by the City Clerk to a person to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the City. 
Manifest shall mean a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by the driver, showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the amount of fare of each trip. 
Passenger means a person riding in an automobile or vehicle for hire as distinguished from a person operating the same. 
Person or persons mean and include any person, individual, firm, association, copartnership, or corporation. 
Rate card shall mean a card for display in each taxicab which contains the rates of fare then in force. 
Taxicab shall mean a four (4) door motor vehicle for hire and regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers, having a seating capacity of not less than five (5) nor more than eight (8) persons, and not operating on a fixed route. 
Taxicab company includes any person or persons, as defined in this section, engaged in the business of operating an automobile or vehicle for hire for the purpose of carrying passengers.  
Sec. 9-402. - Services to be rendered. 
All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the City operating under the provisions of this chapter shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of taxicab licenses shall maintain a central place of business and keep the same open twenty-four (24) hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. They shall answer all calls received by them for service inside the corporate limits as soon as they can do so; and if the services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any holder who refuses to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits when such holder has available cabs, or who fails or refuses to give overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this section; and the licenses issued shall be revoked at the discretion of the City Clerk.  
Sec. 9-403. - Delay of passengers prohibited. 
When one (1) or more persons employ a taxicab and occupy the same as a passenger or passengers, the driver shall not cause the vehicle to remain parked and delay the transporting of the passenger or passengers to the requested destination for a period in excess of two (2) minutes after the passenger or passengers shall have entered therein.  
Sec. 9-404. - Manifest. 
Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which is recorded all trips made each day, showing the time and place of origin and destination of such trip and the amount of fare. All such completed manifests shall be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner. 
Every holder of a taxicab license shall preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least the calendar year next preceding the current calendar year, and the manifests shall be available to the Police Department at all times.  
Sec. 9-405. - Records and reports. 
Every holder of a taxicab license required by this chapter shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations, expenses, capital expenditures and such other operating information as may be required. Every holder shall maintain the records containing such information and other data required by this section at a place readily accessible for examination by the Police Department.  
Sec. 9-406. - Insurance required. 
No taxicab license shall be issued under this chapter until the owner or operator has filed with the City Clerk proof that a policy of insurance has been issued to the applicant by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, providing liability insurance coverage for each and every vehicle to be operated by the applicant, with a liability coverage of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the bodily injury to or death of any one person in any one accident and, subject to said limit for one person, twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for the bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and with the coverage of at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage in any one accident. The insurance coverage shall be effective whether the vehicle was, at the time of the accident, being driven by the owner, his agent, employee, lessee or licensee. The policy also shall provide that it cannot be canceled until ten (10) days' notice of such cancellation shall have been filed with the City Clerk. If the policy is canceled and the applicant fails to provide, within ten (10) days, another policy of insurance complying with the provisions hereof, the license issued for the operation of the vehicle or vehicles covered thereby shall automatically become void and of no effect. The policy of insurance shall be for a period of not less than one (1) year, and a new policy shall be furnished at the expiration of any existing policy if the operation of the vehicle covered thereby is to be continued. If for any reason the policy of insurance shall terminate, lapse, or become void or ineffective, the license on such vehicle insured thereunder shall automatically become void and of no effect unless a new policy is provided or the existing policy is reinstated in full within ten (10) days from the date the policy lapses, terminates or becomes ineffective.  
Sec. 9-407. - Same—Nontransferable, suspension and revocation. 
A taxicab license shall not be transferable. A taxicab license may be revoked or suspended if operations are discontinued by any taxicab company for a continuous period of one (1) month.  
Sec. 9-408. - Taxicab licenses required; fee. 
No person or any owner, agent, employee, or driver shall operate or permit to be operated any motor vehicle as a taxicab unless a proper license has been issued to the owner or operator thereof and the license is in full force and effect. 
A separate nontransferable taxicab license shall annually be issued to the taxicab company for each taxicab it operates in the form of serially numbered taxicab licenses bearing the signature of the City Clerk. 
The taxicab license shall show the expiration date of the license, the name of the taxicab company, the name of the manufacturer of the vehicle, the year of the manufacturer, the engine number, and the number of the license plate issued by the Oklahoma Tax Commission. 
There shall be paid to the City Clerk for the each vehicle to be so used a fee in the annual sum as set by the Master Fee Schedule. 
Each taxicab license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire the thirtieth (30th) day of June next succeeding its issuance. License fees shall not be prorated for a fractional part of a fiscal period and no refund shall be made for any reason.  
Sec. 9-409. - Display of license. 
A taxicab license shall be displayed in a prominent place within each licensed taxicab.  
Sec. 9-410. - Vehicle requirements. 
Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
Each motor vehicle operating under the terms of this chapter shall be kept in safe mechanical condition and in compliance with the Oklahoma safety inspection standards. An official Oklahoma safety inspection sticker shall be shown to the City Clerk or his authorized representative and shall be satisfactory evidence, for the purposes of this section, of safe mechanical condition of such motor vehicle for a period of twelve (12) months after its issuance; provided, that any motor vehicle which shall be used for the first time under the terms of this chapter shall not be operated for such purpose without first obtaining such an inspection sticker or such certification within thirty (30) days immediately prior thereto.  
Sec. 9-411. - Same—Application. 
An application for the operation of taxicab companies shall include: 
A.  Full name, address and age of the applicant, and his permanent business location; if a partnership, the name and address of all of the partners; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors thereof. 
B.  A complete description of each vehicle, including the length of time the vehicle has been in use, the number of persons it is constructed or built to carry, the model, motor and chassis number, state license plate number, and a statement of the ownership of each vehicle; 
C.  The trade name under which the applicant does, or proposes to do business, and the color or distinctive design of the body, if any, of each vehicle, proposed to be used; 
D.  The name and local agent for the company issuing public liability and property damage insurance on each vehicle proposed to be used. 
E.  The State of Oklahoma Certificate of Title for each vehicle shall be exhibited to the City Clerk when the application is filed. 
F.  No person who has been convicted of a felony within the prior ten (10) year period to application for a license shall be issued a license to operate a taxicab service. Applications of person previously convicted of murder, manslaughter, kidnaping, robbery, rape, arson, burglary, and grand larceny, as defined by state and federal law, shall be reviewed by a review board to determine fitness to hold a license to operate a taxicab service. The review board shall consist of a representative of the Police Department, a representative of the City Attorney's Office, and the City Clerk.  
Sec. 9-412. - Color scheme; required information to be displayed on taxis. 
Every taxicab operated under the terms of this chapter may be painted in a color scheme as is desired by the holder of a taxicab license. 
All taxicabs, whether painted in a particular color scheme or not, shall have the name of the owner or trade name and the word "taxicab," if not appearing in the trade name. 
All mandatory lettering and wording, whether in a particular trade name, design, color scheme, method of painting or lettering, or otherwise, shall be at least two (2) inches in height, and shall be of such color as will contrast distinctly with the color of the body of the taxicab. Whenever the word "paint" or "painted" is used in this section, it means the application of coloring matter in oil solution and not in water solution. 
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit any taxicab to appear with a trade name, design, color scheme or method of painting, lettering or numbering for the vehicle concerned that is not in accordance with the terms of this section; and it shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be operated upon the streets of the City with any lettering or wording painted or attached thereto, indicating that such motor vehicle is held out to the public for use as a taxicab unless the motor vehicle is licensed as provided in this chapter. 
After the City Clerk is notified, a taxicab may be repainted with a new or different design if the provisions of this section and other provisions of the ordinances of the City are complied with. 
No vehicle covered by the terms of this chapter shall be licensed whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia to be used thereon shall, in the opinion of the City Clerk, conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already operating under this chapter, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public. If, after a license has been issued for a taxicab hereunder, the color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia thereof is changed so as to be, in the opinion of the City Clerk, in conflict with or to imitate any person, owner or operator in such a manner as to be misleading, or to tend to deceive the public, the license covering such taxicab shall be suspended or revoked.  
Sec. 9-413. - Driver-operator license—Required; fee. 
No person shall drive a taxicab for a licensed taxicab company within the City without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk. Such license shall be issued by the City Clerk after compliance with other provisions of this chapter and upon payment of the required annual fee as set by the Master Fee Schedule. The fees shall not be prorated or refunded for any reason. 
Each driver's license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire the thirtieth (30th) day of June next succeeding its issuance. It shall be the responsibility of the driver-operator to renew the license.  
Sec. 9-414. - Same—Description. 
The driver-operator license shall be on a card of appropriate size. There shall be placed thereon in easily readable letters the name of the driver to whom it is issued. The driver-operator license card shall be displayed on the front interior of the taxicab above the windshield. Such driver-operator license card shall be displayed in such a manner that the entire card shall be visible at all times to any person riding in any seat of the taxicab. No driver-operator license shall be displayed except the one (1) issued to the driver who is on duty in that particular taxicab at that time. It shall be a violation of this article for any driver to drive a taxicab at any time without displaying his driver-operator license as provided in this section. The driver shall be responsible for keeping his driver-operator license in good condition, and it is unlawful to display a torn or illegible license.  
Sec. 9-415. - Same—Application. 
The application for a driver-operator's license shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name, age, sex, weight, height, color of eyes and hair of applicant, his residence or address, and length of residence in the City, and place of residence and employment during the past three (3) years; 
B.  Whether or not the applicant has heretofore been licensed as a chauffeur or taxicab driver, and, if so, when and by what state and whether such license has been revoked or suspended, and, if so, the date of and reason for such revocation or suspension. 
C.  The name of the person by whom the applicant is employed. 
D.  The number of times and places arrested or convicted for traffic violations. 
E.  The experience the applicant has had in driving motor vehicles. 
F.  Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, giving particulars of each such conviction. 
G.  Each applicant shall submit himself to be photographed by the Police Department. 
H.  The applicant must name three (3) reputable persons who have known him for one (1) year or more immediately prior to such application. Such persons given as references must be residents of the county. 
I.  Each applicant must provide to the City Clerk a copy of a motor vehicle report, current within the last seven (7) days.  
Sec. 9-416. - Same—Qualifications of applicants. 
No person shall be issued a license to drive a taxicab if they have: 
A.  More than three (3) moving or hazardous traffic violations within the prior twelve (12) month period of the application for a license; or 
B.  A conviction for driving under the influence of intoxicating substances or a plea to reduced charges of driving under the influence within the prior five-year period to application for a license; or 
C.  A misdemeanor conviction involving a violent crime where physical force is exerted so as to cause damage, abuse or injury to persons or property; or 
D.  A felony conviction within the prior ten (10) year period to application for a license, unless it is a conviction for the crime of murder, manslaughter, kidnaping, robbery, rape, arson, burglary, or grand larceny, as defined by state and federal law. Applications of persons previously convicted of murder, manslaughter, kidnaping, robbery, rape, arson, burglary, and grand larceny shall be reviewed by a review board to determine fitness to hold a license to drive a taxicab. The review board shall consist of a representative of the Police Department, a representative of the City Attorney's Office, and the City Clerk.  
Sec. 9-417. - Loss of license identification card; duplicate. 
In case of the loss of a license identification card, the owner may file with the City Clerk a sworn statement of the facts concerning such loss; and if the City Clerk is satisfied that the facts justify the issuance of a replacement card, he shall, after payment to the City of the fee set by the Master Fee Schedule, issue a replacement card. The replacement card shall be plainly marked "Duplicate;" and the number of the original card shall be furnished to the Police Department, which shall be on the alert for the original card.  
Sec. 9-418. - Revocation and suspension authorized; grounds. 
A driver's license issued under this division may be revoked by the City Clerk, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, for any of the following reasons: 
A.  Conviction or violation of any federal law, state law or municipal ordinance involving moral turpitude. 
B.  Operating a taxicab while ability impaired by alcohol or while under the influence of intoxicating substances. 
C.  Leaving the scene of an accident. 
D.  Failure to make full report of an accident to the Police Department within twenty-four (24) hours of the time of occurrence. 
E.  Permitting any other person to use his license. 
F.  Obliterating or erasing any official entry on his license identification card. 
G.  Conviction of a third major traffic violation during any license year. A major traffic violation is hereby defined to be: 
1.  Speeding; 
2.  Reckless driving; 
3.  Nonobservance of traffic signal lights or stop signs; 
4.  Improper brakes; 
5.  Making a left turn or U-turn where not permitted; 
6.  Driving on the wrong side of a street. 
H.  Misrepresentation of any material facts by a driver in his application for license. 
I.  Charge and collection of more fare than authorized. 
J.  Driving a taxicab without having a valid license issued by the State of Oklahoma. 
A taxicab driver's license may be suspended by the City Clerk, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, for a period of not to exceed ninety (90) days for any of the following reasons: 
A.  First and second offenses of any major traffic violation. 
B.  Repeated infractions of minor traffic laws. 
No person whose license has been revoked shall be eligible to receive a new license until one (1) year from the date of such revocation.  
Sec. 9-419. - Refusal to carry passengers prohibited. 
No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so. Individual service shall be accorded to all passengers requesting it at the rate of fare designated by the rate card of schedule of rates posted in the taxicab.  
Sec. 9-420. - Receipt and discharge of passengers. 
Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible, or in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers. Passengers may be discharged on either side of a one-way street.  
Sec. 9-421. - Receipts. 
The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, give to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or a specially prepared receipt, on which shall be the name of the owner, tag number or motor number, amount of meter reading or charges and date of transaction.  
Sec. 9-422. - Rates to be posted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab for hire within the City without posting, within the taxicab, a schedule or map showing the rates to be charged for such service. The rates to be charged shall be printed on a card, the letters and figures to be not less than one-half (½) inch black, boldface type, and placed where they are clearly visible and can be read by a passenger sitting anywhere in the taxicab. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to charge, receive or collect any fares for transporting passengers within the City greater than the rate posted in the taxicab.  
Sec. 9-423. - Number of passengers. 
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab than the rated seating capacity of the vehicle. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger.  
Sec. 9-424. - Report of accidents. 
It shall be the duty of any driver of any motor vehicle regulated under the terms of this chapter to report immediately to the police station of the City any collision or accident in which any such motor vehicle may be involved.  
Sec. 9-425. - Soliciting passengers. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to solicit passengers except when sitting in the driver's compartment of the taxicab when it is parked immediately adjacent to the curb. In no event shall any driver solicit passengers in a loud or annoying voice or in any other way so as to annoy or obstruct any person, nor shall he solicit passengers at any intermediate stopping point along any established route of another common carrier.  
Sec. 9-426. - Soliciting for hotels or other establishments. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel or motel or to attempt to divert patronage from any hotel or motel to another. Neither shall such driver engage in selling intoxicating liquors, or solicit business for any house of ill repute, or use his vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers.  
Sec. 9-427. - Revocation of licenses generally. 
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the City Clerk for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 9-428. - Notice of revocation or suspension to be given; hearing. 
Before the City Clerk revokes or suspends any drivers' license or any taxicab license, he shall cause a written notice to be sent to the holder of the license involved by either having it delivered to the holder in person or by mailing it to the business address of the holder on file in the office of the City Clerk. Such notice shall be sent at least seven (7) days prior to the time a hearing is to be held and shall advise the holder of the license involved, as to the nature of the reason for suspension or revocation, and advise that such holder shall have an opportunity to show why the license should not be suspended or revoked. The City Clerk, at the time and place stated in the notice, shall hold a hearing to determine whether the license should be suspended or revoked for any of the reasons provided in this article.  
Sec. 9-429. - Denial; reapplication. 
In the event any applicant for a taxicab driver's license is disapproved because it is found that such applicant fails to meet the requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall not be eligible to apply for a driver's license until the expiration of six (6) months from the date of such disapproval.  
Sec. 9-430. - Appeal. 
Any person, organization, society, or corporation whose application for a permit has been denied may appeal to the City Council of the City by giving written notice of intent of appeal within ten (10) days from the date of the hearing. Said notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Manager. The City Council shall at the next regular meeting hear the appeal and may affirm or reverse the action of the City Clerk.  
Sec. 9-431. - Refusal to pay fare. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab or to engage any such vehicle with the intent to defraud the operator of the vehicle.  
Sec. 9-432. - Parking restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating motor vehicles for hire within the City to park any such vehicle on Poplar Street, Main Street, Water Street, Park Street or Elm Street between Hobson Street and Lee Avenue, or on Hobson Street, Dewey Avenue, or Lee Avenue between Poplar and Elm Streets, except while receiving and discharging passengers, baggage or other property; provided, that the City Council is hereby empowered and authorized, without ordinance, to grant to hotels special parking space sufficient to accommodate one (1) or more taxis on the front and side streets adjoining their hotel building, for the purpose of accommodating their guests; provided further, that no such parking space so reserved on Main Street shall be occupied by any hotel bus for a longer time than is necessary to load and unload its passengers or baggage. The parking space so reserved shall be marked off by plain and distinct lines, and with curb signs indicating that same is reserved for the use of the hotel taxi.  
CHAPTER 5. - GARAGE SALES 
 
Sec. 9-501. - "Garage sale" defined. 
A "garage sale," as regulated by this chapter, is defined as a sale of tangible personal property had in a district of the City so zoned as not to permit a regular established business engaged in the sale of merchandise, to which sale the public is invited by an advertisement or otherwise, and shall include but not be limited to: 
A.  "Lawn sales"; 
B.  "Attic sales"; 
C.  "Flea market sales"; or 
D.  Similar sales. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 11A-1; Ord. 1405)  
Sec. 9-502. - Exemptions from chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Sales held pursuant to the order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
B.  Persons acting pursuant to their duties as public officials; 
C.  Persons offering or selling personal property specifically described in the advertisement thereof, such items not to exceed ten (10) in number; 
D.  Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auctions; 
E.  Sales of other character and nature regulated by other ordinances of the City; or 
F.  Sales by business establishments from locations in areas properly zoned therefor. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 11A-2; Ord. 1405, 07/19/1971)  
Sec. 9-503. - License required; application. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or corporation to hold or advertise a garage sale, as defined herein, without first obtaining a license therefor from the City Clerk. Such license shall be issued without charge pursuant to an application made by the person or organization to hold or conduct such sale. Such application shall give the following information: 
A.  The date and location of the sale; 
B.  The number of days on which the sale is to be held which shall not exceed the limit set forth herein; 
C.  The date of any prior similar sale by the applicant; 
D.  The description of the property to be sold; and 
E.  A statement as to how the goods to be sold were acquired. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 11A-3; Ord. 1405, 07/19/1971)  
Sec. 9-504. - Revocation. 
If false information or representations are contained in such application, the license issued thereon shall be void and subject to revocation by the City Clerk. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 11A-4; Ord. 1405, 07/19/1971)  
Sec. 9-505. - Term; new license when sale prevented by inclement weather; maximum number of sales per year. 
No license for a garage sale shall be issued for a longer period than two (2) days, and the same person or organization shall not hold more than two (2) such sales within a period of one (1) year, nor shall more than two (2) sales be held at the same place within a period of one (1) year. If a sale is prevented by inclement weather, a new license therefor may be issued. A license shall not be issued for goods or merchandise acquired by the applicant for the purpose of resale. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 11A-5; Ord. 1405, 07/19/1971)  
Sec. 9-506. - Signs. 
Signs advertising garage sales shall not be placed on the streets of the City, on the property of persons other than the one (1) holding such sale without express permission, nor at a distance of more than three hundred (300) feet from the location of the sale. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 11A-6; Ord. 1405, 07/19/1971)  
CHAPTER 6. - YOUTH RECREATIONAL FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 9-601. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the term "youth recreational facility" means a place or premises open to the public wherein persons not less than thirteen (13) years of age (unless accompanied by a parent) and under the age of twenty-one (21) years may engage in recreational activities which shall include ping pong tables, pinball machines, pool tables, and similar devices permitted by law, and also dancing and other entertainment. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-27; Ord. 1291, 11/04/1968; Ord. 1926, 03/03/1986)  
Sec. 9-602. - Identification. 
The entrance of every youth recreational facility shall be plainly marked, "Youth Recreational Facility, Persons 21 Years or Older Prohibited." 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-28; Ord. 1291, 11/04/1968)  
Sec. 9-603. - Regulations for operation. 
It shall be unlawful and constitute an offense punishable as set forth in this chapter and grounds for revocation or suspension of a license as required by this chapter for any youth recreational facility operator, manager, employee, or person having supervision thereof to permit any of the following acts upon the licensed premises: 
A.  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of the statutes of the state; 
B.  Operation or being open for operation during hours other than specified as follows: 
1.  Ages thirteen (13) through fifteen (15): 
a.  Monday through Thursday — 11:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; 
b.  Friday through Saturday — 11:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.; and 
c.  Sunday of each week — 1:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.; 
2.  Ages sixteen (16) through twenty (20): 
a.  Monday through Thursday — 11:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.; 
b.  Friday through Saturday — 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.; and 
c.  Sunday of each week — 1:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
C.  Permitting a person other than an operator or employee to remain on the licensed premises more than fifteen (15) minutes after closing time; 
D.  Operating without having at least two (2) adults, with the qualifications required by this chapter, to be present on the premises at all times; 
E.  Permitting a person twenty-one (21) years of age or over, other than the parent of a youth on the premises, or an operator or employee, to be present on the premises directing recreational activities; 
F.  Permitting breaches of the peace or public disturbances upon the premises; 
G.  Permitting beer or intoxicating beverages or any intoxicated person to be on the premises. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-29; Ord. 1291, 11/04/1968; Ord. 1926, 03/03/1986)  
Sec. 9-604. - Provisions of article cumulative. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not exempt the owners, operators, managers, or employees thereof, or the youth recreational facility from compliance with the other provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the City not in conflict herewith. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-30; Ord. 1291,11/04/1968)  
Sec. 9-605. - License required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate or manage within the City a youth recreational facility as defined in Section 9-601 without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this chapter. 
B.  A separate license shall be required for each youth recreational facility owned, maintained or operated. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-31; Ord. 1291, 11/04/1968)  
Sec. 9-606. - Application; fee. 
A.  An application for the license required by the preceding section shall state: 
1.  The name of the owner of the youth recreational facility and the location of the establishment. If the applicant is not the owner, a copy of the lease or other arrangement under which applicant holds possession thereof shall be attached to the application; 
2.  The name, age, residence, and previous employment record of the applicant and of the operators, employees, partners or other persons having an interest in or supervisory control over the proposed youth recreational facility; 
3.  The length of time the applicant has been a bona fide resident of the state immediately preceding the filing of the application; 
4.  Any other information that the City Manager shall find reasonably necessary to carry out the general purpose and intent of this chapter and make a determination of the moral qualifications of the applicant, his employees, managers, and operators; and 
5.  The application shall contain an agreement that the premises covered by such application may be inspected at any reasonable time by a police officer or other designated employee of the City. 
B.  Such applications shall be accompanied by an application fee as set by the Master Fee Schedule which shall be paid to the City Clerk. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-32; Ord. No. 1291, 11/04/1968)  
Sec. 9-607. - Investigation of applicant and premises; premises for which license not to be issued. 
A.  Upon the receipt of an application for license for a youth recreational facility, the City Manager shall promptly cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and the manner in which the facility is to be operated and any other matters deemed necessary for the purpose of this chapter. 
B.  A license for such youth recreational facility shall not be issued unless the premises are properly ventilated, supplied with sufficient toilet conveniences, adequately lighted, and in a safe and proper location. No youth recreational facility shall be located nearer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a beer tavern, school, or church. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-33; Ord. No. 1291, 11/04/1968)  
Sec. 9-608. - Issuance of license. 
A.  A license for the operation of a youth recreational facility shall be issued by the City Clerk if the requirements of this chapter are complied with and if it is determined that the owners, operators or employees of such facility are adults, have never been convicted of a felony or an offense involving moral turpitude, and the applicant does not propose to operate such facility in a manner which will violate any provisions of the laws of the United States, the statutes and regulations of the state and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances and regulations of the City. 
B.  If a material misstatement of fact is made by the applicant, it shall be grounds for denial of the issuance of a license or revocation of any license issued to the applicant. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-34; Ord. 1291, 11/04/1968)  
Sec. 9-609. - Action by City Manager; denial of license generally. 
The City Manager shall act upon the application for the license required by this chapter within fifteen (15) days after the filing thereof. If any such application is denied, the applicant shall be notified within five (5) days after such denial, giving reasons therefor. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-35; Ord. No. 1291, 11/04/1968)  
Sec. 9-610. - Appeals from denial of license. 
If an application for a license for a youth recreational facility is denied, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the City Council of the City. Notice of the appeal, stating the grounds therefor, shall be filed with the City Manager within five (5) days after the receipt of the notice of denial. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the City Council shall hold a public hearing, at which such denial shall be reversed or affirmed. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-36; Ord. 1291, 11/04/1968)  
Sec. 9-611. - License fee. 
The fee for a license for a youth recreational facility shall be set by the City Council in the Master Fee Schedule. If more than five (5) pool tables are to be operated, a fee as set by the Council shall be added to such fee for each additional table. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-37; Ord. 1291, 11/04/1968)  
Sec. 9-612. - Display of license. 
Every youth recreational facility shall display in a conspicuous place the license therefor issued yearly. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-38; Ord. 1291, 11/04/1968)  
Sec. 9-613. - Expiration of license. 
Licenses issued yearly under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year; provided, that the first license fee shall be prorated on a quarterly basis. Thereafter, the full annual fee shall be collected regardless of the license date. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-39; Ord. 1291, 11/4/1968)  
Sec. 9-614. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
The City Council may issue or revoke licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter if, after a public hearing, the board finds the holder of the license has made material misstatement in the application for a license or violated any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-40; Ord. 1291, 11/4/1968)  
CHAPTER 7. - MASSAGE BUSINESS 
 
Sec. 9-701. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given herein: 
City means the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation. 
Clerk means the City Clerk of the City of Sapulpa or her authorized representative. 
Direct supervision means on-the-premise control and responsibility for the massage apprentice by and in the physical presence of the massage technician. 
External bath means the bathing of another person by a massage technician or massage apprentice by immersion, shower or steaming any part of the body. 
Licensee means any massage establishment operator, outcall massage service operator, massage technician or massage apprentice appropriately licensed by the City of Sapulpa. 
Massage means any method of pressure on, or friction against by stroking, rubbing, kneading, tapping, pounding, manipulating, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands, feet or otherwise, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, infrared heat, vibrators, mechanical or electrical appliances and external baths, for any type of consideration or gratuity. 
Massage apprentice means any person employed by a massage establishment or outcall massage service and directly supervised by a massage technician for the purpose of learning the method and practice of massage. 
Massage establishment means any establishment or place of business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, any business of the manipulation of the body by means of massage as herein defined. 
Massage technician means any person who administers to another person for any consideration or gratuity, a massage, external bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body or other similar procedure. 
Operator, massage establishment operator , or outcall massage service operator means any person owning or operating a massage establishment or an outcall massage service. In the event of a corporate owner, operator shall mean the manager or person in charge. If a sole proprietorship, operator shall mean such individual alone. 
Outcall massage service means a business which provides licensed massage technicians or massage apprentices to perform a massage at a private location. 
Patron means any person eighteen (18) years of age or older who receives a massage. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
Personal pronouns when used in the masculine or neuter gender, mean the masculine, feminine, and neuter gender. 
Sexual body areas means the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, and perineum of any person and the vulva and breasts of a female person.  
Sec. 9-702. - License. 
A.  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate a massage establishment in the City without having first obtained a license to do so as herein provided. 
B.  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to perform or offer or agree to perform the services of a massage technician or massage apprentice in the City without first having obtained a license to do so as herein provided. 
C.  It shall be unlawful and an offense for an operator of a massage establishment to permit any person in his massage establishment to act as a massage technician or massage apprentice in the City unless such person is duly licensed as provided in this chapter. 
D.  It shall be unlawful and an offense for a person to operate an outcall massage service in the City without first having obtained a license to do so as herein provided. 
E.  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any outcall massage service operator, owner, or manager to permit any person to work out of such service who is not a duly licensed massage technician or massage apprentice as provided in this chapter, regardless of where the massage is performed. 
F.  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any outcall massage apprentice to perform a massage unless acting under the direct supervision of a duly licensed massage technician.  
Sec. 9-703. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following persons while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
A.  Nurses who are registered under the laws of the State of Oklahoma; 
B.  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, chiropodists, podiatrists, osteopaths or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of Oklahoma; 
C.  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the State of Oklahoma, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp, and hair of a patron for cosmetic purposes; or 
D.  Any employee or student of any nonprofit organization such as a hospital, clinic, nursing and convalescent home, university, college or seminary licensed or accredited by the State of Oklahoma or organized as exempt from taxation by the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, when massages are performed as part of such service or education and not for any consideration or gratuity.  
Sec. 9-704. - Fees and renewal. 
A.  Every original application for a massage establishment license shall be accompanied by a non-refundable processing fee as a set by the Master Fee Schedule. Applications for an outcall massage service, massage technician or massage apprentice, shall be accompanied by a non-refundable processing fee as set by the Master Fee Schedule. 
B.  Annual license fees set forth in the Master Fee Schedule herein shall be due and payable by the licensee at the time the City license is issued; provided, however, that fees for the initial applications for massage establishments, outcall massage services and massage technicians may be prorated quarterly. 
(Ord. 2528, 08/20/2007)  
Sec. 9-705. - Applications. 
A.  Massage establishments. Any applicant for a license for a massage establishment shall submit to the Clerk a written application on a form furnished by the Clerk. Before issuing a license, the Clerk shall determine that the following requirements are met by each applicant: 
1.  The applicant or members of the applying firm, partnership or association, or if a corporation, the manager, ("Applicant" herein) shall be twenty-one (21) years of age or older by proof acceptable to the Clerk. The applicant's name, place of birth, sex, race, height, weight, color of eyes and hair, business and home address and telephone numbers, and any other names by which the applicant was known in the past shall be included in the application. The applicant shall specify the exact name and address of the proposed massage establishment. 
2.  The applicant shall not have been convicted of any felony and/or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude for five (5) years preceding the date of the application. 
3.  The applicant, who is or intends to be a massage establishment operator engaged in on-the-premise supervision of massage technicians or who performs the duties of a massage technician, shall be duly licensed by the City as a massage technician as provided in this chapter. 
4.  The applicant shall furnish to the Clerk two (2) full-face photographs of the applicant, one (1) inch by one and one-half (1½) inches, one of which shall be laminated on a City furnished identification card, and the other shall be delivered to the Police Department of the City of Sapulpa. Such photographs must have been taken within thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application and must be considered by the suitable for the purpose of this chapter. 
5.  The applicant shall furnish massage or similar business license history disclosing whether the applicant, in previously operating under license in this or another city or state has had his license revoked or suspended, and if so, the reason therefor, and business activity or occupation of the applicant subsequent to such suspension or revocation. 
6.  The applicant shall have been fingerprinted on all fingers by the Sapulpa Police Department on a form provided by the Police Department within thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application, which fingerprints and one (1) photograph as required herein shall be retained in the Police Department for as long as deemed necessary by the Clerk. The Police Department may verify identification of any applicant by appropriate means and shall notify the Clerk immediately in the event a false identification is discovered. 
7.  The applicant shall list on the application form all felony and misdemeanor convictions other than minor traffic violations. For the purpose of this disclosure, no conviction need be listed for a misdemeanor move than five (5) years preceding the date of the application or for a felony for which a pardon has been granted. 
8.  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall include the state of incorporation, the name and address of the corporation, the registered service agent in the State of Oklahoma, the date authorized to do business in Oklahoma, and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
9.  That the applicant has secured a location in the City of Sapulpa which is described by address and name for the massage establishment, and if leased, a copy of the lease agreement, which location has been inspected and approved by the Creek County Health Department as to the following requirements: 
a.  Steam rooms, shower compartments, steam compartments, tub compartments, toilet rooms, and adjacent exits thereto shall have smooth, nonabsorbent and easily cleanable floors, walls, and ceilings; 
b.  Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one (1) or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer, except that dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains; 
c.  A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning; 
d.  The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used to administer massages; 
e.  Massage tables shall have a cleanable plastic liner covering the entire top surface; 
f.  Closed cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages; 
g.  A toilet facility shall be provided in a convenient location and separate toilet facilities for each sex shall be provided for each twenty (20) employees and patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time; urinals may be substituted for water closets after one (1) water closet has been provided; toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein; toilet room floors and walls shall be smooth, nonabsorbent, easily cleanable, with the walls painted in a light color, toilet facilities shall be vented to the outside air; and 
h.  A minimum of one (1) separate wash facility per toilet room shall be provided in each massage establishment for the use of patrons and employees, which shall provide an approved basin, soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times; in addition, there shall be provided at each wash basin sanitary towels or other approved facilities placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
10.  The applicant shall comply with applicable provisions of the City's building, electrical, plumbing, sign and mechanical codes including, but not limited to the following requirements: 
a.  A readable sign in compliance with all provisions of the City Sign Code, posted at the main entrance, identifying the business as a massage establishment; and 
b.  Minimum lighting in accordance with the City Building Code in each room or enclosure where services are performed on patrons. 
11.  The applicant's massage establishment location shall have been inspected and approved by the City Fire Marshal as to the following requirements: 
a.  Accessible exits for patrons and employees in case of fire; 
b.  No unsafe storage areas of combustible material; 
c.  Adequate fire-extinguishing equipment available and usable by employees instructed by the Fire Marshal as to proper procedure; and 
d.  Approved smoke, heat and incendiary gas detectors in operating condition. 
B.  Massage technician. Any individual seeking to obtain a City license as a massage technician shall submit to the Clerk a written application on a form furnished by the Clerk. The Clerk shall determine that the following requirements are met by each applicant. 
1.  The applicant shall be eighteen (18) years of age or older. The applicant's name place of birth, sex, race, height, weight, color of eyes and hair, residence and business addresses and phone numbers shall be included in the application. 
2.  The applicant shall not have been convicted of any felony and/or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude for five (5) years preceding the date of the application. 
3.  The applicant shall furnish to the Clerk two (2) full-face photographs of the applicant, one (1) inch by one and one-half (1½) inches, one of which shall be laminated on a City-furnished identification card, and the other shall be delivered to the Police Department of the City of Sapulpa. Such photographs must have been taken within thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application and must be considered by the Clerk suitable for the purpose of this chapter. 
4.  The applicant shall have been fingerprinted on all fingers by the Sapulpa Police Department on a form provided by the Police Department within thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application, which fingerprints and one (1) photograph as required herein will be retained in the Police Department for as long as deemed necessary by the Clerk. The Police Department may verify identification of any applicant by appropriate means and shall notify the Clerk immediately in the event a false identification is discovered. 
5.  The applicant shall list on the application form all felony and misdemeanor convictions other than minor traffic violations. For the purposes of this disclosure, no conviction need be listed for a misdemeanor which is more than five (5) years preceding the date of the application or for a felony conviction for which a pardon has been granted. 
6.  The applicant shall have been examined by a medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy within the thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application and, on a form provided by the Clerk, shall be found to be free of any evidence of a contagious disease. If a laboratory analysis is performed in connection with the physical examination, such analysis must be done in a laboratory approved by the Health Department of the State of Oklahoma. 
7.  The applicant shall furnish massage or similar business license history disclosing whether the applicant, in previously operating in this or another city or state, has had his license revoked or suspended, and if so, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation of the applicant subsequent to such suspension or revocation. 
8.  The applicant shall furnish his residence and employment addresses for the preceding two (2) years. 
9.  The applicant shall provide at least one (1) of the following: 
a.  A graduation certificate from a school or other institution of learning recognized by the Clerk wherein the method, profession and work of massage technicians is taught; 
b.  A photocopy of applicant's grade record reflecting successful completion of at least three (3) semester hours of applied anatomy and physiology at any institution of higher learning accredited by the state wherein such institution is located; 
c.  A sworn affidavit, on a form provided by the Clerk, from a City-licensed massage technician that the applicant has completed a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) hours of on-the-job, supervised training in the art of massage as a City-licensed massage apprentice and is thereby fully qualified to be a technician; or 
d.  Evidence that the applicant has heretofore been licensed by the City as a massage operator and is currently the holder of a valid massage operator's license. 
10.  The application shall include the name, address and City license number of the massage establishment or outcall massage service for which the applicant is or shall be employed. 
11.  The applicant shall furnish such other information and identification as the Clerk shall require to verify the matters herein specified. 
C.  Outcall massage service. Any person seeking to obtain a City license for an outcall message service shall submit to the Clerk a written application on a form furnished by the Clerk. The Clerk shall determine that the following requirements are met by each applicant: 
1.  The applicant or members of an applying firm, partnership or association, or if a corporation, the manager, shall be twenty-one (21) years of age or older by written proof. The applicant's name, place of birth, sex, race, height, weight, color of eyes and hair, business and home addresses and telephone numbers, and any other names by which the applicant was known in the past shall be included in the application. 
2.  The applicant shall not have been convicted of any felony and/or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude for five (5) years preceding the date of the application. 
3.  The applicant shall furnish to the Clerk two (2) full-face photographs of the applicant, one (1) inch by one and one-half (1½) inches, one of which shall be laminated on a City-furnished identification card, and the other photograph shall be delivered to the Police Department of the City of Sapulpa. Such photographs must have been taken within thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application and must be considered by the Clerk suitable for the purposes of this chapter. 
4.  The applicant shall furnish massage or similar business license history disclosing whether the applicant, in previously operating under license in this or another city or state, has had his license revoked or suspended, and if so, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation of the applicant subsequent to such suspension or revocation. 
5.  The applicant shall have been fingerprinted on all fingers by the Sapulpa Police Department on a form provided by the Police Department within thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application, which fingerprints and one photograph as required herein will be retained in the Police Department for as long as deemed necessary by the Clerk. The Police Department may verify identification of any applicant by appropriate means and shall notify the Clerk immediately in the event a false identification is discovered. 
6.  The applicant shall list on the application form all felony and misdemeanor convictions other than minor traffic violations. For the purposes of this disclosure, no conviction need be listed for a misdemeanor which is more than five (5) years preceding the date of the application or for a felony conviction for which a pardon has been granted. 
7.  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall include the date of incorporation, the name and address of the corporation, the registered service agent in the state of Oklahoma and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
8.  The applicant shall have secured a location in the City of Sapulpa for the outcall massage service which shall be described by name and address, and if leased, a copy of the lease agreement shall be provided. All telephone numbers of each and every massage technician or massage apprentice working from such service location or requested through such service's telephone numbers shall be provided. 
D.  Massage apprentice. Any individual seeking to obtain a City license as a massage apprentice shall submit to the Clerk a written application on a form furnished by the Clerk. The Clerk shall determine that the following requirements are met by each applicant: 
1.  The applicant shall be eighteen (18) years of age or older. The applicant's name, place of birth, sex, race, height, weight, color of eyes and hair, address of residence and home phone number shall be included in the application. 
2.  The name and City license number of the massage establishment or outcall massage service where apprenticeship will be served shall be included in the application. 
3.  The applicant shall not have been convicted of any felony and/or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude for five (5) years preceding the date of the application. 
4.  The applicant shall have been examined by a medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy within the thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application and, on a form provided by the Clerk, shall be found to be free of any evidence of a contagious disease. If a laboratory analysis is done in connection with the physical examination, such analysis must be done in a laboratory approved by the Health Department of the State of Oklahoma. 
5.  The applicant shall furnish to the Clerk two (2) full-face photographs of the applicant, one (1) inch by one and one-half (1½) inches, one of which shall be laminated on a City-furnished identification card, and the other photograph shall be delivered to the Police Department of the City of Sapulpa. Such photographs must have been taken within thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application and must be considered by the Clerk suitable for the purposes of this chapter. 
6.  The applicant shall have been fingerprinted on all fingers by the Sapulpa Police Department on a form provided by the Police Department within thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application, which fingerprints and one (1) photograph as required herein will be retained in the Police Department for as long as deemed necessary by the Clerk. The Police Department may verify identification of any applicant by appropriate means and shall notify the Clerk immediately in the event a false identification is discovered.  
Sec. 9-706. - Denial and issuance. 
A.  The requirements of this chapter for each license are cumulative and the failure of the applicant to comply with any requirement shall be grounds for denial of such license. 
B.  Each and every applicant who satisfactorily complies with the license requirements of this chapter shall be immediately issued the appropriate license by the Clerk. Nothing herein shall prevent any person from simultaneously holding a massage establishment and an outcall massage service license if requirements for both are satisfactorily met. 
C.  On the face of each license for a massage establishment or outcall massage service, the Clerk shall list by name those persons processed and approved by the Clerk as owner or partner. The Clerk shall issue to each person and approved by the Clerk as owner or partner. The Clerk shall issue to each person and each applicant licensed as a massage technician or massage apprentice a City Identification Card.  
Sec. 9-707. - Display of license and identification card. 
A.  Every massage establishment or outcall massage service shall display, in a well-lighted area on the wall near the front entrance at the licensed address, the City license authorizing the operation of such business. 
B.  Each individual approved by the Clerk and licensed by the City as the owner, operator, partner, or manager of a massage establishment or outcall massage service, or as massage technician or massage apprentice, shall wear on the upper front torso area of his clothing, at all times when engaged in the licensed business or when upon the licensed premises during authorized hours of operation, the City Identification Card issued to such individual.  
Sec. 9-708. - Transfer prohibited. 
No license for the operation of any establishment, service or occupation issued to a particular person or for a particular location shall be transferred to another person or another location unless approved by the Clerk. No more than one (1) license operation authority without further notice until payment satisfactory to the Clerk is made. This provision shall not prevent the filing of criminal charges if and when applicable.  
Sec. 9-709. - Bogus checks. 
Any applicant or licensee who pays any fee with a check which is subsequently dishonored for any reason shall be automatically suspended from license operation authority without further notice until payment satisfactory to the clerk is made. This provision shall not prevent the filing criminal charges if and when applicable.  
Sec. 9-710. - Operating requirements. 
A.  Massage establishments. The following operating requirements shall apply to licensed massage establishments. A violation of any of the following paragraphs shall be unlawful and an offense. Any person responsible for such violation may be charged and tried accordingly before the Sapulpa Municipal Court. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
1.  Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean, in good repair and shall be operated in a sanitary manner. 
2.  A price schedule for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location visible to all prospective patrons. 
3.  All employees, patrons, persons, managers, owners, operators, technicians, and apprentices shall be clean and shall wear clean, non-transparent outer garments, covering the sexual body areas. A separate dressing room for each sex shall be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee, technician or apprentice. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
4.  All massage establishments shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of clean sheets and towels which shall be laundered after each use and shall be stored in a sanitary manner. All soiled linens, towels, and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which shall be kept separate from the storage areas for clean supplies. 
5.  No patron shall receive the services of any massage establishment, technician or apprentice, unless such patron is at least eighteen (18) years of age; provided further that any minor may receive such services as a patron only if a valid written consent to allow such services be performed on said minor has been executed by the minor's legal guardian and kept on file by the massage establishment. 
6.  No person shall sell, give, dispense, consume, provide or keep, or cause to be sold, given dispensed, provided or kept any alcoholic beverage or beer on the premises of any massage establishment. 
7.  No massage establishment shall be operated after 8:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m. 
8.  No person may act as manager for a corporate licensee, unless such person has been approved by the clerk and listed on the license of the massage establishment. 
9.  No owner, operator, partner or manager may supervise massage technicians, unless such person is approved and licensed as a massage technician as provided in this chapter. 
10.  No technician, apprentice, owner, operator, partner, manager, patron or person shall do or permit to be done the massage or touching, or the offer or agreement to massage or touch any person's sexual body areas or the sexual body areas of any other person. 
11.  No technician, apprentice, owner, operator, partner, manager, patron or person shall do or permit to be done the exposing, or the offer or agreement to expose to the view of any other person, his or her sexual body areas or the sexual body areas of any other person. 
12.  All massages shall be performed in a massage room designed for such purpose. No doorway to such room shall be fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
13.  No patron who is affected with any contagious disease or with any disease of the skin shall be massaged in any massage establishment. 
14.  No person holding a massage establishment license shall operate under a name not specified in the license, nor shall business be conducted under any designation or location not specified in the license. 
15.  No licensee, patron or any person shall be intoxicated while upon the premises of a massage establishment. 
16.  All instruments, apparatus, equipment or appliances of a non-disposable nature shall be disinfected after each use. 
17.  Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and massage tables shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each patron's use. 
18.  Each patron and massage table shall be provided with clean and sanitary linens, sheets and towels. 
19.  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
20.  Minimum lighting shall be provided and shall be in use when massage services are being performed. 
B.  Outcall massage services. The following operating requirements shall apply to licensed outcall massage services. A violation of any of the following paragraphs shall be unlawful and an offense. Any person responsible for such violation may be charged and tried accordingly before the Sapulpa Municipal Court. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
1.  Any patron and any technician or apprentice working out of a licensed outcall massage service shall, during massage services, be clean and shall wear clean, non-transparent outer garments covering the sexual body areas. 
2.  No patron shall receive the services of any outcall massage service unless such patron is at least eighteen (18) years of age; provided further that any minor may receive such services as a patron only if a valid written consent to allow such services be performed on said minor has been executed by the minor's legal guardian and kept on file by the massage establishment. 
3.  No outcall massage service shall be provided after 8:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m. 
4.  No patron, technician or apprentice working out of an outcall massage service shall massage or touch, or agree or offer to massage or touch, any person's sexual body areas, including his own. 
5.  No patron, technician or apprentice working out of an outcall massage service shall expose or agree or offer to expose his or her sexual body areas or the sexual body areas of any other person. 
6.  No person owning, operating or managing an outcall massage service shall knowingly cause, allow or permit any patron, technician or apprentice to perform such acts prohibited in subsection 4 or 5 of this section. 
7.  No patron in an intoxicated condition or who is affected with any contagious disease or with any disease of the skin shall be massaged by any technician or apprentice of an outcall massage service. 
8.  No person granted an outcall massage service license shall operate under a name not specified in the license, nor shall such telephone business be conducted under any designation or number not specified on the license. 
9.  All towels and linens used on any patron shall be clean, shall be laundered after each use, and shall be stored in clean containers. 
10.  All soiled towels, linens and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers, separate from clean storage containers. 
11.  All instruments, apparatus, equipment or appliances of a non-disposable nature shall be disinfected after each use.  
Sec. 9-711. - Records to be kept. 
A.  The owner, operator or manager of each massage establishment or outcall massage service shall maintain a current register of all employees, including their address, date of birth, sex, duties and such other information as the Clerk may reasonably require. Upon hiring or discharging any massage technician or apprentice, the owner, operator or manager shall immediately notify the Clerk in writing, and shall include in such notice the personal information required herein. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall be unlawful and an offense. 
B.  Every owner, operator or manager of a massage establishment or outcall massage service shall keep a current record of all massage treatments rendered, either on or off the premises, which record shall include the address where the massage treatment was rendered, the name and address of the patron, the technician or apprentice rendering such treatment and the date of such treatment. Such records shall be maintained for a period of one (1) year. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall be unlawful and on offense.  
Sec. 9-712. - Inspections. 
Any licensed premise, establishment, service or person shall be subject to inspection at any time during working hours by any member of the City Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Code Enforcement Office, or Legal Department to determine and ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person or licensee to refuse to allow such inspections.  
Sec. 9-713. - Revocation. 
Any license issued hereunder shall be revoked by order of the Clerk upon his determination that the licensee has committed any act which would have been cause for denial of a license upon the original application, has made a false statement on the application, or has committed any act in violation of this chapter or in violation of the standards for good moral character.  
Sec. 9-714. - Notice. 
The Clerk shall give notice of denial of license to any applicant by regular mail to his stated home address, or of revocation of license to any licensee by regular mail to his stated business address. Such notice shall state the reasons for denial or revocation, the effective date of such determination and shall advise the applicant or licensee that the Clerk's decision may be appealed to the Council by filing a written request for a hearing with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the receipt of such notice. All such licenses shall be suspended pending appeal.  
Sec. 9-715. - Enforcement. 
Any applicant who has been denied a license, or any licensee whose license has been revoked or suspended hereunder who acts in violation of such denial, revocation, or suspension, shall be guilty of an offense, and each day constituting such violation is a separate and distinct offense with a separate and distinct penalty.  
Sec. 9-716. - Appeals. 
Appeals to the Council from any adverse decision of the Clerk hereunder shall, when timely filed, be docketed on the Council's next available agenda and notice of the date and time of hearing shall be given to all parties concerned. At such hearing the Council shall receive any evidence it deems appropriate and, shall either affirm, reverse or modify the Clerk's decision.  
Sec. 9-717. - Sale. 
Any person desiring to purchase, own, operate, or manage a presently licensed massage establishment or outcall massage service shall make application for such license and must be approved by the Clerk and licensed by the City before assuming such business.  
Sec. 9-718. - Branch operations. 
No branch operation shall be permitted by the holder of any license hereunder, unless such operation is separately approved and licensed by the City according to the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 9-719. - Existing operations. 
A.  All massage establishments, outcall massage services and technicians currently operating within municipal limits shall remain operative until October 1, 2001, at which time such establishment, service and/or technician must comply with the provisions of this chapter and all massage services shall be in compliance with the terms and requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Any new applications for massage technicians, massage apprentices, massage establishments or outcall massage services shall be in compliance with the terms and requirements of the chapter.  
Sec. 9-720. - Penalty. 
Any person, patron, license or individual found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by as provided by Section 1-108 of the Code.  
Sec. 9-721. - Remedies cumulative. 
The conviction and punishment of any person for operating hereunder without the appropriate license shall not relieve such person from paying any appropriate license fee due, nor shall conviction and punishment prevent the Clerk from denying the issuance of any license, nor shall the payment of any license fee prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. The conviction and punishment of any person for violating any of the operating requirements herein shall not prevent the Clerk from revoking any existing license for such violation, nor shall the revoking of the license prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed hereinunder shall be cumulative and the use of one (1) or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.  
CHAPTER 8. - FIREWORKS 
 
Sec. 9-801. - Sale of fireworks prohibited generally. 
The sale or offering for sale, purchase or giving away of fireworks of every description or explosive devises similar to fireworks is hereby prohibited within the City except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2465, 5/16/2005)  
Sec. 9-802. - Wholesale sale of fireworks allowed. 
The wholesale sale of Class C fireworks (as defined by 68 O.S. Section 1622 (a)(1), as amended) shall be permitted in those areas of the City outside of the Fire Districts established by the City Code, upon compliance with each of the following conditions: 
A.  All such sales shall be restricted to either side of the following primary arteries outside of the aforementioned fire districts: Interstate-44. 
B.  Any and all such sales shall be made from a free-standing structure in excess of six thousand (6,000) square feet and which in all cases shall be located no less than one hundred (100) feet from any other structure owned by a third (3rd) party. All such structures must be located within an Industrial or Commercial District as defined by City ordinance. 
C.  All fireworks offered for wholesale sale must be protected from direct contact and handling by the public at all time. 
D.  No person or business shall offer any fireworks for wholesale without first obtaining a license from the City as provided for herein. Any person operating a location where fireworks are sold wholesale shall be required to apply for and obtain a wholesale fireworks license from the City Fire Marshal. The applicant for such license shall provide the following: (i) location of the structure and dimensions; (ii) proof of age of the applicant; (iii) proof that all licenses required under state law have been obtained; (iv) an affidavit signed by applicant stating that he will comply with all applicable City, State and Federal laws and regulations pertaining to the wholesale of fireworks; and (v) payment of the wholesale fireworks license fee as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule to the City Code. 
(Ord. 2465, 5/16/2005)  
Sec. 9-803. - Retail sale of fireworks allowed. 
The retail sale of Class C fireworks (as defined by 68 O.S. Section 1622 (a)(1), as amended) shall be permitted in those areas of the City outside of the Fire Districts established by the City Code, upon compliance with each of the following conditions: 
A.  All such retail sales shall be restricted to either side of the following primary arteries outside of the aforementioned fire districts: Interstate 44, Highway 66 (Dewey and Mission Streets), Highway 97 (Main Street), Highway 117 (Taft Avenue), Highway 75a and that portion of 49th West Ave. located in Tulsa County, Oklahoma. 
B.  Any and all retail sales of fireworks shall be made from a free-standing rigid structure which shall be located no less than one hundred (100) feet from any other structure owned by a third party. The retail sale of fireworks from tents and/or other non-rigid structures is prohibited, unless the owner/operator of the tent and/or other non-rigid structure has been issued a valid license for the wholesale distribution of fireworks by the City and said tent and/or non-rigid structure is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the operator's wholesale structure. In addition, all retail sales of fireworks must be located within an Industrial, Commercial or Agricultural District as defined by City ordinance. One (1) recreational vehicle will also be allowed for safety purposes during the time period specified for allowed sales. 
C.  A sales clerk must be on duty to serve the consumer at the time of purchase. All fireworks offered for retail sale must be protected from direct contact and handling by the public at all time. 
D.  Fireworks may only be offered for retail sale and/or so sold to the public between June 15 and July 6, or December 15 and December 31, of each year. Permitted sale hours each day during which sales are permitted shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, except that sales shall be permitted from 8:00 a.m. on July 4 continuously until 2:00 a.m. on July 5. 
E.  No person or business shall offer to the public any fireworks without first obtaining a license from the City as provided for herein. Any person operating a location where fireworks are sold as permitted shall be required to apply for and obtain a retail fireworks license from the City Clerk. 
F.  The applicant for such license shall provide the following: 
1.  Location of the retail structure; 
2.  Proof of age of the applicant; 
3.  Proof that all licenses required under state law have been obtained; 
4.  An affidavit signed by applicant stating that he will comply with all applicable City, State, and Federal laws and regulations pertaining to the sale of fireworks; and 
5.  Payment of the retail fireworks license fee as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule to the City Code.  
Sec. 9-804. - Discharge of fireworks within municipal limits. 
The discharge of fireworks within the municipal limits of the City of Sapulpa by any individual shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. 2639, 5/16/2011; Ord. 2658, 3/19/2012)  
Sec. 9-805. - Penalty. 
Failure to comply with any of the foregoing provisions of this chapter and/or any violation thereof shall constitute an offense punishable under Section 1-108 of the Code. Each day any such provision is violated shall constitute a separate offense.  
CHAPTER 9. - HOTELS, MOTELS, AND ROOMING HOUSES 
 
Sec. 9-901. - Numbering of rooms. 
Any person engaged in the operation of any hotel, motel or rooming house shall cause each and every room and apartment or suite which is rented or let in such building to be numbered in a plain and conspicuous manner by some approved system of numbering, in such a manner that no two (2) rooms shall have the same number and so that the numbers shall increase or decrease, uniformly from one room to the succeeding room or rooms and from one floor to the succeeding floor or floors. 
(Ord. 2506, 11/20/2006)  
Sec. 9-902. - Persons refused. 
It shall be an offense for any operator, owner, manager, or employee of any hotel. Motel, or rooming house to knowingly receive any person as a guest or to permit any person to remain as a guest or employee who comes within any of the following classifications: 
A.  A prostitute; or 
B.  Any person who solicits or arranges for immoral, illicit, or licentious acts. 
(Ord. 2506, 11/20/2006)  
Sec. 9-903. - Registration of guests. 
Each and every person owning, conducting or operating hotel, motel, or rooming house is hereby required to keep a book or file in which the name, post office address, date of arrival and registration and date of departure shall be entered in the handwriting of the guest; provided, that the room assignment shall be added by the proprietor of the establishment. No person shall be received as a guest of any hotel, motel or rooming house who shall refuse to register as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2506, 11/20/2006)  
Sec. 9-904. - False registration. 
It shall be an offense for any person to falsely register or write or cause to be written in any hotel, motel or rooming house record or file any name other than his/her true and full name by which he is known to the public. 
(Ord. 2506, 11/20/2006)  
Sec. 9-905. - Registration records preserved. 
Each and every person owning or operating any hotel, motel or rooming house shall faithfully keep and preserve all such registers and file records for each and every person entering the hotel, motel or rooming house as a guest for a period of not less than three (3) years from the date of the last registration made therein. It is the intent of this section that the register or file shall show at any time upon inspection a complete and full list of all registrations made within the last three (3) years with their respective dates. 
(Ord. 2506, 11/20/2006)  
Sec. 9-906. - Minor guests—Reports. 
Every person owning, conducting or operating a hotel, motel or rooming house is hereby required to report immediately the registration of any minor, under the age of eighteen (18) years, unaccompanied by his or her parent or guardian, to the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 2506, 11/20/2006)  
Sec. 9-907. - Resistance to police. 
It shall be an offense for any person to refuse or obstruct admittance or offer resistance to any member of the Sapulpa Police Department into the hallways, lobby, office, toilets, cooking apartment or any other apartment of any hotel, motel or rooming house, except such room or apartment as may be actually occupied by a person as a private room, which such peace officer would otherwise have a right to enter under the law. 
(Ord. 2506, 11/20/2006)  
Sec. 9-908. - Inspection of records. 
Records of guests which are required to be kept by proprietors of hotels, motels, and rooming houses shall at all times be subject to inspection by any police officer. 
(Ord. 2506, 11/20/2006)  
Sec. 9-909. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a as provided by Section 1-108 of the Code. 
(Ord. 2506, 11/20/2006)  
CHAPTER 10. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
 
Sec. 9-1001. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any person who travels on foot or by any type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting foodstuffs, beverages, goods, products, wares, merchandise or other personal property of any type, and offering or exposing the same for retail sale, or making retail sales of such articles to purchasers, except that the term shall not include a person representing sales of local non-profit or charitable organizations. 
Public right-of-way means any street or highway and property adjacent to streets and highways which is dedicated to public use and over which the Federal, State or municipal government, or any agency, department or subdivision thereof, exercises control and dominion; or any bridge, alley, sidewalk, canal, plaza, pedestrian bridge, pedestrian way, stairs or elevators which is dedicated to public use and over which the Federal, State or municipal government, or any agency, department or subdivision thereof, exercises control and dominion. 
Retail sale or sales means any sale or sales transactions of foodstuffs, beverages, goods, products, wares, merchandise or other personal property, except as made by a person engaged in selling such personal property at wholesale to dealers in such property. 
Solicitor means any person who travels on foot or by any type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the retail sale of goods, products, wares, merchandise or other personal property of any type, excluding foodstuffs, for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, except that the term shall not include a person representing sales of local non-profit or charitable organizations. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1002. - Use of public right-of-way; prohibition; exception. 
No peddler or solicitor shall engage in business within any portion of any public right-of-way; provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply to a landowner who has expressly reserved in a written easement agreement with the City the right to use defined portion of any public right-of-way for his or her business purposes or to the lawful successor(s) or assign(s) of any such landowner. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1003. - Hours of business. 
No peddler or solicitor shall conduct business within any residential zoning districts, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. each day of the week except Sunday. Provided, however, that deliveries or solicitations may be made where the person delivered to or solicited has agreed by previously arranged appointment for a time other than the prescribed hours. The purpose of this restriction is to protect residents in the peaceable possession of their homes and properties between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. each day. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1004. - Peddlers or solicitors; invitation required to enter posted premises. 
No peddler or solicitor shall enter any premises or attempt to sell, peddle, or solicit where the owner or occupant of such premises has indicated his/her desire not to be contacted for sales or solicitations by the placing of a "No Solicitors," "No Trespassers," or "No Trespassing" sign on those premises, and any such entrance or attempt to sell, peddle, or solicit shall constitute a trespass upon private property and a violation of this Code punishable under Section 1-108. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1005. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense punishable under Section 1-108 of this Code. Every act of peddling or solicitation without a license or otherwise in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1006. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler or solicitor within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1007. - Application procedure. 
A.  Contents of application. Applicants for a license shall file with the City Clerk a verified application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk, which shall contain the following information: 
1.  The full name, description, and birth date of the applicant. 
2.  The applicant's address, both legal and local. 
3.  A brief description of the business to be conducted and the items to be sold. 
4.  The time period for which the applicant desires to do business. 
5.  A current driver's license, proof of insurance, license number and description of any vehicle to be used (if applicable). 
6.  A verification that the applicant or the applicant's employer is a vendor registered with the Oklahoma Tax Commission, or other proof that sales tax has been or is being paid on the items sold; or proof that the applicant or the applicant's employer is exempt from the payment of sales tax. 
7.  The content of any signs to be used. 
8.  If employed by another, the name and address of the applicant's employer, together with a brief description of credentials showing the exact relationship. 
B.  Along with the written application, the applicant shall obtain from the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation and provide to the City Clerk a current Oklahoma criminal history information report. The criminal report is considered current if it is dated no more than thirty (30) days prior to the date on which the applicant submits a completed application to the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1008. - Application fee. 
Any person making application for a license required by the provisions of this chapter shall pay an application fee as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1009. - Review and investigation; issuance or denial. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for a license as required by this chapter, the City Clerk shall review the criminal history information provided by the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation and shall note thereon any relevant information concerning any convictions of the applicant for any of the offenses specified in this chapter. 
B.  The City Clerk shall cause such other investigation or inquiry concerning the applicant as deemed necessary to determine whether the application is in compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code. 
C.  Upon completion of the necessary investigation as provided for by this section, the City Clerk shall review the application to ensure: 
1.  That the applicant or the applicant's employer is a vendor registered with the Oklahoma Tax Commission for the payment of sales tax, or that he has otherwise demonstrated that sales tax has been or is being paid on the items sold, or that the applicant or the applicant's employer is exempt from payment of such tax; 
2.  That the applicant or the applicant's employer is aware of his or her responsibility to collect and pay sales tax, unless tax exempt; 
3.  That the applicant's character or business responsibility is not "unsatisfactory" (as defined in subsection E of this section); 
4.  That the applicant's proposed signs and locations therefor comply with all of the provisions of the Sapulpa Zoning Code § 12-201 et seq.; and 
5.  That the application otherwise complies with all of the provisions of this Code. 
D.  Within twenty (20) business days after receipt of the application, the City Clerk shall either approve or disapprove of the application. Grounds for disapproval shall be the following: 
1.  A finding that the application is incomplete; 
2.  Nonpayment of the application fee and investigation fee; 
3.  Failure of the applicant to verify that he or she, or his/her employer, is a vendor registered with the Oklahoma Tax Commission for the payment of sales tax; or that sales tax has been or is being paid on the items sold; or that he or she, or his/her employer, is otherwise exempt from payment of sales tax; 
4.  A finding that the application is not in conformance with other applicable provisions set forth in this Code; 
5.  A finding that the applicant's character or business responsibility is "unsatisfactory" (as defined in subsection E of this section). 
E.  For the purpose of this chapter, "unsatisfactory character or business responsibility" of an applicant shall be defined as follows: 
1.  A finding that the applicant has been convicted of murder, voluntary manslaughter, robbery, burglary, larceny, theft, fraud, an offense involving moral turpitude, any non-consensual sex offense, any offense involving a minor as a victim, any offense involving the possession, use, distribution or sale of a controlled dangerous substance, any offense involving a firearm, or a felony; 
2.  A finding that the applicant has been convicted of two (2) or more violations of the provisions of this chapter within the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
3.  A finding that a previous license held by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter was revoked within the previous twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1010. - Approved license fee. 
Anyone receiving an approved license shall pay a fee to the City Clerk as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1011. - Appeal of disapproval by City Clerk. 
An applicant who has been denied a license under this chapter may appeal the denial to the City Manager. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1012. - Term. 
Any license issued shall expire within ninety (90) days, one hundred eighty (180) days, or three hundred sixty-five (365) days after issuance depending on the term elected by applicant and payment of the applicable fee, unless sooner revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1013. - Transfer of license or badge. 
No license or badge issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the licensee to whom it was issued. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1014. - Display. 
Peddlers and solicitors are hereby required to exhibit and display their licenses or authorized evidence thereof at all times whenever they are engaged in peddling or soliciting. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1015. - Revocation. 
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked for reasons that include, but are not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement contained in the application for the license; 
B.  Conviction of the licensee for murder, voluntary manslaughter, robbery, burglary, larceny, theft, fraud, an offense involving moral turpitude, any non-consensual sex offense, any offense involving a minor as a victim, any offense involving the possession, use, distribution, or sale of a controlled dangerous substance, any offense involving a firearm, or a felony; 
C.  Conviction of the licensee for one (1) or more violations of the provisions of this chapter within the preceding twelve (12) months; or 
D.  A finding that a licensee has conducted the business for which the license was issued in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace. 
(Ord. 2606, 02/01/2010)  
Sec. 9-1016. - Surrender upon expiration or revocation. 
When a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter expires, or is revoked, its holder shall surrender to the City Clerk and the license shall become the property of the City. 
(Ord. 2606 dated 02/01/2010)  
CHAPTER 11. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 9-1100. - Reserved.  
CHAPTER 12. - ENTERTAINMENT CLUBS 
 
Sec. 9-1201 - Purpose. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any entertainment club, as herein defined, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. 2650,10/03/2011)  
Sec. 9-1202. - Definitions. 
Entertainment club shall mean a commercial establishment which meets the following conditions: 
A.  A person is licensed by the State of Oklahoma to sell and serve low-point beer or alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of the entertainment club; or 
B.  Patrons or customers are permitted to dance on the premises of the entertainment club. 
"Entertainment club" does not include the following: 
A.  A "Principal use restaurant," as defined herein, where the only entertainment consists of background music which is incidental to the primary function of serving food; or 
B.  A banquet, party, or celebration consisting of invited guests and which is not open to the public; or 
C.  A dance or event sponsored or operated by a non-profit political, educational, religious, or fraternal organization which has been permitted and granted an Entertainment Club After Hours Permit by the City Clerk. 
Floor area shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors, including basements, of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or form the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings. Provided that for the purpose of determining compliance with the permitted floor area, the floor area of enclosed required off-street parking areas shall not be included. 
Principal use restaurant shall mean an eating establishment which employs at least one (1) full-time cook, has a menu, a fully equipped kitchen for cooking and preparation of meals and which eating establishment, including the kitchen area but excluding the bar area, occupies at least seventy-five (75) percent of the total floor area, as defined herein, of the business. 
(Ord. 2650,10/03/2011)  
Sec. 9-1203. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished pursuant to Section 1-108. 
(Ord. 2650,10/03/2011)  
CHAPTER 13. - ENTERTAINMENT CLUB AFTER HOURS PERMIT 
 
Sec. 9-1301. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate dances or events sponsored or operated by a non-profit political, educational, religious or fraternal organization held on the premises of an entertainment club between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. The City of Sapulpa regulates such dances or events to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of those persons attending such dances or events and the general public. The regulation also seeks to prevent the secondary effects of such dances or events on surrounding and nearby properties. The City of Sapulpa finds from studies it has done these regulations are necessary to protect property values, to prevent further deterioration of City neighborhoods, promote the return of residents and businesses to City neighborhoods, and decrease the incidence of crime and juvenile delinquency. Further, the City finds that such events or dances tend to attract an undesirable quantity and quality of clientele and have an undesirable effect on surrounding and nearby properties. 
(Ord. 2649,10/03/2011)  
Sec. 9-1302. - Definitions. 
Chief of Police shall mean the Chief of Police of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma or his duly authorized representative. 
City Clerk shall mean the Clerk for the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma or her duly authorized representative. 
Entertainment club shall mean an entertainment club as defined in Part 9, Chapter 12, Section 1202. 
(Ord. 2649,10/3/2011)  
Sec. 9-1303. - Permit required. 
It shall constitute a nuisance and be unlawful for any non-profit political, educational, religious, or fraternal organization to operate or sponsor a dance or event on the premises of an entertainment club between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. without first obtaining a permit as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2649,10/03/2011)  
Sec. 9-1304. - Application for permit. 
A.  Application for an entertainment club after hours permit shall be made to the City Clerk on forms prepared and made available by the City Clerk and shall provide the following: 
1.  The legal name of the non-profit organization making the application; 
2.  The legal address of the non-profit organization making the application; 
3.  The telephone number for the principal office of the non-profit organization making the application; 
4.  Proof of the non-profit legal status of the organization making the application; 
5.  The date of the formation of the organization and the state of formation of the organization making the application; 
6.  Proof that the non-profit organization making the application is authorized or licensed to do business or operate within the State of Oklahoma; 
7.  The legal name of the person making the application for the non-profit organization, his title with the non-profit organization, proof that he is authorized to sign the application on behalf of the non-profit organization making the application; 
8.  The full name, addresses, and phone numbers of the officers or agents of the non-profit organization who will remain on-site during the dance or event and will be overseeing, supervising, and managing the dance or event on behalf of the non-profit organization making the application; 
9.  A written statement setting forth the safety and security plan for those persons attending the dance or event and all measures proposed to ensure that adequate crowd control, crowd protection, and security, both inside and outside the premises of the entertainment club, will be maintained during the dance or event; 
10.  Type of dance or event to be operated or sponsored by the non-profit organization making application and the number of attendees anticipated to participate in the dance or event; 
11.  The date the event or dance will be held and the scheduled times that the event or dance will begin and end; 
12.  Such other information as the City Clerk deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  An application for an entertainment club after hours permit shall be made to the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days, but no more than one (1) year prior to the scheduled date of the dance or event to be sponsored or operated by the non-profit political, educational religious, or fraternal organization. A separate application must be submitted for each date an event or dance is to be sponsored or operated by the non-profit political, educational, religious, or fraternal organization. 
C.  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. 2649,10/03/2011)  
Sec. 9-1305. - Investigation. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the City Clerk shall forward the completed application to the Chief of Police who will promptly cause an investigation and review of the application made by the applicant. 
B.  No permit shall be issued until it shall be found by the Chief of Police that the dance or event, as proposed, will be operated or sponsored by the non-profit organization making the application in a manner in conformance with all sections of this chapter, the Sapulpa City Code and ordinances, state and federal law, and, in particular, all health, safety, and fire regulations of the City. 
(Ord. 2649,10/03/2011)  
Sec. 9-1306. - Issuance of permit. 
A.  The City Clerk shall authorize the issuance of a entertainment club after hours permit upon successful completion of the following investigation: 
1.  That the persons named on the application as the officers or agents of the non-profit organization who will remain on-site during the dance or event and will be overseeing, supervising, and managing the dance or event on behalf of the non-profit organization making the application are: 
a.  Eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
b.  Have not been convicted of any felony, unless such person has received a full pardon, or convicted of any misdemeanor concerning prostitution, gambling, larceny, embezzlement, drugs, marijuana, assault and battery, contributing to the delinquency of a minor, knowingly permitting or allowing a juvenile to remain upon the premises of an establishment during curfew hours, unless five (5) years have passed since such last conviction, and; 
c.  Not holders of a federal gambling tax stamp. 
2.  That the manner in which the applicant proposed to sponsor or operate the dance or event after hours does not violate any provisions of federal law, the statutes and regulations of the State of Oklahoma, the Sapulpa City Code, or any ordinances thereof. 
B.  A misstatement of material fact in any application shall be grounds for denial of issuance of a permit hereunder. 
C.  Each permit issued by the City Clerk shall be valid for one (1) dance or event for the date and times stated within the permit. 
(Ord. 2649,10/03/2011)  
Sec. 9-1307. - Denial of permit. 
The City Clerk shall act upon the application for the permit within ten (10) days after the filing thereof. If the City Clerk denies the application, she shall notify the applicant in writing within five (5) days after the denial, giving the reasons for the denial.  
Sec. 9-1308. - Appeal from denial of permit. 
Any non-profit organization whose application for a permit is denied shall have the right to appeal to the Sapulpa City Council. Notice of the appeal, stating the grounds therefor, shall be filed with the City Clerk and the City Council within five (5) days after receipt of the notice of denial. Appeals to the City Council from any adverse decision of the City Clerk, when timely and properly filed, shall be heard by the Council at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. The City Council shall receive an evidence it deems appropriate and shall either affirm, reverse, or modify the City Clerk's decision. 
(Ord. 2649,10/03/2011)  
Sec. 9-1309. - Display of permit. 
A.  The holder of the permit issued hereunder shall place and exhibit the same at all times during the dance or event in some conspicuous place upon the premises of the entertainment club. 
B.  At least one (1) officer or agent of the non-profit organization sponsoring or operating the dance or event shall have a copy of the permit on his or her person on the premises of the entertainment club during the dance or event. The officer or agent shall present a copy of the permit upon demand by any law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. 2649,10/03/2011)  
Sec. 9-1310. - Penalty. 
An person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilt of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished pursuant to Section 1-108. 
(Ord. 2649,10/03/2011)  
Sec. 9-1311. - Other laws applicable. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to exempt any person or non-profit political, educational, religious or fraternal organization from compliance with any other applicable ordinance of the City of Sapulpa not in conflict herewith, unless specifically excluded herein. 
(Ord. 2649, 10/03/2011)  
CHAPTER 14. - TRANSPORT GAS LICENSE 
 
Sec. 9-1400. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Calculated value shall mean the total transport gas measured in dekatherms delivered to a transport gas consumer for a billing period, multiplied by the settlement price to arrive at the value of the transport gas transported by a franchise holder for that transport gas consumer. 
City shall mean the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
Consumer shall mean any individual person, corporation, company, partnership, firm, unincorporated association, trust, municipality, or public or private entity located within the municipal corporate limits of the City and serviced by a franchise holder through any use of the public ways. 
Dekatherm or Dth shall mean a measurement of natural gas equal to one million (1,000,000) British Thermal Units (Btu), or 1 MMBtu, on a dry basis. Btu shall be computed on a temperature base of sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit and a pressure base of 14.73 pounds per square inch, absolute (PSIA). 
Distribution system shall mean a system of works, pipes, pipelines, apparatus, machinery, structures, appliances, and appurtenances as are reasonably necessary for the transportation, distribution, or sale of gas to consumers. 
Franchise holder shall mean the holder of a franchise issued and approved by the City for the use of the public ways for its distribution system. 
License shall mean the rights, licenses, and privileges granted by the City to a consumer to use the public ways for a transportation tariff arrangement or similar agreement or arrangement for the transport of gas through a franchise holder's distribution system. 
Licensee shall mean a consumer granted a license under this chapter. 
Public ways shall mean any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, lane, park, parkway, sidewalk, driveway, public right-of-way, and any other public ways, places, areas, or grounds within the municipal corporate limits of the City as now constituted or as may be added or extended hereafter. 
Settlement price shall mean the settlement prices for natural gas futures contracts traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX), or any successor exchange or index, on the 15th day of each month as published daily in the Wall Street Journal on the following business day (or the next day in which a settlement price is published) for each month of the twelve (12) month period immediately following. 
Transport gas shall mean all gas transported by a franchise holder pursuant to a transportation tariff arrangement or by other agreement, but not sold by the franchise holder though the franchise holder's distribution system to any consumer or user located within the municipal corporate limits of the City. 
Transport gas consumer shall mean a consumer which uses transport gas. 
Transportation tariff arrangement shall mean any arrangement between a franchise holder and a consumer pursuant to which natural gas owned by any party other than the franchise holder shall be transported, distributed or sold through any portion of franchise holder's distribution system and under one of franchise holder's tariffs or special contract for delivery to the consumer. 
Volumetric rate shall mean four (4) percent of the calculated value of transport gas as determined by a franchise holder in accordance with the provisions of its franchise. 
Volumetric rate fee or volumetric rate fees shall mean the fee or fees based on the volumetric rate to be collected and remitted to the City by a franchise holder as provided and required by the applicable franchise. 
(Ord. 2787, 12/18/2017)  
Sec. 9-1401. - License required. 
No transport gas consumer shall receive or deliver gas within the City pursuant to a transportation tariff arrangement utilizing any franchise holder's distribution system installed in the public ways, unless the consumer shall hold a valid license from the City. Such License shall be issued for the purpose of granting the licensee authority to use the public ways in connection with the sale of transport gas. 
(Ord. 2787, 12/18/2017)  
Sec. 9-1402. - Fee. 
In consideration of the issuance of a license by the City, unless waived by the City and subject to adjustment pursuant to the terms and provisions of the applicable franchise, a licensee shall pay to the City a fee for use of the public ways in connection with the sale of transport gas. This fee shall be calculated as a volumetric rate fee as provided in the applicable franchise. This fee shall be collected by the franchise holder and remitted to the City as provided in the applicable franchise. 
(Ord. 2787, 12/18/2017)  
Sec. 9-1403. - License requirements. 
Any license issued shall contain the following material terms: 
A.  The licensee shall pay the fee set forth in Section 9-1402 to the City or its designated agent on a monthly basis, as directed by the City and pursuant to the applicable franchise; 
B.  The licensee shall subordinate its transportation tariff arrangement to the right of the City to construct, operate and maintain facilities in the public ways; 
C.  The licensee shall grant to the City the right to audit at reasonable times the books and records of the licensee to verify the correct payment of the fee set forth in Section 9-1402; and 
D.  The licensee shall assume jointly with the franchise holder the indemnification terms of the applicable franchise insofar as the terms apply to the transportation tariff arrangement. 
(Ord. 2787, 12/18/2017)  
Sec. 9-1404. - Revocation and penalties. 
Any License issued shall contain the following material terms: 
A.  A License shall be revocable by the City at any time upon a ten (10) day written notice to licensee. 
B.  Any violation of this chapter shall be an offense. Any transport gas Consumer adjudged guilty of violating this chapter shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs, for each offense; and each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2787, 12/18/2017)  
Part 10 - OFFENSES AND CRIMES  
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Attempts to commit an offense. 
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the City, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense, but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted offense itself.  
Sec. 10-102. - Aiding in an offense. 
When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender.  
Sec. 10-103. - "Offense" defined. 
The word "offense," whenever used in this Code or in any part, chapter, article or ordinance of the City means the unlawful act of doing, or failing to do, some particular act or thing construed therein to be detrimental to the general welfare, morals, peace, health, or safety of the inhabitants of the City.  
Sec. 10-104. - "Violation" defined. 
The doing of any of the acts or things prohibited, or failing to do any of the acts or things commanded to be done, as more fully specified and set forth by any provision of this Code or any part, chapter or article hereof, or future ordinances of the City, is hereby declared to be an offense against the good order, public peace, morals, health, proper government, and welfare of the City and unlawful.  
Sec. 10-105. - Penalty not to excuse offense. 
The imposition of one (1) penalty for an offense shall not excuse it or permit it to continue, nor prevent the imposition of further penalties, should the offenses be continued or permitted to continue.  
Sec. 10-106. - Capacity to commit offense. 
All persons are capable of committing an offense as herein provided, except those belonging to the classes following: 
A.  Children under the age of seven (7) years; 
B.  Children over the age of seven (7) years, but under the age of fourteen (14) years, in the absence of proof that at the time of committing the act or neglect charged against them, they knew its wrongfulness; 
C.  Lunatics, insane persons, and all persons of unsound mind, including persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, upon proof that at the time of committing the act charged against them they were involuntarily incapable of knowing its wrongfulness; 
D.  Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, under an ignorance or mistake of fact which disproves any criminal intent. But ignorance of the law does not excuse from punishment for its violation; 
E.  Persons who committed the act charged without being conscious thereof, involuntarily; and 
F.  Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, while under involuntary subjection to the power of superiors.  
Sec. 10-107. - Intoxication, no defense. 
No act committed by any person while in a state of intoxication, whether from alcoholic beverages or drugs, shall be deemed less an offense by reason of his being in such condition.  
Sec. 10-108. - Witness, self-incrimination. 
No person otherwise competent as a witness, shall be incapacitated, excused, or disqualified from testifying concerning the offense mentioned in any section, chapter, or title of this Code, or any ordinances hereafter enacted on the ground that his testimony might incriminate him, but the testimony which may be given by such witness shall in no case be used against him.  
Sec. 10-109. - Nuisances. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to permit, maintain, aid, abet, or sanction a nuisance on or about any premise or premises owned by him or under his control at any place within the corporate limits of the City. 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Sec. 8-101 et seq. of this Code.  
Sec. 10-110. - Conspiracy. 
Any two (2) or more persons assembled or who shall assemble with the intent to mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence and shall make any movement therefor against the property of the City or the person or property of another person shall be guilty of an offense.  
Sec. 10-111. - Limitations of actions. 
The time within which a charge may be filed under the provisions of this chapter shall be one (1) year from the date of the commission or omission or in cases involving fraud, deception, or deceit, one (1) year from the discovery of the fraud, deception, or deceit unless otherwise provided by the statutes of the State.  
Sec. 10-112. - Lawful use of force. 
A.  To use or to attempt to offer to use force upon or toward the person of another is not unlawful in the City in the following cases: 
1.  When necessarily committed by a public officer in the performance of any legal duty, or by any other person assisting him or acting by his direction; 
2.  When necessarily committed by any person in arresting one who has committed any felony, and delivering him to a public officer competent to receive him in custody; 
3.  When committed either by the party about to be injured, or by any other person in his aid or defense, in preventing or attempting to prevent an offense against his person, or any trespass or other unlawful interference with real or personal property in his lawful possession; provided, the force used is not more than sufficient to prevent such offense, and that the same shall be necessary for the self-defense of his person or property; 
4.  When committed by a parent or authorized agent of any parent, or by any guardian, master, or teacher, in the exercise of a lawful authority to restrain or correct his child, ward, apprentice, or scholar, provided restraint or correction has been rendered necessary by the misconduct of such child, ward, apprentice, or scholar, or by his refusal to obey the lawful command of such parent or authorized agent or guardian, master, or teacher, and the force used is reasonable in manner and moderate in degree; 
5.  When committed by a carrier of passengers, or the authorized agents or servants of such carrier, or by any person assisting them at their request, in expelling from any carriage, interurban car, vessel or other vehicle, any passenger who refuses to obey a lawful and reasonable regulation prescribed for the conduct of passengers, if such vehicle has first been stopped and the force used is not more than is sufficient to expel the offending passenger, with a reasonable regard to his personal safety; 
6.  When committed by any person in preventing an idiot, lunatic, insane person or other person of unsound mind, including persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, from committing an act dangerous to himself or to another, or enforcing such restraint as is necessary for the protection of his person or for his restoration to health, during such period only as shall be necessary to obtain legal authority for the restraint or custody of such person; 
7.  In preventing or interrupting an intrusion upon the lawful possession of property; and 
8.  To preserve the peace or prevent the commission of an offense. 
B.  Where force is permitted to effect a lawful purpose only that degree of force necessary to effect such purpose shall be used. 
State Law reference— 21 O.S. § 643.  
CHAPTER 2. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 
 
Sec. 10-201. - Assault and battery. 
No person shall commit an assault or battery, or both, upon the person of another. 
State Law reference— Assault and battery generally, 21 O.S. § 641 et seq.; City's power to prevent, 11 O.S. § 22-110.  
Sec. 10-202. - Assault defined. 
An assault is any wilful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence to do corporal hurt to another.  
Sec. 10-203. - Battery defined. 
A battery is any wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another.  
Sec. 10-204. - Reckless conduct. 
A.  Reckless conduct, as used in this section, consists of an act which creates a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great bodily harm to another and which demonstrates a conscious disregard for the safety of another. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to endanger another's safety by reckless conduct in the operation or handling of any weapon or instrument, including a pistol, revolver, or other firearm.  
CHAPTER 3. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 10-301. - Petit larceny; embezzlement. 
No person shall steal, take, and carry away by fraud or stealth, with intent to deprive another thereof, any personal property under the value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or embezzle any money, personal property or effects of another under the value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). This section does not apply to taking property from the "person" of another. 
State Law reference— 21 O.S. §§ 1701—1740.1.  
Sec. 10-302. - Larceny by false pretense. 
No person shall induce, or attempt to induce, any person to give up or pay over any money or other thing of value which money or value does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by any false representation or pretense, or in exchange for any false or bogus coin or check, draft, or other false evidence of value, or in consideration of refraining from a lawful or unlawful arrest, or in consideration of refraining from reporting any unlawful act to any public official. 
State Law reference— Obtaining Signature or Property by False Pretenses, 21 O.S. § 1542.  
Sec. 10-303. - Altering keys. 
No person shall make or alter or attempt to make or alter any key or other instrument that will open the lock of a building unless requested to do so by some person having the right and authority to make such request.  
Sec. 10-304. - Possession of stolen property. 
No person shall keep in his possession, or dispose of, or conceal any stolen property, or fail promptly to inform some proper official of the possession thereof, under circumstances indicating that such property had been stolen or the possession thereof obtained unlawfully. 
State Law reference— Receiving stolen property, 21 O.S. § 1713.  
Sec. 10-305. - Defrauding public accommodations; proof; exception. 
A.  No person shall obtain food, lodging, or other accommodation in any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant, boarding house, eating or rooming house or place, or any other lodging place, with the intent to defraud the owner or keeper. 
B.  Proof that lodging, food, and other accommodations were obtained by false pretense or fictitious show of any package or other property or that the person gave a check or negotiable paper on which payment was refused or that the person left the hotel, motel, inn, restaurant, boarding house, eating or rooming house or place, or other lodging place, without paying or offering to pay for the food, lodging or other accommodation or that the person surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove the package or property, or that the person registered under a fictitious name shall be prima facie proof of attempt to defraud. 
C.  No person shall refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles after having hired the same, and no person shall hire any vehicle with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
D.  This section shall not apply where there has been an agreement in writing for delay in payment.  
Sec. 10-306. - Concealing unpurchased merchandise; merchant's authority to detain. 
Any person concealing unpurchased merchandise of any establishment, either on the premises or outside the premises of the establishment, shall be presumed to have so concealed the merchandise with the intention of committing a wrongful taking of such merchandise. Such concealment or the finding of such unpurchased merchandise concealed upon the person or among the belongings of such person shall be conclusive evidence of reasonable grounds and probable cause for the detention in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time of such person by a merchant, his agent or employee; any such reasonable detention shall not be deemed to be unlawful nor render any such merchant, his agent or employee, criminally, or civilly liable.  
Sec. 10-307. - Failure to pay fare for public conveyance. 
No person shall use or accept the use and services of any street car, taxi cab, omnibus, automobile or any other means of public conveyance or passengers, operating under the code, ordinance, franchise, permit, or license of the City or State, and refuse or fail to pay to the operator of the conveyance the usual, customary, regulation, or legal charge, or price as fare immediately upon the performance of the service.  
Sec. 10-308. - False or bogus checks. 
It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain or attempt to obtain from any person any money, property or valuable thing by means of any false or bogus check or by any other written or printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin. The term "false or bogus check" shall include checks or orders given for money or property which are not honored on account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, as against the maker or drawer thereof. The making, drawing, issuing, or delivering of a check, draft, or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with, such bank or other depository. Such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with the protest fees, and the check or order shall be presented for payment within thirty (30) days after same is delivered and accepted.  
Sec. 10-309. - Harmful deception. 
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by impersonation, misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in or contributes to the loss, damage, harm, or injury of the person deceived or of a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.  
Sec. 10-310. - Defacing building, damaging property. 
A.  No person shall purposely deface or damage any public or private building or appurtenances thereof, or any fence, street, bridge, sidewalk, driveway, street, or public work. 
B.  No person shall: 
1.  Destroy, injure, deface, damage or molest any structure, building, work or other property, real or personal, belonging to another; 
2.  Use such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use; or 
3.  Interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or any other person entitled to its use. 
State Law reference— Destroying property generally, 21 O.S. § 1760.  
Sec. 10-311. - Removing or breaking private property. 
No person shall wilfully, unlawfully or maliciously take and carry or cause to be taken and carried away any part of a house, barn, fence, gate, or other structure, or maliciously break, tear down, or destroy any part of a house, barn, or other structure not his own.  
Sec. 10-312. - Damaging private property. 
No person shall wilfully and wantonly damage or destroy the personal property of another.  
Sec. 10-313. - Public works under construction. 
A.  Any person who removes, destroys, disturbs, or in any manner injures any grade stake, stone, or other mark or monument set by or under authority of the City to designate or mark grades, lines, corners, or bench marks on any public work in the City prior to the completion and acceptance of the contract for which such stakes or monuments are set, without lawful authority, is guilty of an offense. 
B.  Any contractor or other person constructing any public work in the City shall protect such work by barriers or obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to cross the barriers or to remove them until the work has been completed and opened by authority of the City.  
Sec. 10-314. - Damaging or tampering with motor vehicle. 
A.  No person, other than a peace officer in the performance of his official duties, shall, with intent and without right to do so, injure or tamper with any vehicle or in any other manner damage any part or portion of the vehicle or any accessories, appurtenances or attachments thereto. 
B.  No person, other than a peace officer in the performance of his official duties, shall, without right to do so and with intent to commit a crime, climb into or upon a vehicle, whether it is in motion or at rest, attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting mechanism, brakes or other mechanism or device of the vehicle while the vehicle is at rest and unattended, or set in motion any vehicle while the vehicle is at rest and unattended. 
State Law reference— Damaging motor vehicles, 21 O.S. §§ 1787, 1788.  
Sec. 10-315. - Tampering with, obstructing or damaging of utilities. 
A.  No person shall alter, remove, tamper with, molest, obstruct access to, damage or injure any wires, cable, appurtenance, structure, pipes or equipment of any utility of the City, or any public utility, or connect or tamper with the wires, cables or pipes of any electric, water, sewer, cable television or gas utility or of the City without consent of the utility or City having been first obtained. 
B.  It is unlawful to open up any manhole or opening to a sewer unless authorized by the City, or to leave a manhole or other opening so opened without replacing the fixture or appliances thereto in their proper place and position. 
C.  No person except a member of the Fire Department or a person acting on lawful order or permit issued by the City shall open or use water from any fire hydrant or take off the caps or damage the same. No person may block the approach or access to a fire hydrant or attach, fasten, stand, or brace anything against or on the hydrant. 
D.  No person shall in any manner whatsoever: 
1.  Cut into, attach to or intercept the wires, cables, or pipes, of any electric, water, cable television, or gas utility or of the City for the purpose of fraudulently taking therefrom electric current, water, transmissions, or gas; 
2.  Cut into, attach to or intercept the wires, cables, or pipes for the purpose of conducting around any meter electric current, water, or gas in order to prevent the current, water, or gas from being measured by the meter, or in such other manner so as to consumer or use the utility or cable service so as to evade payment therefor, with the unlawful intent to defraud the company or City out of the value of the service; or 
3.  By any device or manipulation whatsoever to cause current, transmissions, water, or gas used upon any premises to be fraudulently conveyed upon any premises for the purposes of use thereof, and with the intent to defraud and cheat the utility or City from payment thereof. 
E.  Each day that any person violates this section, or maintains any such fraudulent connection with any wires, cables, or pipes, or fraudulently takes from any such wires, cables, or pipes either electric current, transmissions, water, or gas shall constitute a separate offense. 
Cross reference— Utilities, see Sec. 17-101 et seq. of this Code.  
Sec. 10-316. - Destroying trees and shrubbery. 
A.  No person shall willfully, maliciously and without lawful authority cut down, root up, sever, injure or destroy any fruit tree, shade or ornamental tree, cultivated root or plant, grape or strawberry vine, shrub or plant whatever standing on or attached to the land of another, or pick, destroy, carry away therefrom, or in any way interfere therewith, any of the fruit thereof. 
B.  No person shall willfully or without lawful authority cut down, destroy, root up or in any manner injure any fruit, shade or ornamental tree, shrub or vine planted or growing on any street, land, avenue, alley or other public ground of the City.  
Sec. 10-317. - Trespassing prohibited, notice, soliciting, trespass prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful and an offense for any person to commit a trespass within this City upon either public or private property. 
B.  Trespass shall include each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. Trespass shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession after having been told to leave the premises by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises. Trespass shall also mean the act of entering upon or remaining on private property when such is plainly forbidden by signs, markings, or otherwise, by verbal command of the owner, his agent, or employee, of after having been directed to do so by a police officer, although this sentence shall not apply to persons including employees whose presence upon the premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such premises. Trespass shall also include the act of returning to private property after having been directed to vacate the premises by the owner, his agent, employee or police officer under the terms of this section. 
C.  Any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed a violation of this section: 
1.  The doing of an injury or misfeasance to the person of another; 
2.  The doing of any injury or misfeasance to the property of another when done with force and violence, either actual or implied; 
3.  Each and every actual entry upon the premises of another owner or person in possession of real property, whether the property is public or private, without the owner's or occupant's consent, express or implied; 
4.  An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another in violation of a notice exhibited thereon prohibiting entry at specified times; 
5.  An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or other lawful occupant thereof; 
6.  An entry upon any public property, including parks or parking areas, in violation of a notice exhibited there prohibiting entry at specified times; 
7.  An entry upon any public property in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by a City official; 
8.  If on the property of another, or upon public property lawfully, a failure or refusal to depart in case of being requested to so depart orally or written, by any owner, lawful occupant, or by a City official; 
9.  An entry upon any portion of a public park, where the entry involves the use of any vehicle, equipment, or device where such use is specifically prohibited; 
10.  An entry of any public building except for the purpose of dispatching business with the public corporation or consent is obtained from the City Council or other public official which is lawfully authorized to give consent; or 
11.  Remaining on public or private property at any time other than during posted hours of business operation after having been directed to vacate such premises by a police officer. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such premises; nor shall the provisions of this paragraph apply unless hours of business operation are posted upon such premises. Trespass also includes the act of returning to private property before the posted time of opening for business operation on the next business day after having been directed to vacate such premises under the terms of this paragraph. 
D.  For purposes of constituting a violation of this section, the exhibited notice required under paragraphs 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9 of subsection C hereof shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  The notice shall be plainly posted in a place or places conspicuous to those who would enter the property; 
2.  The notice shall be legible so as to afford reasonable warning prior to the commission of a trespass; and 
3.  If upon property to which the public is invited at least some part of the day, the notice shall clearly specify the days and times of day entry is prohibited, and further specify that entry at such times constitutes a punishable offense under the City Code.  
Sec. 10-318. - Congregating, parking on premises after hours. 
A.  No person shall stand, walk, sit, lie, congregate, or otherwise occupy or remain upon the premises of any place or business within the City after business hours without consent of the lawful owner, occupant, lessee, or employee thereof. 
B.  No person shall stop, stand, park, leave, or place any motor vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon any public or private property without the consent of the owner, occupant, lessee, or employee thereof, except where such property is provided for public parking and the use for such parking is not restricted by proper notice. In addition to fine or other punishment for a violation of this subsection, the vehicle so parked, left or placed shall be subject to impoundment upon complaint of the property owner or lawful occupant; the person violating this subsection shall be wholly responsible for payment of towage and storage charges. 
C.  No person may be charged under this section unless the premises in question is posted with a conspicuous sign which states, substantially, that the premises are posted, and that any person congregating, occupying or remaining upon the premises or parking or leaving a motor vehicle thereon, is subject to prosecution pursuant to the City Code. 
D.  When used in this section, the term "after business hours" shall mean that the doors of the business which are open to the public during business hours are closed and locked and that the business is no longer admitting customers. The term applies to places of business which are vacant or permanently or temporarily closed or otherwise unoccupied. The term "place of business" means any private property upon which a building, house or other structure is used for commercial or public purposes, e.g., without limitation, restaurants, gas stations, shopping malls or centers, theaters, convenience stores, grocery stores, drug stores or pharmacies, recreational facilities, wholesale or retail sales activities, offices, banks or other financial institutions, manufacturing, professional services (medical, legal, accounting, insurance, consulting). 
E.  There is a rebuttable presumption that any person or motor vehicle upon the premises of a place of business that is properly posted pursuant to this section after such time as the front door or other such door that admits members of the public is closed and locked is on the premises of such business unlawfully under this section; however, this presumption shall not be applied within thirty (30) minutes of any opening or closing times posted by such place of business. This presumption may only be rebutted by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that any person held by the municipal judge to be subject to this rebuttable presumption was on the premises in question with permission of the lawful owner, occupant, lessee or employee thereof. 
F.  If a motor vehicle is alleged to be unlawfully parked or left under this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the person in whose name the motor vehicle was last registered was the person who parked or left the motor vehicle. 
G.  The parking or leaving of a motor vehicle as set forth herein shall constitute the offense of unlawful parking or leaving a motor vehicle after business hours, punishable as provided in this Section 1-108 of this Code. 
H.  If a person violates subsection A of this section, it shall constitute the offense of unlawful presence on property after business hours or congregating after business hours and is punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
I.  The provisions of this section are cumulative of other applicable offenses enacted in this Code or state law. 
Cross reference— See also Section 15-608 on vehicular trespass.  
Sec. 10-319. - Unlawful intrusion on land. 
A.  No person shall intrude or remain upon any lot or piece of land, or in any building within the City without license or authority from the owner thereof, or erect or occupy thereon any structure whatever without such license or authority. 
B.  No person shall place, erect, or occupy within the bounds of any street, alley, or avenue of the City any structure whatever unless such person is granted a license by the City to do so.  
Sec. 10-320. - Throwing or shooting at persons or property. 
No person shall throw or shoot any object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he is likely to hit another person wrongfully, or injure property, or to throw any object at any person, vehicle, structure, or property of another, whether public or private, except where such is done in defense of oneself or another person or property.  
Sec. 10-321. - Throwing out lighted substances or debris prohibited. 
No person shall throw, drop, deposit or otherwise place in, upon or within the limits of any street, avenue, public ground, public waterway or City-owned property or waterway any lighted cigarette, cigar, or other flaming or glowing substances, or any substance or thing which may cause a fire.  
Sec. 10-322. - Littering, deposits unlawful. 
It is unlawful to throw, deposit or discharge any item or waste material, liquid or solid, on any street or public place in the City or upon the property of another without express authority to do so.  
Sec. 10-323. - Posting advertising matter on building of another. 
A.  No person shall place upon any building any advertising matter of any kind, nor print or exhibit printing on a building or any part thereof, in words, signs or characters, except with the express consent of the owner, lessee, or authorized agent of the owner of the building. 
B.  No person shall place, post, paint, mark, write, print or put any sign, poster, picture, announcement, writing, device, advertisement or other marking upon any public or private building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, post, automobile or vehicle, or property of another without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof.  
Sec. 10-324. - Posting advertising matter on utility poles or on or over streets and sidewalks. 
It is unlawful for any person to place any advertising matter of any kind on any utility pole, or to place any advertising on the streets or sidewalks of the City or to place any advertising on any signs or banners stretched over the streets or sidewalks of the City. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any permanently located commercial or business establishment in the City from erecting and maintaining business or commercial signs in accordance with the ordinances of the City, nor to prohibit the granting of permission by the City to religious, charitable, patriotic or civic bodies to use banners across the streets of the City in such places as may be designated by the mayor for the observance of holidays, charitable drives and the commemoration and celebration of other public or civic occasions.  
Sec. 10-325. - Interference with radio, television or telephone reception of others. 
It is unlawful for any person, or any officer or employee of any person, to operate or use any citizen band radio, ham radio or other electrical apparatus or machine which materially and unduly interferes with radio, television, or telephone reception of others.  
Sec. 10-326. - False weights. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell any commodity or article of merchandise and in the sale thereof knowingly make or give a false or short weight therefor or for any person owning or keeping or having in charge any scale used in weighing any animal, commodity or article to knowingly and wilfully report any false or untrue weight whereby another person shall be defrauded or damaged.  
Sec. 10-327. - Fireworks prohibited, regulation of sales, exceptions. 
A.  For the purpose of this section, "fireworks" shall have the same meaning as in state law, 68 O.S. § 1621 et seq. 
B.  The discharge, firing, sale, offer for sale, possession, or use of fireworks is prohibited except as authorized by Part 9, Chapter 7 of the Code or when otherwise authorized by the City Council for a public display or displays in accordance with the City fire code. 
Cross reference— See also Part 9 Chapter 7 and Section 13-101 et seq.  
Sec. 10-328. - Gasoline pump theft. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who pumps gasoline into the gasoline tank of a vehicle or gas container to leave the premises where the gasoline was pumped without making payment for the gasoline. 
State Law reference— 21 O.S. § 1740.  
CHAPTER 4. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
 
Sec. 10-401. - Disturbing the peace. 
A.  It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by doing any of the acts set out in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such a manner as would alarm or disturb the peace of another or others: 
1.  Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening, violent, or insulting language or conduct; 
2.  Appearing in an intoxicated condition; 
3.  Engaging in a fistic encounter; 
4.  Lewdly exposing one's person, or private parts thereof, in any public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby; 
5.  Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon whether loaded or not at any other person or persons either in anger or otherwise; 
6.  Holding an unlawful assembly of two (2) or more persons, including being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously; 
7.  Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing distance thereof; 
8.  Obstructing the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles on a street, right-of-way or sidewalk, or other public place; 
9.  Obstructing, molesting, or interfering with any person lawfully in a public place; 
10.  Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises; 
11.  Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent, or improper behavior, by profane, improper, or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or 
12.  Committing any other act in such a manner calculated as to unreasonably disturb, interfere or alarm the public or the comfort and repose of any person. 
C.  Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment, decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in subsection A herein, he may, if he deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order that person to leave that place; and any who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
D.  This section shall not apply to peaceful picketing, public speaking or other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other laws.  
Sec. 10-402. - Disturbing funerals. 
No person shall willfully disturb, interrupt or disquiet any assemblage of people who have met for the purpose of any funeral, or obstruct or detain any person engaged in accompanying any funeral to a place of burial.  
Sec. 10-403. - Disorderly conduct. 
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance, alarm or recklessly creating the risk thereof he: 
A.  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb, or health; 
B.  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
C.  Endangers the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct; 
D.  Jostles or crowds or pushes any person in any public place; 
E.  Uses "fighting words" directed toward any person and thus creates a turmoil; 
F.  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; or 
G.  By acts of violence interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
State Law reference— Power of City relating to disorderly conduct, 11 O.S. § 22-110.  
Sec. 10-404. - Unnecessary noise prohibited. 
A.  No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others, within the limits of the City. 
B.  Permits may be granted by the City for certain activities and events which are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
State Law reference— City's power to restrain and prohibit unnecessary noise, 11 O.S. § 22-110.  
Sec. 10-405. - Parades and public assemblies. 
A.  As used in this section, "parade" means any parade, march, ceremony, show, demonstration, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park, or other public place in the City. 
B.  No person shall use any street, alley, public way, park, or other property owned or controlled by the City, except those places specifically designed and intended for such use, for the purpose of holding, conducting, causing or participating in any parade, street fair, street dance, carnival, assemblage or activity of any nature which may cause the disturbance or interference of the normal and ordinary use of the property by other persons, without first having obtained a permit for such purpose. The permits may be granted by the mayor under such conditions as deemed appropriate. 
C.  Permits shall not be required under this section in the case of construction or repairs to or within any such street or property, provided all other requirements of this Code are complied with. 
D.  Not less than two (2) weeks prior to the closing or use of a street or property for a parade, an application shall be submitted by the party to the City. The time requirements may be waived by the mayor at his discretion if sufficient time exists for the proper review of the application as herein provided. The application shall be submitted upon a form prescribed by the City. The application shall provide such other information as requested. 
E.  The mayor shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
1.  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
2.  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the City; 
3.  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the City other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
4.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
5.  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
6.  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; and 
7.  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
F.  The mayor, in such cases as shall be determined in his discretion, may require as a condition to the issuance of a permit herein such insurance or bond holding the City harmless from any and all liability for injury or damage of any kind whatsoever occurring during such activity covered by the permit. 
G.  Without regard to the above provision of this section, the mayor, from his consideration of available, appropriate and necessary information, shall deny the application for a permit provided for by this chapter when, from this information, he has reason to believe that any contemplated advocacy at the proposed event will be directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and will likely incite or produce such action. 
H.  The mayor, in denying an application for a parade permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall so indicate within five (5) days after notice of the action of the mayor. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this section. 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to regulate assemblies, 47 O.S. § 15-102. 
Cross reference— Funeral processions, see Part 15 on Traffic.  
CHAPTER 5. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC 
 
Sec. 10-501. - Public intoxication. 
No person shall be in any public place in a state of intoxication. A state of intoxication means the condition in which a person is under the influence of drugs or alcoholic beverages to such an extent as to deprive the person of his full mental or physical power or be unable to exercise care for his own safety or the safety of others. 
Cross reference— Drinking in public place, see Sections 3-109 and 3-212 of this Code; alcoholic beverages generally, Section 3-101 et seq. of this Code.  
Sec. 10-502. - Marijuana and dangerous substances prohibited. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
2.  Dangerous substance means any drug or substance included in Schedules I through V of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act found in 63 O.S. 1991, § 2-101, et seq., including, but not limited to: 
a.  Cocaine and its derivatives; 
b.  Opiates and opium derivatives such as heroin, codeine, pethidine, and morphine; 
c.  Hallucinogenic substances including lysergic acid diethylamide, marijuana (Cannabis sativa L.), including seed of mature plants, mescaline, psilocybin, and various types of methoxyamphetamines; 
d.  Stimulants such as amphetamines and methamphetamines; and 
e.  Barbiturates and other depressants such as amobarbital, secobarbital, pentobarbital, phenobarbital, methaqualone, phencyclidine, alprazolam, and diazepam. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to use, have, or possess any marijuana in any place in the City except as otherwise permitted by the Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Act, 63 O.S. § 420, et seq., as amended. It is unlawful for any person to use, have, or possess any dangerous substance (other than marijuana) in any place within the city except as legally prescribed by a physician licensed to practice in the state. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or other public place within the city while under the influence of marijuana and/or any dangerous substance. 
D.  Penalty. Unless otherwise expressly provided for in this Code or applicable state law, every person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00); provided further that a subsequent offence may be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed ten (10) days, excluding costs, fees and assessments, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided further, that possession of up to one and one-half (1.5) ounces of marijuana by persons who can state a medical condition, but are not in possession of a state-issued medical marijuana license, shall constitute a misdemeanor offense with a fine not to exceed four hundred dollars ($400.00). 
(Ord. 2781, 08/07/2017; Ord. No. 2825 , § 1, 10-21-2019) 
State Law reference— Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. § 2-101, et seq.  
Sec. 10-503. - Drug paraphernalia. 
A.  For the purpose of this section, "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the state Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, § 2-101 et seq. of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, hereinafter referred to as "the act," and adopted by reference herein. It includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
2.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances; 
3.  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
4.  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances; 
5.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
6.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
7.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana; 
8.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
9.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
10.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
11.  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; and 
12.  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Roach clips: Meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chillums; 
l.  Bongs; or 
m.  Ice pipes or chiller. 
B.  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
1.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
2.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance; 
3.  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the act; 
4.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
5.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object: 
6.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intended to use the object to facilitate a violation of the act; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the act shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia; 
7.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
8.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
9.  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
10.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
11.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
12.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
13.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and 
14.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the act. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the act. 
E.  It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.  
Sec. 10-504. - Sniffing glue, paint, and other substances. 
No person shall sniff or inhale paint, glue, gasoline, or other volatile substances for purposes of intoxication.  
Sec. 10-505. - Curfew for minors. 
A.  This section shall be known and may be cited as the "curfew ordinance" or "regulation of the presence and conduct of minor on streets and public places." 
B.  For the purposes of this section the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
1.  "Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen (18); 
2.  "Parent" means any person having legal custody of a minor as: 
a.  A natural or adoptive parent; 
b.  A legal guardian; 
c.  A person who stands in loco parentis; or 
d.  A person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court; 
3.  "Public place" means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground, or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include but not be limited to any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, café, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center, and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of the above; 
4.  "Remain" means to stand behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling four (4) or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home; 
5.  "Street" means a way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term street includes the legal right-of-way, including but not limited to the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street; 
6.  "Time of night" is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, generally observed at that hour by the public; and 
7.  "Year of age" continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth (17th) to (but not including the day of) the next, such as the eighteenth (18th) birthday, making it clear that seventeen (17) or less years of age is herein treated as equivalent to the phrase "under eighteen (18) years of age." 
C.  It is unlawful for any person seventeen (17) or less years of age (under eighteen (18) to be or remain in or upon the streets within the City at night during the period ending 6:00 a.m. and beginning: 
1.  At 10:00 p.m. for minors fifteen (15) years of age or younger; 
2.  At 12:00 midnight for minors more than fifteen (15) years of age on Sunday through Thursday; and 
3.  At 1:00 a.m. on Saturday morning and Sunday morning for minors more than fifteen (15) years of age. 
D.  In the following exceptional cases a minor on a City street during the nocturnal hours for which subsection C of this section is intended to provide the maximum limits of regulation shall not, however, be considered in violation of the curfew ordinance: 
1.  When accompanied by a parent of such minor; 
2.  When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take the parent's place in accompanying the minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area; 
3.  When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona fides of such exercise by possessing a written communication, signed by such minor and countersigned, by a parent of such minor with their home address and telephone number, specifying when, and where and in what manner the minor will be on the streets at night (during hours when the curfew ordinance is otherwise applicable to the minor) in the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such communication; 
4.  In case of reasonable necessity, but only if the minor has in the minor's possession a written communication signed by the minor, countersigned by a parent of such minor evidencing their home address and telephone number, and establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified streets at a designated time for a described purpose including points of origin and destination; 
5.  When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides, or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor not communicating an objection to the police officer; 
6.  When returning home, by a direct route from (and within thirty (30) minutes of the termination of) a school activity, or activity of a religious or the voluntary association, provided the minor has a written communication in the minor's possession, countersigned by a parent indicting the home address and telephone number, the purpose for the event, when, where and in what manner the minor will be on the streets at night; 
7.  When authorized, by regulation issued by the City Council, in other similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled but adopted to necessary night-time activities of more minors than can readily be dealt with on an individual special permit basis. Normally such regulation by the City Council permitting use of the streets should be issued sufficiently in advance to permit appropriate publicity through news media and through other agencies such as the schools, and shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the streets permitted, the period of time involved not to extend more than thirty (30) minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity, and the reason for finding that such regulation is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the public interest and the purposes of this curfew ordinance; 
8.  When the minor carries a certified card of employment, briefly identifying the minor, the addresses of his home and his place of employment and his hours of employment or caries a valid proof of employment which may include the latest payroll receipt not over thirty (30) days old; or 
9.  When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This contemplates normal travel. This clearly exempts bona fide interstate movement through the City, particularly on normal routes. 
E.  It is unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain upon any City street under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, the curfew ordinance. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall a fortior, be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any person operating or having charge of any public place to knowingly allow, permit or suffer the presence of minors in violation of the curfew established by this chapter. 
G.  Upon finding or having attention called to any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of the curfew ordinance, a police officer of the City shall normally take the minor to the City police station, or other place designated by the Chief of Police, where a parent shall immediately be notified to come for such minor, whereupon they shall be interviewed. This is intended to permit ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts, and to centralize responsibility in the personnel then on duty for accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement, and recording, thus making available experienced supervisory personnel, the best facilities and access to information and records. In the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a police officer on the street shall in the first instance use his best judgment in determining age; 
1.  Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience and may provide, inter alia, that the police officer may deliver to a parent thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances. For example, a minor of tender age near home whose identity may readily be ascertained or is known; 
2.  In any event such police officer shall within twenty-four (24) hours, file a written report with the Chief of Police. The report shall be treated for purposes of juvenile records in accordance with state statutes; 
3.  When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the minor, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located, or fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except to the extent that in accordance with police regulations, approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or arrival of a parent; or 
4.  In the case of first violation by a minor, the Chief of Police shall cause to be personally delivered or by certified mail, send to a parent written notice of violation with a warning that any subsequent violation shall result in full enforcement of the curfew ordinance, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties. 
H.  If after the warning notice pursuant to paragraph 4 of subsection G of this section of a first violation by a minor, a parent violates subsection E of this section (in connection with a second violation by the minor), this shall be treated as an offense by the parent. The penalty upon a plea of guilty, nolo contendere, or finding of guilt shall be as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code.  
Sec. 10-506. - False representation as blind, crippled or physically defective to obtain money, aid. 
No person shall falsely represent himself as blind, deaf, dumb, crippled or physically defective for the purpose of obtaining money or other things of value, or to secure aid or assistance on account of such false representation. 
State Law reference— Offense against public morals being a misdemeanor, 21 O.S. § 22; public decency generally, 21 O.S. § 22.851, et seq.  
Sec. 10-507. - Misrepresenting age by false documents. 
No person shall, for the purpose of violating any statutes of the state or any ordinances of the City, willfully and knowingly misrepresent his age by presenting a false document purporting to state his true age or by presenting a document not his own. 
Cross reference— Misrepresentation of age by false or altered documentation for purpose of obtaining alcoholic and low point beer, see Part 3. 
State Law reference— Misrepresentation of age by false documents, 21 O.S. §§ 1518—1520.  
Sec. 10-508. - Obscene, threatening or harassing telephone calls. 
A.  No person shall by means of a telephone, willfully: 
1.  Make any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent; 
2.  Make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without disclosing his identity and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number; 
3.  Permit any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section; or 
4.  In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, make repeated calls or simultaneous calls solely to harass any person at the called number. 
B.  Use of a telephone facility under this section shall include all uses made of such a facility between the points of origin and reception. Any offense under this section is a continuing offense and shall be deemed to have been committed at either the place of origin or the place of reception. 
State Law reference— Telephone calls, 21 O.S. § 1172.  
Sec. 10-509. - Disorderly house. 
A.  A disorderly house means any structure or vehicle by which the peace, comfort, health, welfare, or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of the people therein committing or resorting to any of the following acts: 
1.  The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession, or use of which is declared unlawful by state statute; 
2.  The violation of any of the ordinances of this City or statutes of this state regulating the sale, distribution, possession, or use of alcoholic and nonintoxicating beverages as defined by law; 
3.  The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state statute or City ordinance including, but not limited to, soliciting for purposes of prostitution; or 
4.  The violation of any state statute or City ordinance prohibiting gambling. 
B.  No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist in keeping and maintaining a disorderly house. 
C.  No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership or corporation having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease or otherwise permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house, and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly house, no persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to grant permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house. 
D.  No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into, or remain in a disorderly house. In any prosecution for violation of this section, the City shall have the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not by circumstantial evidence. This section shall not apply to physicians or officers in the discharge of their professional or official duties. 
Cross reference— See also Section 10-513 on prostitution. 
State Law reference— Municipal power to regulate disorderly houses and indecencies, 11 O.S. § 22-109.  
Sec. 10-510. - Nudity, improper dress, indecent exposure. 
It is unlawful for any person to: 
A.  Appear in any public place in the City in a state of nudity; 
B.  Appear in any public place in the City in any offensive, indecent or lewd dress; or 
C.  Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1021.  
Sec. 10-511. - Gambling and gambling devices. 
A.  Any person who plays or carries on, or opens or causes to be opened, or who conducts, either as owner or employee, roulette, craps, or any banking or percentage game, played with dice, cards or any other device, for money, checks, credit or any representative of value, or any other gambling game, is guilty of an offense. 
B.  Any person who bets on or plays at any of the prohibited games mentioned in subsection A above, or otherwise gambles, is guilty of an offense. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to exhibit or expose to view in any building, or in any part of or room in any building, any table, cards, dice, roulette wheel or other article or apparatus designed for or used for gambling purposes. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to keep, own, operate, use, conduct or cause to be kept, operated, used or conducted, either as owner, manager, dealer, clerk or employee, and whether for hire or not, any punch board, machine, cards, game, parlay card or any other device or paraphernalia, wherein or whereby any money or property or any representative of either, or other valuable thing, may be played, bet, staked, wagered or hazarded, won, lost or obtained upon any change, combination of numbers, emblems or any uncertain or contingent event or condition, or football or baseball contest. 
E.  It is unlawful for any person to play any prohibited game described in this section. 
F.  It is unlawful for any person to bar or barricade any building, or any part of or room in any building, in order to render the same difficult of access or ingress to the police officers of the City, in which building, or any part of or room in any such building, any table, cards, dice, roulette wheel or other article or apparatus designed for or being used for gambling purposes are exhibited or exposed to view. 
G.  The apparatus and paraphernalia used in the conduct of any of the gambling games prohibited by this section are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and subject to seizure and suppression by any officer, and shall be abated, forfeited and destroyed upon the order and decree of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
H.  It is unlawful for any person to be about in the immediate vicinity where a person or persons are gambling, whether by playing games, operating a slot machine or other device, or otherwise. 
I.  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the sponsoring and operation of bingo games by nonprofit religious, fraternal, charitable or educational organizations; provided the organizations are properly licensed and operated in accordance with law. 
State Law reference— Gambling generally, 21 O.S. § 941 et seq.; punishment for betting on or playing prohibited game, 21 O.S. § 942, bingo generally, 21 O.S. § 995.1 et seq.; Oklahoma Horseracing Act, 3A O.S. § 200 et seq.; disposition of equipment used for gambling, 21 O.S. § 943; search and seizure of equipment used for gambling, 21 O.S. § 916; 22 O.S. § 1261 et seq.  
Sec. 10-512. - Prostitution prohibited. 
A.  As used in this section, "prostitution" means and includes the getting or receiving of the body for sexual intercourse for hire and includes the giving or receiving of the body for indiscriminate sexual intercourse without hire. 
B.  It is unlawful: 
1.  To engage in prostitution, lewdness or assignation; 
2.  To solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit an act of lewdness, assignation or prostitution; or 
3.  To aid, abet or participate in the doing of any of the acts herein prohibited. 
C.  No person shall in any way or manner whatever, keep, harbor or house any prostitute. 
D.  No person shall entice or attempt to entice any female into a house of prostitution, or have illicit sexual intercourse with any female under eighteen (18) years of age. 
E.  No person shall keep or maintain a house of prostitution or house of assignation. 
F.  No person shall lease, let or furnish any building, room, tent or structure of any kind, or any conveyance used or to be used as a place of prostitution or assignation within the City, or knowingly permit the same to be so used. 
G.  No person shall knowingly accept, receive, levy or appropriate any money or other thing of value without consideration from a prostitute or from the proceeds of any women engaged in prostitution. 
H.  No person shall offer, or offer to secure another for the purpose of prostitution, or for any other lewd or indecent act. 
I.  No person shall direct, take or transport, or offer or agree to take or transport or aid or assist in transporting, any person to any house, place, building or other structure, vehicle, trailer or other conveyance, or to any other person with knowledge or having reasonable cause to believe that the purpose of such directing, taking or transporting is prostitution, lewdness or assignation. 
J.  It is unlawful for a person to be present in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such a purpose is manifested are: That such person is a known prostitute or procurer; that such person repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop or engage passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily gesture. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this subsection unless the arresting officer first affords such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this subsection if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
K.  For the purpose of this section, a "known prostitute or procurer" is a person who, within one year prior to the date of the suspected violation of this section has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted of a violation of this section or has been convicted of violating any statute or ordinance of any jurisdiction which makes prostitution or soliciting for the purpose of prostitution unlawful. 
State Law reference— Definition of prostitution, 21 O.S. § 1030; Soliciting, 21 O.S. § 1029; pimping, 21 O.S. § 1081.  
Sec. 10-513. - Offenses near schools. 
No person shall engage in any of the conduct or acts hereinafter set forth around, in or near any school or school grounds or streets and alleys adjacent to any school: 
A.  Any conduct that would disturb the orderly conduct of the school; 
B.  Annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school; 
C.  Lewd or wanton conduct in, near or around any of the schools or school grounds or streets and alleys adjacent to the schools; 
D.  Moving or parking any vehicle in the vicinity of any school for the purpose of annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school; or 
E.  Any other act or conduct calculated to or likely to annoy or molest any student or employee of such school.  
Sec. 10-514. - Sleeping in places, property. 
It is unlawful for any person, without lawful reason, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and sunrise, to sleep on any street, in any other public place, or on any property of another without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge of such place.  
Sec. 10-515. - Contributing to delinquency of a minor. 
A.  "Any person" as used in this section means any human being, without regard to the legal or natural relationship to a minor, as well as legal or corporate entities. "Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
B.  Any person who shall knowingly or wilfully cause, aid, abet or encourage a minor to be, to remain, or to become a delinquent child, as defined by state law, shall be guilty of an offense. 
State Law reference— Contributing to delinquency of minors, 21 O.S. § 856 et seq.  
Sec. 10-516. - Tobacco to minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to sell, barter, give or otherwise furnish cigarettes, cigars, electronic cigarettes also known as "e-cigarettes", vapor products, tobacco in any form or nicotine in any form to a minor, or to permit such minor to frequent any premises owned, held, or managed by him for the purpose of using or procuring cigarettes, cigars, vapor products, tobacco, or nicotine in any form. 
(Ord. 2716, 02/02/2015)  
Sec. 10-517. - Carrying weapons, exceptions. 
It is unlawful for any person to carry upon or about his person, or in his portfolio or purse, any pistol, revolver, dagger, bowie knife, dirk knife, switchblade knife, spring-type knife, sword cane, knife having a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife, blackjack, loaded cane, billy, hand chain, metal knuckles, or any other offensive weapon, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and as authorized by state law. This section shall not prohibit the proper use of guns and knives for hunting, fishing or recreational purposes, nor shall this section be construed to prohibit any use of weapons in a manner otherwise permitted by law.  
Sec. 10-518. - Discharging firearms, air rifles, bb guns, pellet guns. 
It is unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, air rifle, BB gun or pellet gun, except when doing so in line of duty, when lawfully doing so in defense of oneself, of another person or of property, or when doing so during competition in or practicing skeet, trap or other recognized and controlled sporting events, and when doing so in such sporting event does not create unreasonable risk of harm to another and which does not demonstrate a conscious disregard for the safety of another person, or when otherwise authorized bylaw or ordinance.  
Sec. 10-519. - Smoking in public places. 
A.  No person shall smoke in a designated non-smoking area in the City municipal building or at any meeting of any public body created and acting under authority of the City Council. 
B.  The City municipal building shall be designated as a "non-smoking" area with exception of portions of the building located in the south end of the structure utilized by City employees for purposes of repairing and storing motor vehicles, supplies, parts, etc. 
C.  Smoking and non-smoking areas shall be designated by the City Manager in the City municipal building. Existing physical barriers and ventilation systems shall be utilized in the designated smoking areas to minimize smoke in both the smoking and adjacent non-smoking areas. The manager shall post signs which clearly state that smoking in the municipal building is prohibited in designated non-smoking areas, pursuant to state statutes, and the City Code, and that all employees, in addition to City Council members, shall request smokers to refrain from smoking in the City municipal building upon request of a patron or citizen or employee who suffers discomfort from the smoke or who has hypersensitivity to smoke.  
Sec. 10-520. - Laser pointers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to focus, point or shine a laser beam directly or indirectly on another person or animal in such a manner as to harass or annoy said person or animal.  
CHAPTER 6. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 10-601. - Escaping custody. 
No person lawfully in custody or confined in the City Jail, before or after conviction for any violation of the ordinances of the City, or held in custody going to the City Jail, or working upon the streets or other public grounds of the City or in custody of any officer of the City, shall break or attempt to break such City Jail or custody, and escape or attempt to escape therefrom.  
Sec. 10-602. - Conveying Instruments to Assist Escape. 
No person shall convey into the City Jail any disguised instrument or anything proper or useful to facilitate the escape of any prisoner lawfully committed to or detained in the City Jail for any violation of the City ordinances, for any criminal offense, or lawfully detained or imprisoned therein, whether such escape is effected or attempted or not.  
Sec. 10-603. - Assisting prisoner to escape. 
No person shall in any way aid, remove or assist any person to resist or escape from custody of any police officer or from any lawful confinement in the City. 
State Law reference— Assisting prisoner to escape, 21 O.S. §§ 437, 441.  
Sec. 10-604. - Delivery of articles to person in confinement. 
No person shall deliver any article or thing to any person under arrest without the consent of the officer having charge and custody of the prisoner.  
Sec. 10-605. - Assaulting City officer. 
No person shall knowingly commit any assault, battery or assault and batter any City official or police officer or firefighter while in the performance of their duties. 
State Law reference— Assaulting law officer, 21 O.S. §§ 649, 650.  
Sec. 10-606. - Resisting a police officer. 
A.  It is unlawful to resist, oppose or assault, prevent, fail to cooperate with or in any way interfere with a police officer or any person duly authorized to act as such, while the officer or person is discharging or attempting to discharge his official duties within the limits of the City. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to assist such other person to flee, escape or evade an officer seeking to make an arrest or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of or in front of an approaching officer. 
C.  Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or obstruction of, an individual acting in his official capacity, and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his official capacity. 
D.  The words "obstruction of" shall, in addition to their common meaning, include: 
1.  Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest; 
2.  Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he is under arrest; or 
3.  Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity known to the arresting officer.  
Sec. 10-607. - Citizens' duty to assist. 
It is the duty of all persons in the City when called upon by any police officer to promptly aid and assist him in the execution of his duties.  
Sec. 10-608. - Obedience to orders of police and firefighter. 
No person shall fail to heed a reasonable order of a police officer or firefighter while such officer is in the discharge of an official duty in maintaining the public safety or welfare.  
Sec. 10-609. - Eluding police officer by motor vehicle. 
No operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual or audible signal, a red light or a siren from a police officer driving a motor vehicle, showing the same to be an official police, sheriff or highway patrol car directing the operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, shall willfully increase his speed or extinguish his lights to elude or attempt to elude such police officer, or attempt in any other manner to elude the police officer.  
Sec. 10-610. - Use of siren or whistle. 
A.  No person shall use any police whistle or any other instrument used by police officer to give signals to each other, or imitate any signal given by one police officer to another or any special signal used by police officers, for the purpose of improperly or causelessly attracting the attention of the police. 
B.  No person, except members of Police Department, Fire Department or ambulance services, shall ring, use or otherwise sound any gong, siren, whistle or any other device for making similar noise.  
Sec. 10-611. - Impersonating a police officer or any City officer. 
A.  No person, other than police officers of the City, shall wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or any other insignia of office like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the police officers of the City. 
B.  No person shall do or attempt any act to impersonate a police officer. 
C.  It is unlawful to falsely impersonate any officer or employee of the City, or falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the City, by any kind of representation, pretense, insignia, sound, clothing or conduct, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an officer or employee of the City without being authorized to do so. 
State Law reference— Impersonating public officers, 21 O.S. §§ 263, 264, 1533.  
Sec. 10-612. - False statements, reports or complaints. 
A.  No person shall knowingly make or file or cause to be made or filed a false or misleading report or misrepresentation, allegation or complaint with the Police Department or any officer or employee of the City, or on any official application or to commit perjury before any tribunal of the City. 
B.  No person shall wilfully and without probable cause make a false report to any person of any crime, violation of the City's ordinances, or circumstances indicating the possibility of crime or violation having been committed, including but not limited to the unlawful taking of personal property, which report causes or encourages the exercise of police or other official action or investigation.  
Sec. 10-613. - False alarms. 
It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in any manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the Fire Department, Police Department or any other emergency personnel, or summon any officer or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, accident or other emergency or knowingly to cause the Fire Department or Police Department or its officers or employees to make a useless or unnecessary run to any part of the City or outside the City. It shall also be an offense to permit any false call or alarm that causes the Fire Department or Police Department or its officers or employees to make a useless or unnecessary run to any part of the City or outside the City. After three (3) such false calls from the same premises during one (1) year, the owner of the premises shall be deemed in violation of this section for each such false call thereafter occurring during the same calendar year.  
Sec. 10-614. - Removal of barricades. 
It is unlawful for any person except by proper authority to remove any barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the City to keep traffic off any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk, or other area.  
Sec. 10-615. - Resisting public officials. 
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or wilfully to: 
A.  Resist, oppose or obstruct the Chief of Police, any other police officer, the municipal judge, or any other officer or employee of the City in the discharge of his official duties; 
B.  Obstruct, threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any officer or employee from the discharge of his official duties; or 
C.  Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive or indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties.  
Sec. 10-616. - Duties of the public at fires, emergencies. 
A.  All persons at fires or other emergencies or accidents shall conduct themselves in an orderly and lawful manner and to assist in maintaining law and order. 
B.  No person at or near any fire or emergency shall conduct himself in a disorderly manner or neglect or refuse to promptly obey any order of the fire chief or his assistants relative to such fire; and no person shall resist, obstruct, hinder, or abuse any officer of the Fire Department or any firefighter in the proper discharge of his duty. 
C.  Every police officer present at a fire shall keep back all persons who are in the way or impeding the work of the Fire Department, and so far as possible protect all property from loss or injury, and cooperate with and assist the Fire Department in every way possible while at the fire. The fire chief or an assistant fire chief or any police officer shall have the power to designate persons to guard any goods. 
D.  No person shall follow or block the way of any emergency vehicle engaged in emergency run, or knowingly interfere with officers at the location of any fire or emergency. 
State Law reference— Interfering with firefighters, 21 O.S. § 127.  
Sec. 10-617. - Tampering with signs, equipment. 
It is unlawful for any person to tamper with any signs, signal equipment or other device placed, operated and maintained by the City in connection with the administration of its code provisions, ordinances, regulations, services, functions or performance of duties thereto. 
Cross reference— See also tampering with public utilities, Section 10-314.  
Sec. 10-618. - Interfering with police dog in performing functions or duties. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to interfere with, tease, meddle with, throw objects at or toward, torture, torment, injure, beat, strike, kick, mutilate, disable or kill any dog used by the Police Department of the City, or any member thereof, in the performance of the functions or duties of the department.  
Sec. 10-619. - Destroying, tampering with evidence. 
It is unlawful to destroy, alter, conceal or disguise physical evidence, plant false evidence or furnish false information to an officer which impedes that or another officer in the performance of his duties, or which is intended to prevent the apprehension or to obstruct the prosecution or defense of any person.  
CHAPTER 7. - NOISE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-701. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Ambient noise means all all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually being a composite of sounds from many sources near and far, but excluding the specific noise source being measured; 
Decibel of sound means a unit of sound level which denotes a ratio between two (2) quantities which are proportional to the power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two (2) amounts of power is ten (10) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of this ration; 
Excess noise or sound means a volume of sound being emitted from a motor vehicle which is unreasonable in volume for the circumstances then existing and which, because of the time, place and circumstances existing, constitutes a public nuisance because of being an assault upon the right of others to be secure in their health, welfare, peace and dignity; 
Motor vehicles mean any motor-driven vehicle having two (2) or more wheels, expressly excluding civil defense equipment, emergency vehicles, earth moving equipment, lawn mowers, yard tractors, farm tractors and farming implements, and specifically including but not limited to vehicles commonly known as automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, and the like; 
Sound amplifying device means a radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial or noncommercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public; provided, that nothing in this section shall be interpreted to include the sounds customarily given by emergency vehicles or chimes, as hereafter defined. "Chimes," as used herein, shall mean bells which are rung or played in such a manner as to produce music, and shall not include recorded or reproduced sounds of bells or amplified sounds of bells; 
Sound level meter means an instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter and a frequency weighing network for the measurement in decibels of noise and sound levels in a specified manner. 
(Ord. 1256, 12/04/1967; Ord. 1558, 09/20/1976)  
Sec. 10-702. - Sound amplifying devices on moving vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sound amplifying device upon a moving vehicle or when the same is attached to a vehicle which, in the operation of such device, is moved from place to place. 
(Ord. 1256, 12/04/1967)  
Sec. 10-703. - Sounds which may be transmitted. 
The only sounds to be transmitted from a sound amplifying device as defined in this chapter shall be music or human speech; provided, that such speech or music shall not be profane, lewd, indecent, or scandalous. 
(Ord. 1256, 12/04/1967)  
Sec. 10-704. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful to use, operate, or cause to be operated a sound amplifying device in the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or to operate such device within a distance of three hundred (300) feet of a rest home, nursing home, hospital, or clinic, such distance to be measured from the nearest part of such rest home, nursing home, hospital or clinic. 
(Ord. 1256, 12/04/1967)  
Sec. 10-705. - Application. 
Every person operating or causing to be operated a sound amplifying device shall first file an application for this purpose with the City Manager. Such application shall be upon a form prescribed by the City Manager, which shall show the name and address of the applicant, the purpose for which sound amplification will be used, the location of the sound amplifying device when in use, the proposed hours and duration of operation, and the approximate maximum distance which such sound will reach. Such application shall be filed not less than one (1) day prior to the proposed use of the sound amplifying device, and the permission for use thereupon shall not extend beyond the calendar year in which granted. 
(Ord. 1256, 12/04/1967)  
Sec. 10-706. - Appeal. 
If, after the making of an application as provided for by Section 10-705, the right to operate and use a sound amplifying device is refused by the City Manager, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such decision to the City Council of the City and such appeal shall be heard at the next regular meeting of such board following the refusal of the application. Until such appeal is heard, the applicant is prohibited from the use of a sound amplifying device in the City. 
(Ord. 1256, 12/04/1967)  
Sec. 10-707. - Maximum audibility permitted. 
Sound amplifying devices shall be operated in such a manner that the same will not be clearly audible at a distance of over one hundred fifty (150) feet when the same is directed over or upon a public street, and not over a distance of eight hundred (800) feet when operated or used in a park, playground or place of public assembly upon private property. 
(Ord. 1256, 12/04/1967)  
Sec. 10-708. - Chimes. 
The foregoing provisions of this chapter shall not apply to chimes, as defined by Section 10-701. However, the use of chimes for the production of sounds to be cast upon the public streets or public places of the City outside of buildings or homes shall be prohibited; except, that the use of chimes by regularly organized churches shall be permitted on the following days, except between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., to-wit: Sundays, or Saturdays if they are the days designated by a church for its regular weekly religious service, Easter, Independence Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and the days from December 15 to December 25, inclusive. No permit shall be required for the use of chimes as provided in this section, but the same shall not be operated in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by this Code and other ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. 1256, 12/04/1967)  
Sec. 10-709. - Permits. 
The City Council is authorized to issue permits that would allow the use of chimes at times other than those times permitted in Section 10-708. Such permits shall be issued on a case by case basis so as not to permit public nuisances as defined by this Code. 
(Ord. 1741, 01/19/1981)  
Sec. 10-710. - Exhaust and muffle systems, condition. 
Every motor vehicle being operated within the City shall be equipped with an exhaust and muffler system in good working order and in a condition of repair or design which shall not allow an unreasonable and excessive noise or sound to be emitted, and it shall be a violation of this section for any motor vehicle being operated within the City to emit an excessive sound or noise, as herein defined, or to emit or be capable of emitting, a sound or noise of eighty-six (86) decibels or more. 
(Ord. 1558, 09/23/1976)  
Sec. 10-711. - Persons in violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the City when such motor vehicle is capable of emitting noise or sound which constitutes a violation of Section 10-709 of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for any owner of a motor vehicle to allow such motor vehicle to be operated within the City when such owner knows or has reason to know that such motor vehicle is capable of emitting a noise or sound which constitutes a violation of Section 10-709 of this chapter; provided that, this section shall not be applicable while such motor vehicle is being reasonably operated as an incident to the actual repair process required to cause such motor vehicle to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1558, 09/23/1976)  
Sec. 10-712. - Evidence of decibel rating. 
In all cases of an arrest made or citation given for a violation of Sections 10-709 to 10-712 of this chapter, the person charged with such violation shall have the right to refuse or consent to the motor vehicle in question being tested by a sound level meter for noise or emission levels by a procedure as hereinafter provided, and the results obtained from such tests may be used in the municipal court of the City as evidence for or against the person charged with a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1558, 09/23/1976)  
Sec. 10-713. - Testing procedure. 
A.  In all instances wherein a sound level meter is used to obtain results of a noise or sound emission level, the persons administering such tests shall be first qualified to perform such tests by the Chief of Environmental Health of the County or by the City Police Chief. 
B.  In performing noise level tests for decibel rating, the sound level meter shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the subject vehicle being tested and such motor vehicle shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet from any walls, barriers or other structures which are capable of reflecting sound and such tests shall be performed while the motor of such motor vehicle is being fully revved at a standing position in order to obtain a reading of the highest number of decibels of noise capable of being produced through the exhaust or muffler system, if any, of such motor vehicle. 
C.  Ambient noise is a factor and the noise emitted from the motor vehicle being tested must exceed the surrounding ambient noise by ten (10) decibels or more in order for the decibel reading obtained by the sound level meter to be used in evidence of a violation of this chapter against the person charged with such violation. 
D.  The sound level meter approved to perform the tests as herein provided shall be a sound level meter which has been manufactured according to the specifications of the International Electrical Commission of the American National Standards Institute. 
(Ord. 1558, 09/23/1976)  
Sec. 10-714. - Defense or excuse. 
It is expressly declared that it shall not be a defense or excuse for a violation of Sections 10-710 to 10-712 of this chapter that the motor vehicle emitting noises in excess of that allowed by this chapter is equipped with a muffler or exhaust system in the same working order as originally installed by the manufacturer or distributor thereof because of the higher nature of the necessity to preserve the peace, dignity, safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(Ord. 1558, 09/23/1976)  
Sec. 10-715. - Operation within the City. 
A motor vehicle creating a noise in violation of Section 10-710, as above provided, shall not be allowed to operate within the City until the exhaust or muffler system of such motor vehicle has been repaired or replaced to comply with the noise emission standard established by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1558, 09/23/1976)  
Sec. 10-716. - Retail distributors. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation selling motor vehicles as an ordinary course of business to sell, lease, or loan a motor vehicle intended for use within the City if such motor vehicle at the time of the sale, lease, or loan is capable of violating this chapter. 
(Ord. 1558, 09/23/1976)  
Sec. 10-717. - Alternation for hire. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation acting for hire to knowingly alter, change or repair the muffler or exhaust system of a motor vehicle in order to cause such motor vehicle to be capable of producing a noise in violation of this chapter if such motor vehicle is intended to be used within the City. 
(Ord. 1558, 09/23/1976)  
Sec. 10-718. - Other noise practices prohibited. 
A.  No motor vehicle shall be operated in a manner producing loud and unnecessary squealing of tires. 
B.  No motor vehicle shall sound its horn, bell, siren or other signaling device, except in an emergency situation or as a danger or cautionary warning. 
C.  No person shall race the engine of a motor vehicle in such a manner as to produce unreasonably loud and unnecessary noises. 
(Ord. 1558, 09/23/1976)  
Part 11 - PARKS, RECREATION, AND CEMETERY  
CHAPTER 1. - PARKS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-101. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Animal means any mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian, fish, and invertebrate; 
Board means the parks and recreation board of the City of Sapulpa; 
City Council means the governing council of the City; 
Director means the Director of Parks and Recreation Department, or authorized representative of the City; 
Employee means any person employed by the City or by any Board of the City; 
Park areas and facilities mean any park, playground, recreation area, sports filed, garden, land, building, or other structure designated by legal instrument, formal acceptance, or custom, under the jurisdiction of the Parks and Recreation Department and/or Park Board of the City; 
Permit means any written license issued by or under the authority of any board as defined above; and 
Person means any natural person, corporation, company, association, firm, or partnership. 
(Ord. 2086, 10/05/1992; Ord. 2329, 10/23/2000)  
Sec. 11-102. - Limitation of activities. 
The appropriate board, or director when authorized by the board, may designate particular locations within park areas and facilities for specific activities and may limit such activities by issuance of permits with approval of the City Council. The board may establish operating hours during which park areas and facilities shall be open to the public by the enactment of specific rules and regulations, provided that such hours shall be posted at the entrances of the affected park area and facility with approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. 2086, 10/05/1992, Ord. 2329, 10/23/2000)  
Sec. 11-103. - Rules and regulations. 
The appropriate board shall adopt such rules, regulations and policies, as it deems best for the safety and convenience of the public, for the operation of its park areas and facilities with the approval of the City Council. When such rules and regulations have been adopted and approved, any person found guilty of violating such rules and regulations shall be subject to the appropriate penalties. 
(Ord. 2086, 10/05/1992; Ord. 2329, 10/23/2000)  
Sec. 11-104. - Prohibited acts. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to do or cause to be done any of the following acts within any public park or facility under the jurisdiction of the board, provided that no provision hereof shall apply to any act performed by any officer, agent or employee of the board or the City while in performance of his/her duties: 
A.  To mark, deface, disfigure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, char coalers, decorative structures, railings, pavings or paving materials, water lines, or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal; 
B.  To damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant, or remove any plant or injure the bark, or pick flowers or seed of any tree, to plant, dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the natural beauty or usefulness of any area; 
C.  To cut any tree, dead or alive, whether erect or felled, or to collect leaves, bark, wood chips, mulch or other organic material, or soil for any purpose, without the written permission of the appropriate board or director; 
D.  To handle or disturb plants or flowers or any other object or thing in any area, either cut or uncut, or otherwise place any plant material, tree shrub, or flower within any park area or facility without written permission of the appropriate board or director; 
E.  To hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot, or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile, or bird or to give or attempt to give any such animal a noxious substance or anything disagreeable to such animal, or to have in one's possession any wild animal or its young, or the eggs, nest or young of any bird or reptile; 
F.  To skate, slide, glide, or coast by means of ice skates, shoe or snowmobile in any park area or facility except those that may be designated for such use by the appropriate board or director; 
G.  To throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park area or facility, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the waters; 
H.  To start the water flowing from any spigot other than at a drinking fountain or place provided as a watering place for people or animals or to disregard or fail to comply with any rule or regulation posted or displayed at any swimming pool, wading pool, lake, etc.; 
I.  To make a fire in any park area or facility except in places provided for such purposes. Any fire shall be under the continuous care and supervision of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar, cigarette, tobacco, paper, or other material or to ignite or set off any fireworks, model rockets, or other incendiary device in any park area or facility; 
J.  To ride, drive, or allow a horse in any park area or facility, except for those trails or facilities specifically designated for equestrian use; 
K.  To use any portion of any park or facility for toilet purposes except the public restrooms provided; 
L.  To seine for minnows or other aquatic animals or to use a seine for any purpose within any body of water within any park or area or facility, to catch or take or attempt to catch or take, in any manner, within any park area or facility any fish for commercial purposes. Bow fishing is prohibited in all park areas and facilities; 
M.  To solicit pecuniary assistance or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private, or expose or offer for sale any article in any park area or facility. Provided, however, this shall not apply to any person acting pursuant to a valid contract with the City; 
N.  Enter upon or use any park area or facility without paying an admission or rental fee when such fee has been established or approved by the board. Further, to enter into any park area or facility by other than the approved means of access or to remove or disturb any barrier intended to prevent access, entry or occupancy; further, to go into any shrubbery or enclosure, or upon any lawn, slope, or other area where there is a sign prohibiting such ingress; 
O.  To drive upon or park in any park area or facility, except upon a designated parkway or parking lot. No vehicle shall be operated at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour. Under no circumstances shall any vehicle designated for the purpose of transporting freight, merchandise, or bulk materials of any kind, enter into any park area or facility unless authorized by the appropriate board or director; 
P.  To disregard any rule or regulation promulgated by any board, including rules of conduct covering the use of any park area or facility; 
Q.  To bring into or have in one's possession, in any park area or facility, any firearm, BB gun, air pistol, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, knife or other weapon capable of inflicting injury to persons, animals, or public property, whether or not such weapons are loaded unless such park area or facility has been specifically designated for such activity and posted or unless in conjunction with an approved program; 
R.  To swim or wade in any lagoon, lake, fountain, or other waters in any park area or facility, except swimming, wading or spray pools constructed for such activities. Further, no person shall swim or wade in any pool at any time the pool is not open to the public; 
S.  To disturb any tree in any park area or facility. For the purpose of this paragraph, disturbing shall include, but not be limited to, clubbing, flailing, thrashing, shaking, throwing objects into, ramming, or climbing into any tree; 
T.  To interfere with or disobey or ignore any lawful order of an employee while in the performance of his/her duties in any park area or facility; 
U.  To attach any rope, cable, or other contrivance to any post, paint, erect, or place any sign, banner, or advertisement to any tree, fence, railing, bridge, bench or other structure or into the ground; 
V.  To consume any beverage containing alcohol within any park area or facility including any road or parking lot; 
W.  To practice golf in any park or facility not specifically designated for such uses; 
X.  To camp in any area of a park not designated as a camping area; 
Y.  To use or possess glass containers within any park area; 
Z.  To enter into or remain upon any park area or park facilities between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:30 a.m., unless a valid permit from the Sapulpa Parks and Recreation Department has been issued and is on file with the Sapulpa Police Department. Nothing in this section shall prohibit persons from being in City parks and recreation areas who are engaged in organized sporting events beyond the denoted curfew while engaged in such sporting activity; nor shall this section affect the time restrictions provided in Section 11-402; and 
AA.  To leave any vehicle unattended in any park area or park facility between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:30 a.m. or for a period of time exceeding twenty-four (24) hours. Any vehicle in violation of this section is subject to impound at owner's expense. Nothing in this section shall prohibit vehicles from being in City parks and recreation areas whose owner or driver is engaged in organized sporting events beyond the denoted curfew while engaged in such sporting activity; nor shall this section affect the time restrictions provided in Section 11-402. 
(Ord. 2086, 10/05/1992; Ord. 03/17/2003; Ord. 2409, 05/19/2003)  
Sec. 11-105. - Acts requiring permits. 
It shall be an offense for any person to perform any of the following acts within any park area or facility without having first obtained a permit from the appropriate board or director: 
A.  To give any theatrical entertainment, moving picture show, parade, procession, or public gathering, festival, concert, recreational program or event, or other outdoor presentation, whether or not an admission fee is charged; 
B.  To use loud speaker, public address system, amplifier, or any other device to amplify and direct sound; 
C.  To dig, bury, erect, build, uncover, place, or remove any object or to store any materials or equipment of any kind; 
D.  To sell, offer for sale, or give away without charge any food, drink, merchandise, service, or any other article; 
E.  To use any park area or facility for any commercial purpose including the production of films, photographs, or advertisements, whether for sale to individuals or groups; 
F.  To tie or fasten to any pier or stake, or store any boat, launch, or other vessel used or intended to be used for transportation on water except in those specifically designated for such use; and 
G.  To camp within a designated camping area of a park. 
(Ord. 2086, 10/05/1992)  
Sec. 11-106. - Permits. 
A.  Permits for camping and/or special events in all park areas and facilities shall be obtained by application to the appropriate board or director in compliance with the following procedures: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The name and address of the person(s), corporation, or association sponsoring the activity; 
3.  The day and hours for which the permit is desired; 
4.  The part area or facility for which the permit is desired; 
5.  The nature and purpose of the activity for which the permit is desired; 
6.  Variances required from park rules and regulations or ordinances; 
7.  Any other information reasonably necessary for a determination as to whether a permit should be issued; and 
8.  That all local, state, and federal laws and regulations will be complied with. 
B.  Standards for issuance of a use permit shall include the following: 
1.  That the proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public's enjoyment of the park area or facility; 
2.  That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety, and recreation; 
3.  That the proposed activity or use will not include violence, crime, or disorderly conduct; 
4.  That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the City; 
5.  That the park area or facility desired has not been reserved for other use on the requested date and hour; 
6.  That the sponsor will abide by the rules and regulations promulgated by the board; and 
7.  That the sponsor will comply with all Health Department rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 2086, 10/05/1992; Ord. 2329, 10/23/2000)  
Sec. 11-107. - Fees. 
The City shall provide by the Master Fee Schedule the fees charged for any such park or recreational privileges on any property or facility for recreational purposes owned or operated by the City. 
(Ord. 2329, 10/23/2000)  
Sec. 11-108. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalties as provided by Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2329, 10/23/2000)  
CHAPTER 2. - LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— For charter provisions as to the public library, see Char., Art. XIV, Sec. 3. 
State Law reference— For state law as to public libraries generally, see 65 O.S. § 41 et seq. As to city and town libraries, see 65 O.S. § 71 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-201. - Established. 
There is hereby established a free public library for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 16-1; Ord. 365)  
Sec. 11-202. - Board of directors, composition; appointment, qualifications and compensation of members. 
The management and control of the public library established by Section 11-201 shall be conducted by the City Manager or his designated representative. In addition, an Advisory Board of Directors, consisting of six (6) members, shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council; and shall provide the Manager or his designee with recommendations concerning the operation of the library. Such Directors shall be chosen from the citizens at large, with reference to their fitness for such office, and no director shall receive compensation as such. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 16-2; Ord. 2186, 09/16/1996; Ord. 2436, 04/05/2004)  
Sec. 11-203. - Organization, rules and regulations and terms of members. 
The organization of the Board of Directors mentioned in Section 11-202, the terms of their offices, and all rules and regulations for the conduct of the public library established by this chapter shall be in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 65 of the Oklahoma Statutes. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 16-3; Ord. 365)  
Sec. 11-204. - Donations, etc. 
Any person desiring to make donations of money, personal property, or real estate, for the benefit of the public library established by this chapter, or for the establishment, maintenance or endowment of public lecturers in connection with such library upon any subject designated by the donor in the field of literature, science, and the arts (except that lectures in the interest of any political parties, politics, or sectarian religion are expressly prohibited), shall have the right to vest the title to the money, personal property, or real estate so donated in the Board of Directors mentioned in Section 11-202, to be held and controlled by such board when accepted according to the terms of the deed, gift, devise, or bequest of such property; and as to such property, such board shall be held and considered to be special trustee. 
(Prior Code, 16-4; Ord. 365)  
Sec. 11-205. - Library cash fund. 
There is hereby created a special fund to be designated the "Library Cash Fund," the same to consist of all moneys derived from fines or other charges collected by the public library of the City and, if desired by the donor, any gifts or donations of money made to such library may be placed in such fund. Such fund shall be kept separate from all other funds of the City and shall be used by the Library Board of Directors of the City for the purpose of improving, enlarging, equipping, and maintaining such library. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 16-5; Res. 1354)  
Sec. 11-206. - Regulations on care, use, borrowing books, offenses. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense in the City: 
A.  For any person to recklessly or wilfully mutilate or destroy in part or in whole any book, magazine, paper, periodical, document, written instrument, videotape, recording, or any other type of personal property in or belonging to the Sapulpa Public Library or the board thereof in the City; except this provision shall not be construed to mean the ordinary wear and tear of such articles arising out of careful, prudent, and ordinary use of same; 
B.  For any person who shall lawfully procure any book, magazine, periodical, recording, or other property from the library or board and fail or refuse to return the same to the library upon demand or to appropriate the same to his own use; 
C.  For any person to procure any book, magazine, paper, periodical, document, recording, video, or written instrument in or belonging to the Sapulpa Public Library or the board thereof and to return such property in such a condition that it cannot be used, ordinary wear and tear excepted; or 
D.  For any person to remove or carry from the library any book, magazine, paper, periodical, document, written instrument, videotape, recording or any other article belonging to the library or the board, without the consent of the librarian or person in charge of the building. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 16-6; Ord. 1944, 11/17/1986)  
Sec. 11-207. - Regulations on conduct, offenses. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense in the City: 
A.  For any person to spit upon the floors, walls, steps, or any part of the Sapulpa Public Library building; or the sidewalks in front, at the side or behind the building; or to strike matches or explode or ignite any other flammable or combustible substance within the building; or to smoke tobacco or any other substance within the building; or 
B.  For any person to conduct themself in a loud and boisterous manner, or to throw articles at any other person or to make or cause to be made any loud or unusual noises of any kind whatsoever within the Sapulpa Public Library building or on the premises adjacent thereto. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 16-7; Ord. 1944, 11/17/1986)  
CHAPTER 3. - CEMETERY  
ARTICLE A. - DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 11-301. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Cemetery means South Heights Cemetery, North Heights Cemetery, Sapulpa Cemetery, and Fairview Cemetery. 
Department means the Department of Cemeteries of the City. 
Grave, burial space, lot, plot shall be used interchangeably, and shall apply with like effect to: 
A.  One (1), or more than one (1), adjoining grave; 
B.  One (1) or more than one (1), adjoining crypts or vaults; or 
C.  One (1) or more than one (1) adjoining niches. 
Markers mean a stone or object denoting the location of a grave and which does not exceed six (6) inches in width, thirty (30) inches in height, and twenty-four (24) inches in length. 
Monument means a memorial stone or object of a size in excess of that of a maker. 
Superintendent means the Superintendent of Cemeteries, and any subordinate designated by him. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-302. - Statement of policy. 
The provisions of the Code shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the protection and operation of City-owned cemeteries and the burial of the dead of the City. All lot owners and visitors within the cemetery and all lots sold shall be subject to the provisions of this Code as well as any other applicable provision of the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-303. - Enforcement. 
The responsibility for the enforcement of this Code including the rules and regulations shall be vested in the superintendent of cemeteries and his authorized assistants or agents, subject to the supervision and control of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-304. - Modifications. 
Special cases may arise in which the literal enforcement of a provision may impose an undue and unnecessary hardship. The superintendent of cemeteries, after due consideration and under the supervision of the City Manager, may make temporary exceptions, suspensions, or modifications of any provision. Such temporary exceptions, suspension or modifications shall not be construed as effecting the general application of the intent of the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-305. - Appeal of order. 
If any person shall feel aggrieved by any order or decision by the superintendent of cemeteries, he may, within ten (10) days after receipt of such order or decision, appeal in writing to the City Manager. The City Manager may make such decisions as he deems in the public interest within the scope and intent of this Code and such rules and regulations, and such decisions shall be final unless an appeal in writing is filed within ten (10) days thereafter with the City Council. The City Council may take such action on such appeal as it deems just, and may vary the terms of such rules and regulations as it determines is in the public interest. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-306. - Liability of non-cemetery personnel and workmen. 
A.  The City and its cemeteries shall not be responsible for damages by the elements, an Act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots, or by the order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage be direct or collateral. 
B.  All non-cemetery personnel and their workmen engaged within the cemetery on any class of work whatsoever, shall be held fully responsible for any damage done by them or their agents to any cemetery properties. All unsightly material or debris accumulated from any class of work must be removed at once and on the completion of work. All tools must be removed immediately and the grounds left in as good a condition as found by these parties. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-307. - Hours. 
A.  The cemetery office shall remain open Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., except on New Year's Eve Day, New Year's Day, Christmas Eve Day, Christmas Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Good Friday, and any other day declared a holiday by the City Council. 
B.  Special arrangements can be made with the superintendent of cemeteries for business purposes for hours other than those listed as office hours. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-308. - Fees and changes. 
A.  Fees and charges for services are payable at the office of the City Clerk to the City. 
B.  Fees and charges are set forth by the Master Fee Schedule. 
C.  No employee of the cemetery shall solicit or accept any form of payment or gratuity for work or services rendered. Employees of the cemetery are not permitted to do any work for lot owners or interested parties except under the direction of the Superintendent or his authorized assistants or agents. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-309. - Monuments and markers. 
Only one (1) marker shall be placed at any grave, and all foundations for monuments and markers shall be built of concrete. If any monument or marker, or any other object whatever does not conform to the provision of this chapter, or any inscription on a marker or monument is deemed offensive or improper by the Superintendent, the Superintendent, after conferring with the City Manager, shall have the power to remove the non-conforming, offensive or improper object or objects and shall notify the lot owner or heirs of such action. 
(Ord. 2357, 07/02/2001)  
Sec. 11-310. - Violations. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine as provided in Section 1-108 or by imprisonment, or both. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
ARTICLE B. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 11-311. - Traffic regulations. 
A.  All vehicles will obey the posted fifteen (15) miles per hour speed limit on all cemetery roads. 
B.  No person shall drive any motor vehicle or other means of transportation off the established roads. No person shall drive any motor vehicle or other means of transportation upon grave, lot, or lawn located within the cemeteries. 
C.  When meeting a funeral procession, vehicles must stop until the procession passes. Vehicles may not pass a funeral procession going in the same direction. 
D.  No person shall use a cemetery road as a public or private thoroughfare. 
E.  No motorcycles, motorbikes, or motor scooters will be admitted to the cemeteries except such as may be in attendance at funeral or on cemetery business. 
F.  No all-terrain vehicles (ATV) are allowed within the cemeteries at any time. 
G.  No person shall turn a vehicle around within the cemeteries except by following established roadways. 
H.  Every person driving a vehicle into the cemeteries shall be responsible for any damage caused by such vehicle. 
I.  No vehicles will be allowed on cemetery roads after snow and ice makes those roads impassable. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-312. - Vehicle parking. 
A.  No person shall park or leave any motor vehicle or other means of transportation on any road or driveway within the cemetery in such a location or in such a position as to prevent the passing of the same. The exception to this would be during a funeral, when vehicles may be parked in an orderly fashion near the grave site, and into special areas for parking as directed by the Superintendent and his assistants. 
B.  Any such motor vehicle or other means of transportation so found may be removed by the superintendent and the owners liable for the costs incurred by the removal. 
C.  Motor vehicles are not allowed to park or come to a full stop in front of an open grave unless such vehicles are in attendance at a funeral. 
D.  No person shall park any motor vehicle or other means of transportation upon a grave, lot or lawn located within the cemeteries. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-313. - Use of cemetery roads and walkways. 
Persons within the cemetery shall only use roads, avenues, walks, alleys, and other areas which may be designated for traffic and are not permitted to walk upon or across lots, unless it becomes necessary to gain access to one's own lot. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-314. - Public on cemetery grounds. 
A.  No person shall be allowed in the cemeteries from a period beginning two (2) hours after sunset and continuing to two (2) hours before sunrise, without fist securing permission from the Superintendent. 
B.  Strangers are not allowed to approach the grave during a funeral. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-315. - Picking of flowers, defacing memories. 
A.  Persons visiting the cemetery or attending funerals are strictly forbidden from picking flowers, wild or cultivated, breaking or injuring any tree, shrub, or plants, writing upon, defacing, or injuring any memorials, fences, or other structures within the cemetery grounds. 
B.  No person shall destroy or otherwise disturb the birds or other animal life within the cemeteries. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-316. - Loitering. 
No person, other than lot owners or relatives of persons interred in the cemeteries, shall be permitted to loiter in the cemeteries or in any of the cemetery buildings. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-317. - Profane language or misconduct. 
Any person using profane or boisterous language or acting in a disorderly manner or loitering within the limits of the cemeteries shall be required to leave the cemetery grounds or be arrested for disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-318. - Consuming refreshments. 
No person shall carry any intoxicating liquor or under the influence thereof, or in any way disorderly, will be permitted within the cemetery premises. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-319. - Refuse and rubbish. 
A.  No person shall throw any refuse or rubbish upon the drives and walkways or on any part of the grounds lots or graves or in any of the buildings of the cemeteries. 
B.  Receptacles for waste materials shall be located in convenient places throughout the cemeteries. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-320. - Firearms on cemetery grounds. 
A.  The possession of firearms within the cemetery grounds is forbidden, except the military or other organizations may carry arms for the purpose of firing over the grave at the burial of a member. 
B.  No hunting is permitted in the cemeteries. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-321. - Animals within the cemetery. 
No dogs are allowed within the cemetery without a leash. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-322. - Children within the cemetery. 
Children under fifteen (15) years of age are not permitted within the cemeteries or its buildings unless accompanied by their parents or adult responsible for their conduct. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-323. - Playing and recreational activities. 
No playing or recreational activities or recreational games shall be conducted in the cemeteries at any time. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-324. - Advertising in cemeteries. 
The placing of signs, notices, or advertisements of any kind, peddling or soliciting, and the sale of any commodity in the cemeteries is prohibited. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-325. - Business activities and assemblies. 
A.  Cemetery grounds may not be used for business activities, including meetings, gatherings, or assemblies of any kind unless they are a part of the funeral service. 
B.  Exceptions to this rule may be made only by the Superintendent, the City Manager or the City Council. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-326. - Smoking. 
Smoking or expectorating within any of the cemetery facilities is prohibited. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Secs. 11-327—11-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C. - LOTS 
 
Sec. 11-331. - Ownership. 
No person shall acquire the absolute title in fee to any cemetery lots. The purchase and entry of a lot holder and his subsequent possession are by permission, a license, a right of burial and shall not constitute an absolute ownership in fee regardless of the form of conveyance. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-332. - Place of burial. 
No lot shall be used for any other purpose than as a place of burial for the human dead. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-333. - Location of lot. 
A.  The location of lots will be in accordance with the cemetery master plans which are kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
B.  The corners of each lot and grave spaces will be laid out by the Superintendent. 
C.  Grade lines of all lots and single graves are laid out before the lots or graves are sold and will not be changed. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-334. - Lot or grave space price schedule. 
A.  Every lot or grave space is sold subject to rules and regulations now in force or hereinafter adopted. 
B.  The price for obtaining burial rights is contained in the Master Fee Schedule and subject to changes adopted by the City Council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2118, 1/18/94)  
Sec. 11-335. - Lot purchase. 
A.  The purchase of a lot or grave space may be made at the office of the City Clerk. 
B.  The lot, upon which a burial is to be made, must be paid in full before any burial may take place. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-336. - Issuance of cemetery deed. 
A.  Upon full payment for a lot or grave space, a cemetery deed will be issued to the owner. 
B.  Cemetery deeds will be mailed to the lot owner upon signing of the deed by the Mayor and City Clerk. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-337. - Exclusions to burial rights. 
The lot owner or his legal representative may, at any time, designate in writing to the office of the City Clerk whom he wishes or does not wish buried in his grave or lot. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-338. - Power of attorney. 
Power of attorney to act for the owner must be filed and recorded at the office of the City Clerk to become operative. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-339. - Transfer of burial rights. 
A.  The owner of a lot may at any time transfer this right to another person. 
B.  All requests for transfer must be made at the office of the City Clerk. 
C.  No transfer will be permitted for speculative purposes. 
D.  The price for transfer of burial rights is contained in a schedule of prices and subject to changes adopted by the City Council from time to time. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-340. - Joint ownership. 
Joint ownership of burial rights is permitted. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-341. - Disagreements between partners. 
In case of disagreement between joint owners of a cemetery lot, the first order of a registered owner shall prevail. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-342. - Death of owner. 
A.  Should the owner die without having designated the persons to be buried on the balance of his or her lot, the City will permit the burial of heirs. 
B.  Possession of a cemetery deed is not in itself evidence on which to record the transfer of ownership of a grave or lot. The legal right of ownership of the burial privilege must be established. 
C.  The descent of title of cemetery lots is governed by the laws of the State as related to personal property. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-343. - Correction of errors. 
A.  The cemetery management reserves the right to correct any error that may be made by it, in making interments, disinterments, or removals or in the description, transfer, or conveyance of any interment property, either by cancelling the conveyance and substituting and conveying in lieu thereof, other interment property of equal value and similar location or by refunding the amount of money paid on account by the purchaser. 
B.  In the event the error involves the interment of the remains of any person, the City reserves and shall have the right to remove and transfer the remains so interred to other property of equal value and similar location of the same cemetery. 
C.  When making corrections, the cemetery will abide by the laws of the State and obtain any necessary permits or permission. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-344. - Grave space defined. 
A.  One grave space will be a four (4) foot by twelve (12) foot space. Exception to this would be those spaces in what is known as Babyland. 
B.  One burial per grave space. Exceptions found under section covering interments. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-345. - Descent of interment rights. 
A.  Ownership or burial rights shall descend as directed by will or other suitable document signed by the owner and properly witnessed by another party. 
B.  The absence of any such will or document, the burial rights shall descend as personal property under the applicable descent and distribution statutes of the state, and interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
C.  Those rightful heirs of a cemetery deed, by will or other such document, should contact the office of the City Clerk with such proof and transfer the burial rights in their name. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-346. - Veterans' memorial plot. 
A.  The section or area designated "Veterans' Memorial Plot" shall be reserved for burial of veterans of the armed forces of the United States. 
B.  The Superintendent is authorized to provide a grave space for the internment of any veteran that is a resident of the City. The grave space is to be at no cost; provided such internment shall be in an area of the cemetery designated by the City Council for said purpose. 
C.  Ownership of a free burial space for any veteran shall be retained by the City. 
D.  The burial of any veteran is subject to the availability of dedicated spaces for the internment of veterans. The City reserves the right to select the burial space for any veteran interred in the "Veterans' Memorial Plot." 
E.  The City shall not be responsible for any funeral director's fees or costs associated with the internment of any veteran. The City shall not waive the opening and closing costs for the burial of any veteran. 
(Ord. 2357, 07/02/2001)  
Sec. 11-347. - Indigent burials. 
A.  The Superintendent is authorized to provide a grave space for the internment of any destitute person that is a resident of the City. The grave space is to be at no cost; provided such internment shall be in an area of the cemetery designated by the City Council for said purpose. 
B.  The Superintendent is authorized to provide a grave space for the internment of any destitute person that is not a resident of the City; provided such internment is at the request of the County Commissioners and the opening and closing costs are paid by the County. The grave space is to be provided by the City in such event at no cost. Such internment shall be in an area of the cemetery designated by the City Council for said purpose. 
C.  Ownership of a free burial space shall be retained by the City. 
D.  The internment of any destitute person is subject to the availability of burial spaces. The City reserves the right to select the burial space in which a destitute person is to be interred. In addition, the internment of any destitute person shall not be held after 4:00 p.m. on weekdays or on any weekend or holiday. 
E.  The City shall not be responsible for any funeral director's fees or costs associated with the internment of any destitute person. The City shall not waive the opening and closing costs for the burial of any destitute person. 
(Ord. 2357, 07/02/2001)  
Secs. 11-348—11-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE D. - CARE OF LOTS 
 
Sec. 11-351. - Perpetual care to include. 
Perpetual care shall include watering and mowing and raking of lots and graves, resodding, seeding, and filling in sunken graves or sodding over the surface of graves to lot level. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-352. - Perpetual care not to include. 
A.  Perpetual care shall not include the watering of flowers or plants or the trimming of shrubs if planted by the lot owner. 
B.  Perpetual care does not include the maintenance, repair or replacement of any marker, memorial, tomb or mausoleum placed or erected on the lot unless caused by a direct act (not omission) of negligence by an employee of the City. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-353. - Special care on lots. 
Owners who desire special attention for their lot, such as special care for flowers, trees and shrubs must make arrangements for such care with a person, firm or corporation not connected with the City. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-354. - No endowment for special care. 
Under no circumstances will the superintendent accept an endowment for special maintenance and care of the lot. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-355. - Plants and shrubs. 
A.  A lot owner may embellish his or her lot or grave subject to obtaining permission from the Superintendent. 
B.  Planting out of harmony with the general landscape design of the cemetery grounds and circumferential planting or any other planting which may interfere with adjacent lots will not be allowed. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-356. - Removal of plants and shrubs. 
A.  The Superintendent reserves the right to remove, without notice, trees, shrubs and flowers planted in violation of these rules. The Superintendent reserves the right to trim, cut down, and remove any plantings by a lot owner which are undesirable in their present condition. 
B.  When it is necessary to remove any tree on a cemetery lot usable, the cost of removal shall be borne by the lot owner. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-357. - Enclosures. 
A.  Cement curb around a lot but within the confines of that lot is permitted: 
1.  Curb must be laid flush with the ground; and 
2.  Permission from the Superintendent must be obtained prior to construction. 
B.  Enclosures of any other description detract from the appearance of the cemetery and are prohibited. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-358. - Lots, taxation exemption. 
A.  Lots and grave spaces are exempt from ordinary taxes and cannot be seized on execution. 
B.  No mortgage or other encumbrance shall be given on any burial space or lot. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-359. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE E. - GRAVE MARKERS, MONUMENTS AND MAUSOLEUMS 
 
Sec. 11-360. - Materials used. 
Materials used: 
A.  The materials used in the construction of mausoleums, monuments, and markers, where permitted, shall be of recognized durable granite, marble, or standard bronze. The use of sandstone, terra cotta, slate, artificial stone, cement, wood, or iron in any form is not permitted where exposed to the elements. 
B.  All foundations for monuments and markers shall be built of concrete. 
(Ord. No. 2118, 1/18/94)  
Sec. 11-361. - Appearance. 
Should any monument, marker or mausoleum become unsightly, dilapidated or a menace to visitors, the superintendent shall have the right, at the expense of the lot owner or heirs, either to correct the condition or to remove the same. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-362. - Material on markers. 
The reproduction of a photograph on glass porcelain or other material attached to a memorial is not recommended and the City will not be responsible for damage occurring to same. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-363. - Raised grave markers—Double. 
One grave marker embracing two (2) grave spaces may be allowed if both grave spaces are paid for and the purchaser agrees to bear the cost of removing and resetting the dual marker when the second grave space is to be used. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-364. - Placing of markers before interments. 
The placing of markers before interments will be allowed. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-365. - Corner posts. 
A.  Lot corner marker posts, whenever used, shall be of monumental stone placed level with the turf. 
B.  Initials shall be incised (cut in), not raised. 
C.  Posts shall be finished where they abut on adjacent lots. 
D.  All corner posts will be set by the owner, with supervision from the superintendent. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-366. - Temporary markers. 
Temporary markers or metal name places (furnished by some funeral directors) may be used to identify a grave for a period of time. The period shall not exceed twelve (12) months from the date of interment. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-367. - American flag. 
A.  American flags may be furnished by any lot owner or his representative or by a veterans' organization for display on any grave. 
B.  The maximum size of any such flag shall be twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches. 
C.  The maximum size of any staff or pole upon which a flag is displayed shall be five (5) feet. 
D.  Flags may be displayed on graves from May 15 through July 6, inclusive and November 1 through November 15, inclusive. 
E.  Any flag not removed by the person or organization responsible for its being placed on a grave within the designated display time shall be removed by the superintendent. 
F.  The superintendent may remove any flag at any time when such flag becomes faded, tattered, torn, or otherwise presents an adverse appearance. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-368. - Armed service markers. 
One official metallic tablet of the Disabled American Veterans, or other similar organization whose membership is limited to those who have served in the military or naval forces of the United States of America, will be permitted upon a grave. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-369. - Monuments. 
A.  Only one central or family memorial shall be allowed on a family lot. When the memorial is set at the rear of the lot, it shall be placed not less than two (2) feet from the rear line. 
B.  Monuments may be erected on family lots which consist of at least four (4) grave spaces or more. 
C.  The superintendent shall be consulted concerning family memorials before any such erection is undertaken. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-370. - Mausoleums. 
A.  The erection of mausoleums and vaults are prohibited. 
B.  Any mausoleum or vault which becomes unsightly or dangerous, through neglect by the owner or heirs, may be removed and the remains therein buried in the lot. 
C.  The expense of removing the structure shall be born by the owner or heirs. 
D.  No neglected mausoleum will be removed without the superintendent making every effort to contact the person or persons with an interest in the mausoleum or vault and inform them of the neglect to maintain the mausoleum or vault. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
ARTICLE F. - INTERMENTS 
 
Sec. 11-371. - Cemetery open for interments. 
A.  The cemetery will be open for interment from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. daily, with the exception of Sunday, Christmas Day, Christmas Eve Day, New Years Day, Thanksgiving Day, Fourth of July, Memorial Day, Labor Day, or any other day declared a holiday by the City Council. 
B.  Should it become necessary, because of health reasons or religious customs, or undue hardship placed on the family, burial may be made on any of these days if additional charges are paid in accordance with the rate schedule provided by the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-372. - Notice of funerals. 
A.  Notice of funerals must be given to the office of City Clerk at least twenty-four (24) regular working hours in advance of the funeral. 
B.  One (1) week notice is required prior to any proposed disinterment or removal. 
C.  The superintendent may refuse to make an interment until a more expedient time if the remains arrive at the cemetery entrance after 4:00 p.m. or if too many funerals arrive at the same hour. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-373. - Burials after 4:00 p.m. 
A.  Additional charges shall be made to the funeral director for any burial service which requires cemetery personnel to be in attendance after 4:00 p.m. 
B.  Regular Saturday interments carry an extra fee. 
C.  These additional charges are part of a rate schedule provided in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-374. - Weather conditions. 
A.  Because of concern for safety of persons attending funerals, added problems required to prepare for a grave side service during winter months, grave side service will not be held if inclement weather conditions exist. 
B.  If inclement weather conditions exist, a cemetery chapel service may be held. 
C.  The superintendent will contact the funeral director for arrangement, as to the wishes of the family. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-375. - Placing of graves on lot. 
No grave shall be placed in an irregular appearance with graves on the same or adjoining lots. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-376. - Misrepresentation or errors. 
While all reasonable efforts will be made by the City to establish the identity of the person or persons claiming ownership of the lot or in making arrangements for interments, the City and its employees will not be liable for misrepresentation or error made by the person or persons purported to be the owner, legal representative, or agents. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-377. - Grave opening orders. 
A.  The City and its employees shall not be held responsible for any order given by telephone, or for any mistake occurring from the want of precise and proper instruction as to the particular space, size, and location in a plot where interment is desired. 
B.  Orders given by the funeral director for opening a grave will be construed as orders from the lot owners or heirs. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-378. - Error: Failure to designate. 
A.  The City reserves, and shall have the right to correct any errors that may be made by it, either in making interment, disinterment, or removal or in the description transfer or conveyance of any interment property. 
B.  When an interment is to be made in a lot, the location of such interment shall be designated by the lot owner or heirs. Should the owner or heirs fail or neglect to make such designation, the City reserves the right to make the interment in a location designated, and the City shall not be liable in damages for any error so made. 
C.  The superintendent reserves the right to request that the lot owner, heirs, or funeral director sign a "grave opening authorization" form, which states the grave location to be used before interment takes place. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-379. - Opening and closing of graves. 
All interments, disinterments, removals, and cremated interments shall be handled by the cemetery personnel. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-380. - Zone for burial services. 
When deemed necessary to assure a proper burial, the Superintendent may establish and properly mark a zone in which only persons attending the funeral may enter. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-381. - Construction during funerals. 
A.  All work of any description shall cease while a funeral is being conducted nearby. 
B.  All trucks and workmen shall withdraw to a reasonable distance from the location of the funeral interment. 
C.  This regulation applies to all contract workers as well as cemetery personnel. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994])  
Sec. 11-382. - Burial containers. 
In order to maintain a high standard of care and to eliminate sunken graves caused by the collapse of wooden boxes, it is required that all burials must be made in an outside container made of metal or concrete. 
(Ord. No. 2118, 1/18/94)  
Sec. 11-383. - Disinterment and removals. 
A.  No disinterment and removal to another location within the cemetery of a body will be permitted without the written consent of the legal heirs or unless by a duly authorized public official. 
B.  No disinterment and removal to another location of a body will be permitted without a permit from the Oklahoma State Department of Health. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-384. - Grave accounts, cemetery fees and charges. 
A.  The full purchase price of the designated grave and grave opening shall be paid preceding any proposed interment. 
B.  Arrangements for the payment of any and all indebtedness due to the City shall be made before any proposed interment can take place. 
C.  The charges for any disinterment or removal as provided by the Master Fee Schedule shall be paid in advance to the office of the City Clerk before any disinterment or removal will be effected. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-385. - Interment for profit: Removal, provisions governing. 
A.  Lot owners shall not allow interments to be made on their lots for remuneration of any kind. 
B.  Removal, by the heirs, of a body or cremated remains so that a plot may be sold for profit, or a removal contrary to the expressed or implied wish of the original plot owner, is repugnant to the ordinary sense of decency and is absolutely forbidden. 
C.  A body, or cremated remains, may be removed from its original plot to a larger or better plot in the cemetery, when there has been an exchange or purchase for that purpose. 
D.  The City shall exercise due care in making a disinterment and removal, but it shall assume no responsibility for damage to any casket, burial case, or urn incurred in making the disinterment and removal. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-386. - Interments: Person per grave. 
A.  The interment of two (2) or more persons in one (1) grave space is prohibited. 
B.  Only in the case of mother and infant if interred at the same time or in the case of twin infants interred on the same day will interment of two (2) persons in one (1) grave be allowed. 
C.  Two (2) cremation burials are allowed on one (1) grave space. 
D.  One cremation burial is allowed if grave space is occupied by a body. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-387. - Roads, drives, etc.: Rights of interment. 
No easement or right-of-interment shall be granted to any plot owner in any road, drive, alley, or walk within the cemetery but such road, drive, alley, or walk may be used as a means of access to the cemetery, lots or buildings, as long as the cemetery devotes it to that purpose. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-388. - Lots, interment rights. 
A.  Persons may be interred in any lot even though they do not have an interest therein. Upon a timely written objection duly filed with the superintendent by any person interested in the lot, no interment will then be allowed except upon written consent of all parties interested in the lot. 
B.  An heir at law, as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction, of any record owner, may be buried in the lot provided in these rules or in the laws of the state. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-389. - Grave mounds. 
Grave mounds are not allowed. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-390. - Opening of caskets. 
No person shall open a casket within the confines of the cemetery prior to burial unless that person is next of kin to the deceased, or has written permission of the deceased's next of kin. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-391. - Charges established. 
A.  All charges for grave spaces, burials, removals, or other services shall be in accordance with the Master Fee Schedule. 
B.  A schedule of cemetery prices can be obtained from the office of the City Clerk upon request. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-392. - Supervisor in charge of funerals. 
All funerals and interments within the cemetery grounds shall be under the direction of the Superintendent or his duly appointed representative. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
ARTICLE G. - DECORATIONS 
 
Sec. 11-393. - Decorations, removal. 
A.  The City shall retain the right to remove all floral design, flowers, trees, shrubs, plants, or herbage of any kind from the cemetery as soon as, in the judgment of the superintendent, they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental, or diseased, or when they do not conform to the standard maintained. 
B.  Winter decorations, holly, evergreens, or artificial wreaths or other artificial floral pieces may be placed on graves from October 1 through May 1. All such decorations remaining after May 1 shall be removed. 
C.  All decorations and vases placed in the cemetery for Memorial Day shall be removed within seven (7) days after Memorial Day. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-394. - Decorations, liability. 
A.  The City shall not be liable for floral pieces, baskets, or floral containers or frames in which or to which such floral pieces are attached, beyond the act of acceptance of such floral pieces for cemetery use. 
B.  The City disclaims any liability for damage of any kind that may occur to floral decorations in the normal course of cemetery operation. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-395. - Decorations, prohibitions. 
A.  The planting of trees, plants, shrubs, or flowers on lots or graves is prohibited. Tree and shrub planting may be done under the supervision of the superintendent. 
B.  Wire, metal rods, wooden stacks, or any other items are strictly prohibited from being used to brace, support, or stabilize any vases, flower containers or pots. 
C.  The placing of boxes, shells, toys, metal design, ornaments, chairs, settees, glass, wood and iron cases and similar articles upon lots or graves spaces shall not be permitted and, if so placed, the cemetery shall remove same and assume no responsibility for their return to the owner. 
D.  Empty glassware, metal containers or baskets when found shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed and the City shall assume no responsibility for their return to the owners. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-396. - Decorations: Restrictions. 
A.  Artificial flowers shall be allowed in urns only, during the summer months of June through September. 
B.  New shrub plantings must be cared for by the lot owner: 
1.  Shrubs must be kept within the size limits of thirty-six (36) inches in height and twenty-four (24) inches in diameter; 
2.  When shrub planting is done, every effort is to be made to keep that shrubbery within the confines of the lot in which it is planted; and 
3.  Any shrubbery allowed to grow larger will be removed. 
C.  When a purchase of two (2) grave spaces or more is made, the owner is allowed to place one shrub at each end of a double marker only: 
1.  Shrubbery is also permitted on each end of a family monument; and 
2.  Shrubbery may also be placed between two (2) single markers on a double grave lot. 
D.  All new shrub plantings must be approved by the superintendent. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-397. - Grading of graves. 
A.  The grading of grave spaces, lots and grounds, or improvements shall be performed by cemetery personnel and any improvements made in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be removed and the expense of such removal shall be charged to the owner or heirs of the lot or grave. 
B.  The grade of lots is fixed at the time of the preparation of the ground for sale and no change in the established grade will be allowed. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
Sec. 11-398. - Damage. 
A.  The superintendent and his staff will make every effort to prevent loss or damage to any decorations within the cemetery. 
B.  They will not, however, be held responsible for those same decorations. 
(Ord. 2118, 01/18/1994)  
CHAPTER 4. - LAKES AND CREEKS  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— For state law as to authority of City relative to municipally-owned lakes, etc., see 11 O.S. §§ 33-201 to 33-205. See also, 63 O.S. § 823. 
 
Sec. 11-401. - Swimming, wading, in certain waters prohibited; provision. 
Swimming, wading and bathing is hereby prohibited in any of the waters composing the water supply of the City, more definitely described as follows, to-wit: 
The Country Club Lake and Euchee Creek from such lake to Rock Creek and the tributaries of Euchee Creek, Lake Sahoma, Pretty Water Lake, Pretty Water Stream, and Rock Creek and their tributaries from such lake to the dam on Rock Creek below the City golf course; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit persons wearing watertight wading boots or watertight clothing from wading in such waters not exceeding the height of such boots or clothing; and provided further that nothing herein shall prohibit tube floaters wearing watertight clothing from fishing in Pretty Water Lake. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-1; Ord. 684; Ord. 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-402. - Public use hours of Lake Sahoma and Pretty Water Lake. 
A.  It is hereby established and declared that the City-owned property known as Lake Sahoma is hereby declared open to the public from 6:00 a.m. each day until 10:00 p.m. in the evening. Such property shall be closed from 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. the following morning, at which time it shall reopen. During the established trout season, Pretty Water Lake is hereby declared open to the public from sunrise to sunset only. During the established catfish/panfish season, Pretty Water Lake is hereby declared open to the public from sunrise to 10:00 p.m. only. 
B.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to enter, be on or remain on Lake Sahoma or the Pretty Water Lake property during the time that such property is closed, with the following exceptions: 
1.  City employees engaged in the scope of their employment; or 
2.  Persons holding valid general fishing licenses for Lake Sahoma from the City; provided, that such persons are engaged in fishing; provided, further, that such persons do not disturb others or cause any disturbance in the area; 
3.  Campers holding a valid overnight camping permit and camping in City approved and designated areas on Lake Sahoma. No person shall camp within a park area unless such person possesses a current and valid camping permit which shall be issued by the City on a per day basis after payment of the fee reflected by the Master Fee Schedule. Permanent camping facilities, the digging or leveling of any ground and the use of glass containers in any park or lake area are prohibited. Authorized camping is limited to tents and recreational vehicles only with no more than two (2) tents per tent campsite and one (1) recreational vehicle per recreational vehicle campsite. 
C.  Any unauthorized person found on such property during hours the property is closed or any person authorized to be on such property but who causes, creates, or participates in a disturbance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-1.1.; Ord. 1787; Ord. 1822; Ord 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Secs. 11-403, 11-404. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B. - BOATS AND BOATING 
 
Sec. 11-405. - Gasoline motor powered boats prohibited upon certain lakes, creeks. 
The use and operation of boats powered or driven by gasoline motors, or which have a gasoline powered motor attached, upon Pretty Water Lake or any of the lakes, creeks, and laterals composing the water supply of the City, except Lake Sahoma, is hereby prohibited; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of boats powered or driven by electric motors. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-2; Ord. 903, 08/19/1957; Ord. 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-406. - Deleted by Ord. 2402.  
Sec. 11-407. - Rules and regulations for use of motor driven boats upon Lake Sahoma. 
The following rules and regulations covering the use of motor driven boats upon Lake Sahoma and Pretty Water Lake are hereby and put into effect: 
A.  Boats shall not be operated in a reckless or imprudent manner, or in such a manner as to endanger the person or property of others; 
B.  Rowboats shall at all times have the right-of-way over motor-driven boats, and such motor driven boats shall keep a safe distance from rowboats on such lake; 
C.  Motor driven boats shall at all times remain a safe distance from each other; 
D.  Boats shall not be operated at a speed exceeding twelve (12) miles per hour on the main body of the lake. Boats shall not be operated at a speed exceeding four (4) miles per hour on the west end of such lake, or fingers of the lake. 
E.  Boats in an unsafe condition shall not be permitted to operate upon such lake. Each boat upon such lake shall be equipped with not less than one (1) life preserver of an approved type for each occupant; 
F.  Persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor shall not be permitted upon such lake. It is also forbidden for a person to have intoxicating liquor in his possession while upon such lake; 
G.  Racing of motor-driven boats upon such lake is prohibited unless special permission therefor is given by the City Council of the City; 
H.  Every boat upon such Lake Sahoma after dark or during the nighttime shall carry a light which shall be so placed as to be easily visible to occupants of other boats; and 
I.  Any person wilfully violating any of these rules and regulations, or operating or proposing to operate boats which do not meet the above requirements, shall not be permitted upon Lake Sahoma. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-4; Ord. 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-408. - Boat permit required. 
Every person, other than one possessing a current City general, trout, or catfish/panfish fishing license, and who is operating a vessel on any City lake is required to first obtain a City boat permit from the City Clerk or his duly authorized representative and pay the required fee for same as reflected by the Master Fee Schedule. Annual boat permits will expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. Daily permits will expire at sunrise the day following issuance. 
(Ord. 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-409. - Enforcement of article. 
The officer designated by Section 11-435, or any special officer appointed by the City Manager, or any police officer of the City shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article, and to make arrests for violations hereof. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-5; Ord. No. 903; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
ARTICLE C. - HUNTING DUCKS, GEESE, UPON LAKE SAHOMA, LAKE SAPULPA, AND PRETTY WATER LAKE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— For state law as to game and fish generally, see 29 O.S. § 101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-410. - Prohibited and permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt ducks or geese or migratory wildfowl upon City property, with the exception of hunting upon Lake Sahoma, without first having obtained a permit to hunt from the City. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt with ammunition that is toxic or not steel. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-6; Ord. 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-411. - issuance, generally; duplicate to be retained by City Clerk. 
Permits required by Section 11-410 shall be issued by the City Clerk or his duly authorized representative and a duplicate thereof shall be kept as a record by the City Clerk. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-7; Ord. 834; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-412. - Prerequisites to issuance, generally. 
The applicant for a permit as required by Section 11-410 shall, before obtaining the same, exhibit a license to hunt from the State for the current year issued to such applicant and shall have complied with all applicable state and federal regulations. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-8; Ord. No. 834; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-413. - Waiver and release of liability to be signed by applicant. 
Every applicant for a hunting permit as required by this article shall, before receiving the same, execute a waiver and release of any liability to the City for damages to his person or property received while hunting upon Lake Sahoma or property of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-9; Ord. 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-414. - Classification; period of validity. 
Hunting permits as required by Section 11-410 shall be yearly, which shall cover the current calendar year; provided, that such permits shall be valid only during the open season for hunting provided by state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-10; Ord. 834; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-415. - Fees, generally. 
The fee charged for the permit as required by Section 11-414 shall be as set by the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-11; Ord. 834; Ord. 1798, 09/20/1982; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-416. - Disposition. 
All fees collected from the sale of hunting permits required by this article shall be placed in a fund separate from all other funds of the City, to be designated the "Hunting and Fishing Fund" and the monies from such fund shall be used only for the improvement of hunting and/or fishing conditions upon the lakes enumerated in Section 11-410 or in payment of a patrolman to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-12; Ord. 834; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-417. - Transferability; to be carried by permittee. 
Hunting permits as required by Section 11-410 shall be nontransferable and shall be carried upon the person while hunting. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-13; Ord. 834; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-418. - Provisions applicable to Lake Sahoma, duck blinds. 
The City Manager or his duly authorized designee shall cause to be designated and numbered the locations for duck blinds upon Lake Sahoma. Such locations shall be assigned at the Annual Duck Blind Drawing to holders of yearly City Hunting permits under rules and regulations adopted by the Parks and Recreation Department of the City. In addition, the following rules and regulations apply to any duck blinds: 
A.  No blind may be constructed within two hundred (200) yards of an existing blind location and no fishing or hunting shall be permitted within two hundred (200) yards of an occupied duck blind. Location of any blinds is within the discretion of the City. All duck blinds shall be constructed large enough to accommodate at least three (3) hunters and with a length or breadth of six (6) feet facing the lake. Blinds shall be solidly constructed of boards of not less than one (1) inch in thickness and shall be boarded up at least three (3) feet from the bottom or floor thereof. Construction of these blinds shall be entirely completed at least three (3) days prior to the opening of Teal Season or the blind shall be given to the first person making application for; 
B.  A blind location may be assigned to from one (1) to three (3) persons and the persons to whom assigned are to be jointly and severally responsible for the construction of such blind; 
C.  Hunting from boats is allowed to the extent said boat is directly in front of an approved and designated blind location. When not in use, all boats left by the owners beside the duck blinds shall be securely docked; 
D.  At least one (1) of the blind holders shall be at the Lake Sahoma concession stand one (1) hour before legal shooting time in order to claim his blind for that day. Legal shooting times are per the Oklahoma Department of Wildlife Conservation hunting regulations. If the blind is not claimed by such time it shall be given by the lake custodian to the first person making request there for such day, and that person shall have full hunting privileges therein. The holder of the duck blind assignment may not assign his rights thereto to any other person. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-14; Ord. 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-419. - Registration and record of hunters. 
Persons hunting upon Lake Sahoma shall register for each day's hunt with the lake custodian who shall keep a permanent record of such registrations. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-15; Ord. 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-420. - Use of certain firearms prohibited. 
The shooting of rifles or pistols of any caliber and of shotguns loaded with shot larger than size No. 4 is hereby prohibited upon the lakes mentioned in Section 11-410. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-16; Ord. 834; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-421. - Violations and penalties. 
A holder of a duck blind assignment under this article failing to comply with the provisions of Section 11-418 shall forfeit his right to such location for the current year. Any person violating any of the other provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Secs. 11-422—11-424. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE D. - FISHING 
 
Sec. 11-425. - Applicability of article. 
The provisions of this article shall be effective upon all the creeks, lakes, and laterals composing the water supply of the City, and upon Pretty Water Lake and Rock Creek from Lake Sahoma to the south boundary of the municipal park of the City. 
(Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-426. - Permit required. 
Except as provided in Section 11-428, it shall be unlawful for any person to fish in or upon any of the waters designated by Section 11-425 without obtaining and having in possession a fishing permit from the City. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to fish upon Pretty Water Lake without first obtaining and having in possession a Trout Fishing or Catfish/Panfish Fishing Permit from the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-19; Ord. 765; Ord. 777; Ord. 1004; Ord. 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-427. - Issuance generally. 
The permits required by Section 11-426 shall be issued by the City Clerk or by his duly authorized agent for such purpose. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-20; Ord. 765, Sec. 2; Ord. 777, Sec. 1; Ord. 1004, Sec. 1)  
Sec. 11-428. - Classification; fees; persons under seventeen years of age or age sixty-five or older. 
A.  Fishing permits as required by this article shall be of the following eight (8) kinds: 
1.  A yearly general permit, which shall entitle the holder to fish for the period of one (1) year from the date of issuance (except on Pretty Water Lake); 
Yearly general fishing permit: Ten dollars ($10.00) plus tax per year. Ages seventeen (17) to sixty-four (64). 
2.  A daily general permit, which shall entitle the holder to fish until sunrise following the day of issuance thereof (except on Pretty Water Lake); 
Daily general fishing permit: Two dollars ($2.00) plus tax daily. Ages seventeen (17) to sixty-four (64). 
3.  Trout season adult fishing permit, which shall entitle the holder to fish in or upon Pretty Water Lake during the period of November 1 through March 31, or other period designated by the City as trout season. 
Trout season adult fishing permit: 
Fifteen dollars ($15.00) plus tax for regular season permit. Ages seventeen (17) to sixty-four (64); 
Ten dollar ($10.00) plus tax for special season permit available to persons nine (9) to sixteen (16) years of age; sixty-five (65) years or older; or with a disability or receiving SSI benefits; 
Children eight (8) years and younger free. 
4.  Trout daily fishing permit, which shall entitle the holder to fish in or upon Pretty Water Lake during the period of November 1 through March 31, or other period designated by the City as trout season. 
Five dollars ($5.00) plus tax daily permit (valid on day purchased only). Ages nine (9) and older. 
5.  Family trout fishing permit, which shall entitle the holder to fish in or upon Pretty Water Lake during the period of November 1 through March 31, or other period designated by the City as trout season. 
Family season permit. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus tax. 
Note: Family household members must have same address on ID and/or State fishing license. Must be purchased at the Lake Sahoma Bait and Concessions Store only. 
6.  Catfish season adult fishing permit, which shall entitle the holder to fish in or upon Pretty Water Lake during the period of April 15 through October 15, or other period designated by the City as catfish season. 
Catfish season adult fishing permit: Fifteen dollars ($15.00) plus tax for regular season permit. Ages seventeen (17) to sixty-four (64). 
Ten dollars ($10.00) plus tax for special season permit available to persons nine (9) to sixteen (16) years of age; sixty-five (65) years or older; or with a disability or receiving SSI benefits. 
7.  Catfish daily fishing permit, which shall entitle the holder to fish in or upon Pretty Water Lake during the period of April 15 through October 15, or other period designated by the City as catfish season. 
Five dollars ($5.00) plus tax daily permit (valid on day purchased only). Ages nine (9) and older. 
8.  Family catfish fishing permit, which shall entitle the holder to fish in or upon Pretty Water Lake during the period of April 15 through October 15, or other period designated by the City as catfish season. 
Family of four (4) season permit. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus tax. 
Note: Family household members must have same address on ID and/or State fishing license. Must be purchased at the Lake Sahoma Bait and Concessions Store only. 
Children eight (8) years and younger—Free. 
General, trout, and catfish fishing permits shall be sold for such sums as are set by the Master Fee Schedule. General fishing permits to fish shall not be required of persons under the age of seventeen (17) years; and provided, further, that no fee shall be charged persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older or from a person who has a disability as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act, or who receives SSI income as their major source of income. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-21; Ord. 765; Ord. 777; Ord. 1004; Ord. 1798; Ord. 1823; Ord. 2225; Ord. 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-429. - State license prerequisite to issuance. 
Before the City Clerk, or his duly authorized agent, shall issue a permit to fish to any person, as required by this article, such person shall exhibit a current license to fish issued to such applicant by the state. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-22; Ord. 765; Ord. 777; Ord. 1004; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-430. - Printing; record. 
The City Clerk shall cause consecutively numbered general, trout, and catfish fishing permits to be printed, and shall keep a record in which the number of the permit, the name of the person to whom issued, the date of issuance and the day or year for which the permit is issued is entered in writing, and such record shall be open to inspection to any resident of the City or any game warden of the State. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-23; Ord. 7652; Ord. 777; Ord. 1004; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-431. - Disposition of funds received under article. 
All monies received by the City Clerk from the sale of fishing permits required by this article shall be kept in a separate fund and shall not be used for any purpose other than for the protection and propagation of fish and the maintenance and improvement of such waters for fishing, except that fifty cents ($0.50) from each permit sold may be remitted to or retained by any outside vendor selling such City fishing and/or trout permits. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-24; Ord. 2369, 10/01/2001; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-432. - Game fish regulations generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, catch, or kill any fish commonly designated as game fish from the waters regulated by this article by any means other than by hook and line, flies, plugs, or other similar artificial lures. 
Fishing by trotlines, juglines, throwlines, limblines, yo-yos, seines, and throw nets in all areas of Lake Sahoma and Pretty Water Lake is hereby prohibited. It is also unlawful for any person to seine or use a throw net to catch or kill any fish, minnows, shad, or other aquatic animals or to use a seine or throw net for any purpose within any body of water regulated by this chapter, or to fish for commercial purposes upon any such body of water. 
As used herein the following terms have the ascribed meaning: A trotline is an unattended line placed in the water with hooks along its length and attached at each end; a jugline is an unattended vertical line with hooks suspended from a non-metallic or non-glass device, drifting free or anchored; a throwline is an unattended line attached at one (1) end and weighted at the other with hooks along its length; a limbline is an unattended line with hooks attached to a limb, branch or other natural object; a yo-yo is an unattended line with hooks and attached to a self-activating retracting device; a seine is typically a large net with sinkers on one (1) edge and floats on the other that hangs vertically in the water and is used to enclose fish when its ends are pulled together or are drawn ashore; a throw net is a casting net typically ten (10) feet square, which may either be used from a boat or from the shoreline to catch fish, minnows, shad or other aquatic animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, catch or kill any trout or catfish from the waters regulated by this article by any means other than by single rod and reel fishing. Fishing on Pretty Water Lake and Lake Sahoma with more than two (2) rods at a time or with more than two (2) hooks on a rod/line is prohibited; except that fishing on or in the Lake Sahoma Covered Fishing Dock with more than one (1) rod at a time or with more than two (2) hooks on a rod/line is prohibited. The Pretty Water Lake Catch and Release Rules in effect during the trout and catfish seasons are allowed only if the fish is unharmed and immediately released back into the water. If a fish is injured in any way or put on a stringer or in a basket, it may not be released. A five (5) fish limit per person per day is hereby imposed during the established trout and catfish fishing season. 
Trout fishing is prohibited upon Pretty Water Lake between sunset and sunrise each day. Catfish/panfish fishing is prohibited upon Pretty Water Lake from 10:00 p.m. until sunrise each day. 
(Ord 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-433. - Size and catch of certain fish restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take and keep from any of the waters designated by Section 11-425 fish of the species known as bass, or any variety thereof, that is smaller than fourteen (14) inches in length. It shall also be unlawful for any person to take, catch, or keep in possession more than six (6). It shall be unlawful for any person to catch or keep in his possession more than five (5) channel catfish from Pretty Water Lake in any one (1) day. It shall also be unlawful for any person to catch or keep in his possession more than five (5) Trout from Pretty Water Lake in any one (1) day. State of Oklahoma fishing rules and regulations shall govern any and all other rules and regulations not specifically covered herein. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-26; Ord. 765; Ord. 2402, 03/17/2003; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-434. - Closing waters regulated by article. 
The City Council of the City shall have the authority to close any or all of the waters, specified by this article to fishing by resolution duly adopted by such Council, and may close the same for any period deemed necessary. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-27; Ord. 765; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-435. - Enforcement of article. 
The City Manager may appoint one (1) or more special officers to enforce the regulations of this article, and such officers shall have authority to make arrests for violations of the provisions hereof. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-28; Ord. 765; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
ARTICLE E. - CAMPING AT LAKE SAHOMA 
 
Sec. 11-436. - Applicability of article. 
The provisions of this article shall be effective upon the areas designated for such activities within the Lake Sahoma Municipal Park of the City of Sapulpa. 
(Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-437. - Permit required. 
Except as provided in Section 11-439, it shall be unlawful for any person to camp in or upon any of the City's municipal park areas except for the areas designated at Lake Sahoma. 
It shall be unlawful for camping at Lake Sahoma Park without obtaining and having in possession a camping permit from the City. 
Camping fees are non-refundable. 
(Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-438. - Issuance generally. 
The camping permits required by Section 11-437 shall be issued by the City's Lake Sahoma caretaker or by his/her duly authorized agent for such purpose. All camping fees must be paid in advance. No Exceptions. 
From May 1 through September 30 annually, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall ensure that no more than five (5) campsites of the seven (7) total R/V sites available are reserved and utilized for long term R/V camping. 
All daily campsite fees are due each day no later than 9:00 a.m. 
A night drop box is available for after hours payment at the City of Sapulpa Lake Sahoma Concession building. Campers must complete the provided City camping permit form in its entirety and place the form and the camping fee in the envelope provided and place them in the night drop box slot. 
(Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-439. - Classification; fees; short and long term; persons sixty-five years of age or older; rules. 
Tent and recreational vehicle (R/V) camping is allowed at Sahoma Lake within the areas designated by City for such activities. 
A.  Tent camping. 
1.  The maximum tent camping duration is fourteen (14) days. 
2.  A maximum of two (2) tents allowed per campsite. 
B.  Recreational vehicles (R/V) camping is allowed at Sahoma Lake within the areas designated by City for such activities. Short term (daily) and long term (one (1) to three (3) months) are allowed. 
1.  Long term R/V camping is from one (1) to three (3) months in length. The maximum R/V camping period is three (3) months. Renewal of three (3) month term is allowable upon approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation and/or his duly authorized representative (Lake Caretaker). 
2.  All camping renewals are due on the expiration date. No Exceptions. 
3.  No skirting or decks allowed on R/V's in campsite. 
C.  All daily campsite fees are due each day no later than 9:00 a.m. 
1.  Night drop is available for after hours payment at the City of Sapulpa Sahoma Lake Concession building. 
2.  Complete the form provided in its entirety and place form and fee in envelope provided and place in night drop slot. 
D.  Rules. Please refer to Sapulpa City Code for further definitions, limitation of activities, rules and regulations, prohibited acts, acts requiring permits, fees, penalties for violations, and curfews governing the use of City of Sapulpa parks and recreation facilities. 
1.  Camping area needs to be kept clean and orderly. 
2.  All trash is to be put in trash bags and placed in trash dumpster provided by the City. 
3.  Dogs and cats only. Dogs must be kept on a leash. You are required to pick up and properly dispose of all pet excrement. 
4.  For R/V camping only; boat and vehicle must be parked in designated parking areas only. No more than one (1) boat and two (2) vehicles allowed per R/V site. 
5.  Camp fires in fire rings only. Please make sure fires are out before leaving unattended. No fires allowed during burn ban. 
6.  No ATV's allowed. 
7.  No trespassing allowed on private property abutting City of Sapulpa Lake Parks. 
8.  No swimming. 
9.  Campers are required to comply fully with the City of Sapulpa Code, and all rules and regulations, ordinances, etc. whether posted or not. Failure to fully comply may result in removal from the park. 
10.  Fishing Permits are required at Sahoma Lake for individuals ages sixteen (16) to sixty-four (64). 
(Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-440. - Record. 
The Sapulpa Parks and Recreation Department's Lake Caretaker shall issue permits and shall keep a record in which the camping permit, the name of the person to whom issued, the date of issuance and the day, month, or months for which the permit is issued is entered in writing, and such record shall be open to inspection to any resident of the City or any game warden of the State. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-23: Ord. 765; Ord. 777; Ord. 1004; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
Sec. 11-441. - Enforcement of article. 
The City Manager may appoint one (1) or more special officers to enforce the regulations of this article, and such officers shall have authority to evict campers for violations of the provisions hereof. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 15-28; Ord. 765; Ord. 2689, 08/19/2013)  
CHAPTER 5. - GOLF COURSE  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 11-501. - Composition. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the municipal golf course shall include all that portion of the municipal park of the City used as, or in connection with, the golf course, but shall exclude the following portions of the municipal park: 
A.  The roadside park adjacent to U.S. Highway 66. 
B.  The softball and baseball fields. 
(Prior Code 4-23; Ord. 1131; Ord 2223, 08/04/1997)  
Sec. 11-502. - When course closed to public. 
The municipal golf course of the City shall be closed to the public between the hours of 8:30 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of each day of the year except that on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and New Year's Day, the course shall be closed to the public for the entire day, and it shall be unlawful for any person, except officers and employees of the City, to go upon such golf course or the greens, fairways, and other portions thereof between such hours or on such days. 
(Prior Code 4-24; Ord. 2425, 12/15/2003)  
Sec. 11-503. - Destroying, mutilating, etc., greens, fairways, etc.; driving, etc., motor vehicle thereon. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully destroy, mutilate, or damage the greens, fairways or other parts of, or appurtenances to, the municipal golf course, and it shall further be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the City, to drive or operate a motor vehicle on the greens and fairways thereof; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to motorized golf carts operated by persons engaged in playing golf on such course. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-25; Ord. 1131)  
Sec. 11-504. - To be operated as separate utility. 
The municipal golf course of the City shall be operated as a separate utility outside of the General Fund of the City and the revenue therefrom shall be carried in a separate cash fund to be designated as the "Municipal Golf Course Cash Fund," to be used for the maintenance and operation of the golf department and for such other purposes as may be permitted by law. 
(Prior Code 4-26; Ord. 1183)  
Sec. 11-505. - Green fees. 
A.  Persons using the municipal golf course shall pay greens fees for the use of the golf course as set forth in this section. 
B.  Greens fees for Monday through Friday per eighteen (18) holes played and for Saturdays, Sundays and holidays per eighteen (18) holes played shall be in such sums as are set by the Master Fee Schedule. Additionally, a period to be known as "Twilight Play" is hereby established for periods past 5:00 p.m. on all days the golf course is open, during which time a green fee as set by the Master Fee Schedule for nine (9) holes of golf is hereby established. 
C.  Persons wishing to do so may purchase annual permits which will allow them use of the golf course without the purchase of greens fees as set forth in Subsection B above. Charges for annual permits shall be as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
1.  Individual permit; 
2.  Persons aged sixty-five (65) or over; and 
3.  Student through twelfth (12th) grade. 
D.  All persons shall be required to sign in prior to tee off and shall be required to obtain a "fee permit" for each eighteen (18) holes played. The fee permit must be carried while on the course. The fee permit per eighteen (18) holes played shall be set by the City Council by motion or resolution. Such charge shall not apply to those persons holding unexpired annual permits as of March 21, 1988. Such persons shall be subject to all fee requirements however, upon the expiration of their annual permit. The normal fee permit charge provided for herein shall be reduced to a rate as set by the City Council for twilight play and additionally for any person wishing to play only nine (9) holes or less. 
E.  All annual permits shall expire on the anniversary date of purchase. 
F.  No "lifetime passes" shall be issued to persons except upon resolution of the City Council. 
G.  No "free passes" shall be issued to present or former members of the City Council. 
H.  Establishment of Golf Course Improvement Fund. 
In order to compensate the City for costs associated with capital improvements to be made at the golf course and to raise the funds necessary for such improvements, the sum of two dollars ($2.00) from each weekday, and/or weekend green fee charged and collected by the City at the regular or Twilight rate, and the sum of two dollars ($2.00) from each golf cart fee charged and collected by the City shall be earmarked and received in escrow by the City in a separate fund for such purpose and the interest earnings if any will be added to the fund. Provided further that the sum of two dollars ($2.00) from each weekday and/or weekend green fee charged and collected by the City at the senior rate, and the sum of two dollars ($2.00) from each green fee charged and collected by the City at the junior, youth and/or City employee rates, shall be earmarked and received in escrow by the City in a separate fund for such purpose and the interest earnings if any will be added to the fund. This fund may then only be used by the City to pay all or any portion of the capital construction improvement costs at the golf course, including design and engineering costs. The City will deposit all such earmarked funds into a separate escrow account which may be used only for capital improvements to the City Golf Course. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-26.1; Ord. 1813; Ord. 1915; Ord. 1967; Ord. 1984; Ord. 2105; Ord. 2107; Ord. 2253; Ord. 2329, 10/23/2000)  
Secs. 11-506—11-510. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B. - GOLF COURSE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 11-511. - Creation. 
A Golf Course Commission is hereby created to advise the City Council on golf course related matters. 
(Ord. 2102, 12/21/92)  
Sec. 11-512. - Size, term. 
The Golf Course Commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor, and approved by the council, as follows: 
A.  Two (2) for five (5) years; 
B.  Two (2) for four (4) years; 
C.  One (1) for three (3) years; 
D.  One (1) for two (2) years; and 
E.  One (1) for one (1) year. 
Thereafter, each member shall serve for five (5) years or until a successor has been appointed, but in no event shall a member serve more than three (3) consecutive terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term of any member in the manner set forth for appointments to a full term. 
(Ord. 2102, 12/21/1992; Ord. 2382, 08/05/2002)  
Sec. 11-513. - Composition, qualifications. 
The commission shall be composed of at least three (3) persons with a knowledge for the game of golf. 
(Ord. 2102, 12/21/1992)  
Sec. 11-514. - Quorum, procedure. 
In order to conduct official business, a quorum consisting of five (5) members must be present. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the commission may determine. The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice-chair, or acting chair may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings, deliberations, and voting of the commission shall be open to the public. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each individual member, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. Records of the Commission are public records which shall be kept and immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk within City Hall. 
(Ord. 2102, 12/21/1992)  
Sec. 11-515. - Votes. 
All decisions made by the commission will be by majority vote of the members present. 
(Ord. 2102, 12/21/1992)  
Part 12 - PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT  
CHAPTER 1. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS  
ARTICLE A. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 12-101. - Economic Development Department created. 
A City of Sapulpa Economic Development Department is hereby created for the purpose of attracting and recruiting business and industry to Sapulpa as well as retaining and assisting in the expansion of existing commercial and industrial enterprises. The Economic Development Director shall be appointed by the City Manager and serve under his/her supervision and control as provided by the Sapulpa City Charter, City of Sapulpa personnel policies and procedures and State law. 
The duties of the Economic Development Director include, but are not limited to, the development and dissemination of marketing and demographic materials, call visits, preparation and packaging of incentive programs, application and use of local, state, and federal grants and loans, serving as a facilitator and advocate of business with City departments while assuring compliance with public safety codes, developing and implementing economic development strategies, and working with community, metropolitan, state, and national governmental agencies and individuals to attract new business and assist with the expansion of existing commercial and industrial enterprises in Sapulpa and the surrounding area.  
Secs. 12-102—12-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 12-110. - Economic Development Advisory Board. 
The Sapulpa Economic Development Advisory Board is hereby created for the purpose of making recommendations to the Mayor, City Council, City Manager and Economic Development Director regarding the economic development affairs of the City. The board is charged with also providing advice and oversight to the City Manager and Economic Development Director regarding business prospects and the implementation of economic development incentives and strategies.  
Sec. 12-111. - Board qualifications. 
Seven (7) of the voting members shall be residents of the City of Sapulpa or Creek County. The remaining voting members shall reside or have a business interest in the City of Sapulpa or Creek County.  
Sec. 12-112. - Board composition. 
The Sapulpa Economic Development Advisory Board shall be composed of the following nine (9) voting members and five (5) ex-officio members, with the Mayor or his designee acting as chair-person of the committee: 
The Mayor and three (3) other City Councilors currently or thereafter appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council to the City of Sapulpa's Community and Economic Development Committee; 
Two (2) representatives of local banks appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council; 
One (1) Sapulpa Area Chamber of Commerce Board Member appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council; 
One (1) UpTown Sapulpa Action, Inc. a/k/a Main Street Board Member appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council; 
One (1) board member of the Creek County Industrial Authority appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council; and 
Five (5) ex-officio members consisting of the City Manager, Economic Development Director, Executive Director of the Chamber of Commerce, Executive Director of Sapulpa Main Street, and one member at large appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.  
Sec. 12-113. - Terms of office. 
The term of the City Councilors on the City's Community and Economic Development Committee shall coincide with their respective term on the City Council. The two (2) local bank representatives shall serve four (4) year terms except that the respective terms of the first bank appointee shall serve a term of two (2) years and the second bank appointee shall serve a term of four (4) years. The term of the Sapulpa Area Chamber of Commerce board member shall coincide with their Chamber term. The term of the Main Street Board member shall coincide with their term on the Main Street Board. The term of the ex-officio members shall coincide with their tenure of office, provided that the member at large shall serve until otherwise replaced.  
Sec. 12-114. - Meeting times. 
The regular meetings of the Sapulpa Economic Development Advisory Board shall be held at least quarterly at a regular repeating time established by the Board.  
CHAPTER 2. - ZONING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 12-201. - Zoning ordinance adopted. 
The City has adopted Ordinance No. 2017, June 5, 1989, setting forth zoning regulations of the City, and all amendments thereto, as the City's zoning regulations. Appendix H contains the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sapulpa. This zoning ordinance, and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. A copy of the zoning ordinance and amendments are on file in the office of the City Clerk.  
Sec. 12-202. - Penalty. 
Any violation of the City's zoning regulations, as set out in Section 12-201 of the Code or in ordinances of the City, is punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. Each separate day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.  
Sec. 12-203. - Miscellaneous planning and administration fees. 
There is hereby assessed and imposed certain charges, as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule for special services rendered by the urban development and zoning staff of the City to the general public for various planning and administrative services and functions rendered during the normal course of business.  
CHAPTER 3. - LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 12-301. - Purpose. 
The purposes of these landscape requirements are: 
A.  To promote the beautification of the City of Sapulpa and to enhance the quality of life; 
B.  To promote reasonable preservation and replenishment of valued trees and vegetation; 
C.  To aid in establishing an ecological balance by contributing to air purification, oxygen regeneration, ground water recharge and stormwater runoff retardation; and 
D.  To achieve a meaningful urban forest, while permitting economically feasible urban development to occur.  
Sec. 12-302. - Applicability and exemptions. 
The landscape requirements herein established shall be applicable to all land for which a building permit is sought; provided, however, that the landscape requirements shall not be applicable to the following: 
A.  Individual single-family or duplex lots where only one (1) such structure is to be constructed on the lot; or barns and similar types of structures on AG (Agriculture) zoned property; 
B.  Restoration of buildings constructed prior to the adoption date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which are damaged by fire, flood or other catastrophe; 
C.  Interior remodeling; or 
D.  Construction of a structure, other than a building, which does not increase the developed area of a lot more than thirty (30) square feet.  
Sec. 12-303. - Landscape requirements. 
A.  Frontage and perimeter requirements. 
1.  Not less than fifteen (15) percent of the street yard shall be established and maintained as landscaped area. 
2.  Within the lot, a landscaped area shall be established and maintained which is not less than seven and one-half (7.5) feet in width and which extends along the entirety of the abutting street right-of-way. For lots abutting arterial streets a landscaped area shall be established which is not less than ten (10) feet in width. 
3.  Within a lot used for office, commercial, industrial or multi-family residential purposes, off-street parking shall be separated from an abutting residential district or residential development area (as in a PUD) by a landscaped area of not less than ten (10) feet in width. 
4.  Required building setbacks shall be landscaped in accordance with street yard standards. 
5.  Street yard landscaped areas shall be included in the minimum computation. 
6.  New single-family or duplex residential additions abutting arterial streets shall provide a landscaped buffer of not less than ten (10) feet in width. Setbacks from the arterial, which are larger than ten (10) feet will be provided at each side of project entry, drive at its intersection with an arterial. 
7.  For lots abutting state highway rights-of-way, a landscaped area shall be established and maintained which is not less than fifteen (15) feet in width and which extends along the entirety of the abutting arterial. 
8.  Landscaping shall not be required in vehicular access points and shall not be allowed to obstruct site triangles. 
B.  Parking area requirements. Within surface off-street parking areas, landscaped areas shall be established and maintained as follows: 
1.  For lots two and one-half (2.5) acres or less in size, no parking space shall be located more than fifty (50) feet from a landscaped area which contains at least thirty (30) square feet having a minimum width or diameter of five (5) feet. A landscaped area must contain at least one (1) tree. 
2.  For lots greater than two and one-half (2.5) acres in size, no parking space shall be located more than seventy-five (75) feet from a landscaped area which contains at least one hundred (100) square feet having a minimum width or diameter of seven (7) feet. A landscaped area must contain at least one tree; however, all landscape areas two hundred (200) square feet or more in size shall contain at least two (2) trees. 
C.  Tree requirements. Trees, as defined herein, shall be selected from those listed in Appendix C. Additional tree requirements include the following: 
1.  Within the street yard, trees shall be preserved, planted and maintained, or replaced as follows: 
a.  One (1) tree for each one thousand (1,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of street yard. 
b.  Each existing tree in the required street yard which is at least six inches in caliper and which is removed for the development of the parking area, shall be replaced at a 2:1 ratio within the required street yard. In other words, two (2) replacement trees shall be counted as one (1) tree for purposes of compliance with street yard tree planting requirements. 
2.  One (1) tree for each ten (10) parking spaces shall be required for surface parking areas, located outside the street yard, in all zoning districts except CBD. Each required landscape area shall require at least one (1) tree. 
3.  If surface parking areas, located in the CBD zoning district and designed for twenty (20) or more spaces, have parking areas within twenty-five (25) feet of a public street right-of-way, then trees shall be preserved, planted and maintained, or replaced as follows: 
a.  One (1) tree for each thirty-five (35) lineal feet of parking area located along and parallel to the street boundary; and 
4.  Required trees shall be located within ten (10) feet of the public street right-of-way. 
5.  An existing or planted tree which is at least six (6) inches in caliper shall be considered as two (2) trees for the purpose of determining compliance, provided that there is no alteration of the soil grade under the existing tree's drip line. 
6.  Planted trees shall be planted in a pervious area not less than three (3) feet in diameter. 
7.  Minimum tree sizes at the time of planting shall be as follows: 
a.  Ornamental trees shall be not less than six (6) feet in height and one (1) inch in caliper; 
b.  Conifers and evergreen trees, such as pine, spruce, or cedar, shall be not less than five (5) feet in height; and 
c.  Canopy trees shall not be less than eight (8) feet in height and two (2) inches in caliper. 
8.  Surface parking areas designed for ten (10) or more spaces and located within twenty-five (25) feet of state highway rights-of-way trees shall have trees planted, preserved and/or replaced as follows: 
a.  One (1) tree for each fifty (50) lineal feet of parking area which is located along and parallel to the street boundary; and 
b.  Each existing tree in the required street yard which is less than six (6) inches in caliper and which is removed for the development of the parking area shall be replaced at a 3:1 ratio within the required street yard. In other words, three (3) trees shall count as one (1) tree for the purposes of compliance with street yard planting requirements. 
9.  Landscaped buffers separating new single-family or duplex residential additions from arterial streets shall be treated as follows: 
a.  A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted for each fifty (50) feet of lineal street frontage. 
b.  Tree sizes shall conform to the standards outlined in this section. 
c.  Each existing tree which is removed, or caused to be removed, by the developer of the addition during street grading or utility placement, and which is larger than six (6) inches in caliper when measured at three (3) feet above the ground, shall be replaced at a 2:1 ratio with trees sized as designated in this section. The new trees shall be located within the ten (10) foot landscaping buffer area adjacent to the arterial street or the expanded entry area setbacks. Two (2) replacement trees count as one (1) tree toward the satisfaction of the one (1) per fifty (50) linear foot requirement of Section 1702.C.8.a. 
d.  Preservation or planting of trees, larger than six (6) inches in caliper, within the required landscaped areas shall be considered as two (2) trees for the purpose of determining compliance provided that there is no alteration of the soil under the existing tree's dripline. 
D.  Miscellaneous requirements. 
1.  Artificial vegetation of any type will not satisfy the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  Required landscaping will be irrigated by one of the following methods: 
a.  An underground sprinkler system; 
b.  A drip system; or 
c.  A hose attachment within one hundred (100) feet of all landscaped areas. 
3.  All landscaped areas which are adjacent to pavement shall be protected with curbs or equivalent barriers. 
4.  Landscaping shall not obstruct traffic visibility. 
5.  Required landscaping shall be maintained in a live and healthy condition and shall be replaced as necessary to comply herewith. In addition, landscape areas will be neatly trimmed and mowed and free of weeds. 
6.  Required landscaped areas shall be maintained free of debris and litter. 
E.  Incentive credits. To encourage preservation of existing mature trees and/or planting of larger trees, each square foot of landscaped area which is permeable and within the drip line of a tree of at least six (6) inches in caliper shall constitute one and one-half (1.5) square feet of landscaped area for the purpose of meeting the fifteen (15) percent street yard landscaping requirement. The following conditions shall apply: 
1.  Overlapping drip line areas shall be counted only once. 
2.  At least one-half (½) of the drip line shall be permeable. 
3.  The original grade of the drip line shall not be changed. 
4.  The one and one-half (1.5) square foot credit shall not constitute more than twenty-five (25) percent of the landscape requirement. 
F.  Parking credits. All nonresidential development, requesting a building permit prior to the adoption date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be given one (1) acre or less in size, the following parking credit: 
The required number of off-street parking spaces shall be reduced by one (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of street yard which is required to be landscaped.  
Sec. 12-304. - Administration. 
A.  Landscape plan. An application for a building permit for uses requiring landscaping shall include a landscape plan which provides the following: 
1.  The date, scale, north arrow, project name, and name of owner. 
2.  The location of the property lines and dimensions of the tract. 
3.  The approximate center line of existing water courses; the approximate location of significant drainage features; the location and size of existing and proposed utility easements and overhead utility lines on or adjacent to the lot; and the existing and proposed sidewalks on or adjacent to the lot. 
4.  The location, size and type (trees, shrub, ground cover, or grass) of proposed landscaping and the location and size of the proposed landscaping areas. 
5.  Planting details and/or specifications. 
6.  The method of protecting damage to the existing trees which are to be retained during construction. 
7.  The proposed irrigation system, including a drawing of the nature and the location of the system. 
8.  The schedule of installation of required landscaping and appurtenances shall occur prior to the hook up of utilities. The Planning staff may grant approval for hook up prior to the completion of tree installation, based upon a specific tree planting schedule, not to exceed a temporary occupancy permit time limit. 
B.  Certification of installation. Prior to utility hook up, the owner, an architect, landscape architect, or a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oklahoma shall certify in writing to the City that the installation of the landscaping and appurtenances has been accomplished in accordance with the approved landscaping plan. 
In the event that the Urban Development staff has granted approval for hook up of utilities prior to the completion of tree planting, the owner, an architect, landscape architect, or a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oklahoma shall provide written certification that all trees have been installed in accordance with the approved plan. Such certification shall be provided prior to issuance of the occupancy permit or within the time frame approved in the specific tree planting schedule, and shall not exceed the time allowed in the temporary occupancy permit. If certification is not received within this time frame, it will be considered a violation of the zoning code and the developer will be subject to daily fines until certification has been received. 
C.  Administrative review. After receipt of the landscaping plan, the urban development staff shall: 
1.  Approve the landscaping plan as complying with the requirements of this chapter; or 
2.  Approve the landscape plan with conditions which bring it into compliance with the requirement of this chapter; or 
3.  Reject the landscape plan as failing to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Alternative compliance. If the City Planner rejects the landscape plan, the applicant may request, after payment of a fee as set by the Master Fee Schedule, that the Board of Adjustment review the plan and determine that the plan as presented implements the intent of the chapter although it does not meet the technical requirements of this chapter. However, in the case of such an appeal, public notice shall be given to the abutting property owners and a notice published in the paper.  
Sec. 12-305. - Definitions. 
The Zoning Code of the City of Sapulpa, be and the same is hereby amended by adding the following definitions: 
Caliper means the diameter of the tree trunk measured at six (6) inches above ground level for a tree trunk having a diameter of four (4) inches or less and the diameter of the tree trunk measured at twelve (12) inches above ground level for a tree trunk exceeding four (4) inches. 
Developed area means the area of a lot which, on the adoption date, is covered by a structure, off-street parking or loading areas or other areas paved with all-weather material. 
Drip line means the periphery of the area underneath a tree which would be encompassed by perpendicular lines extending from the exterior edges of the crown of the tree. 
Existing buildings means buildings completed and existing at the time of application for the building permit. 
Landscaped area means, within a lot, the unpaved area containing grass, shrubs, flowers, ground cover, trees or native plant materials and which may include decorative fixtures such as rock, pools, or planters. 
Street yard means the minimum required yard (residential) abutting a public street or the area of a lot contained between the minimum required building setback line (nonresidential) and an abutting public street. 
Tree means a woody plant and shall be one of the varieties listed in and included in Appendix C to the City Zoning Code. 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated § 12-304, the provisions have been redesignated as § 12-305 at the discretion of the editor.  
CHAPTER 4. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 12-401. - Title. 
These regulations shall hereafter be known as the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Sapulpa and referred to as "Regulations" in this text.  
Sec. 12-402. - Authority. 
The Sapulpa Metropolitan Area Planning Commission (hereafter referred to as "Planning Commission") pursuant to the powers vested through Title 19, Oklahoma Statutes, Chapter 19.a, Sections 12 and 13, as amended, does hereby exercise the power and authority to review, approve and disapprove plats for the subdivision of land within the City of Sapulpa.  
Sec. 12-403. - Purpose and intention. 
The purpose and intention of these regulations is a follows: 
A.  To provide for the physical development of the City of Sapulpa in accordance with the comprehensive plan and the major street and highway plan; 
B.  To provide for the most beneficial relationship between the development of land and buildings, and the circulation of traffic throughout the City of Sapulpa, particularly regarding, but not limited to, the following: Avoidance of congestion of streets and highways; providing for appropriate movement of traffic and pedestrians for various uses of land; and providing for the proper location of streets and of building lines; 
C.  To secure and provide for the proper arrangement of streets or other highways in relation to existing or planned streets or to the comprehensive plan or plans for the area; for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of firefighting apparatus, police and other emergency vehicles, parking lots, parks, light and air; and for the avoidance of the congestion of population; 
D.  To establish a subdivision process that is expeditious, efficient and cost effective as possible, while providing for the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare; 
E.  To ensure that proper legal descriptions, monumenting of land and adequate and accurate record of platting and land subdivision are kept in conjunction with the subdivision process; 
F.  To ensure that public facilities and utilities are available that will have sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision while providing for the orderly development of the general community; 
G.  To consider the natural beauty and topography of the City of Sapulpa and to encourage appropriate development with regard to all-natural features; and 
H.  To provide that the costs of improvements that primarily benefit the tract of land being developed be borne by the owners and developers of the tract.  
Sec. 12-404. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall apply to the subdivision of all land within the corporate limits of the City of Sapulpa, as established by law now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. These regulations shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision: 
A.  The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots, sites, parcels, units, plots, or interests for the purpose of sale, lease or development, any one (1) of which when subdivided shall contain less than ten (10) acres in area; or 
B.  The division of land previously subdivided or platted into tracts, lots, sites, parcels, units, plots, or interests of less than ten (10) acres in area; or 
C.  The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, including those for use by public or private utility companies; or 
D.  The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract of land regardless of the area involved.  
Sec. 12-405. - Conflict with public or private provisions. 
A.  Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation or statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulations, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive shall control. 
B.  Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where these regulations are more restrictive, or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of tzhese regulations shall control.  
Sec. 12-406. - Severability. 
If any part or provision of these regulations or the application thereof shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other part, section, clause, paragraph, portion or provision of these regulations.  
Sec. 12-407. - Saving provision. 
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now or pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, or modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the City, except as expressly provided in these regulations.  
Sec. 12-408. - Amendments. 
For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, the Planning Commission may, from time to time, recommend amendments to the provisions of these regulations. Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by the Planning Commission in the manner prescribed by law. The recommendations of the Planning Commission on amendments to these regulations shall be forwarded to the City Council for final approval and adoption.  
Sec. 12-409. - Conditions of approval. 
The regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions of approval to the regulations of land, is a valid exercise of the police power delegated to the City of Sapulpa by the State of Oklahoma. The subdivider has the duty to comply with said reasonable conditions laid down by the Planning Commission for design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the land so as to conform to the physical and economic development of the City of Sapulpa and to the safety and general welfare of future owners of realty in the subdivided land and the community at large.  
Sec. 12-410. - Subdivision requirement and waiver. 
For any land which has been rezoned upon application, no building permit shall be issued until that portion of the tract on which the permit is sought has been included within a subdivision plat or replat; as the case may be, submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission or City Council and filed of record in the office of the County Clerk where the property is located. The Planning Commission, upon a showing that the purposes of these regulations have already been achieved by a previously approved subdivision or would not be achieved by a plat or replat, may waive the requirements for a plat or replat.  
Sec. 12-411. - Modifications. 
A.  General. The design requirements of these regulations may be modified by the Planning Commission where unusual topographic or other exceptional conditions require such modification, to the extent that the Planning Commission determines that the purpose of these regulations may be served by an alternative proposal. The Planning Commission shall not approve any modification to any procedural requirement of these regulations or other such modification where the granting of such will be detrimental to the public safety, health, general welfare, or be injurious to other public or private property or improvements, or where the granting of such modification will diminish in any way the intent of any governing zoning code or the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Conditions. In approving modifications, the Planning Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the intent, objectives, standards and requirements of these regulations. 
C.  Procedure. A request for such modification shall be submitted to the Planning Commission in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is submitted for consideration of the Planning Commission. The request for modification shall state fully the grounds for the application and all facts relied upon by the subdivider. 
D.  Approval. Such modification may be granted only by the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the Planning Commission subject to the approval of the plat and acceptance of the dedications shown thereon by the City Council.  
Sec. 12-412. - Tense and definition. 
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in Section 12-456 herein. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense, words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular, except where the construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The words "should" and "may" are directory and not mandatory. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.  
Sec. 12-413. - Penalty. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any of the provisions of these regulations, or shall fail to comply therewith, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be liable for a fine as provide herein. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the remedies provided herein, the City may institute any other action or proceeding to enforce these regulations. 
B.  No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change, improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land which does not comply with all of the provisions of these regulations. 
C.  Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land within the area, transfers, or sells or agrees to sell, or negotiates to sell any land by reference to or exhibition thereof, or by other use of a plat of a subdivision or a contract for deed or other instrument before such plat or deed or instrument has been approved by the City of Sapulpa and filed of record in the office of the County Clerk, or whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of ground, transfers, or sells or agrees to sell, or negotiates to sell any tract of land of less than ten (10) acres where such tract was not shown of record in the office of the County Clerk as a separately owned at the effective date of the regulations here provided and not located within a subdivision approved according to law and filed of record in the office of the County Clerk, or if so located, not comprising at least one (1) entire lot as recorded, without first obtaining the written approval of the Planning Commission, including approval by the City Council, as applicable, by its endorsement on the instrument of transfer, or contract of sale or other agreement to transfer, shall be subject to the penalties provided below and such transaction shall be unlawful and shall not be recorded by the County Clerk. 
D.  A violation of these regulations shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00) including costs for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.  
Sec. 12-414. - Technical advisory committee. 
A.  General. There is hereby created a subdivision Technical Advisory Committee (TAC). The TAC shall be responsible for coordinating review and comments, and making reports and recommendations to the Planning Commission on all matters pertaining to the subdivision of land. 
B.  Committee membership. The TAC shall be composed of representatives from departments, agencies and offices involved in the subdivision process including, but not limited to the following: City Planning, City Engineering, City Water and Sewer Department, Police Department, Sheriff's Department, Fire department, Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality, School Board, City Park Department, Federal Housing Administration, utility companies, and the U.S. Soil Conservation Services. The Sapulpa City Planner, or the City Planner's designee shall serve as the Chairperson of the TAC and be responsible for calling meetings, and preparation of the minutes and record of all proceedings. 
C.  Meeting dates. The TAC shall schedule meetings prior to the Planning Commission meeting and shall otherwise meet upon the call of the Chairperson. Schedules of all TAC regular meeting dates and cutoff dates for filing plats to be reviewed by the TAC will be posted and available in the Planning Commission offices. 
D.  Recommendations. It shall be the responsibility of the TAC to meet together on the call of the Chairperson, to review and study all preliminary plats, final plats and lot splits and related matters and to submit its findings and recommendations to the Planning Commission.  
Sec. 12-415. - Computer aided drafting of plat and record drawings. 
Subdividers with the capability of generating computer layouts and system drawings for plats, water, sanitary sewer, paving, drainage, grading, etc. shall provide the Public Works Department with computer files of such drawings.  
Sec. 12-416. - Filing and permit fee. 
There shall be paid a filing fee for each sketch plat and final plat as reflected in the Master Fee Schedule. 
There shall also be an engineering review fee for each subdivision preliminary plat and/or PUD and a fee for non-floodplain commercial/industrial developments and a fee for commercial/industrial additions less than 1CFS with no detention design/build as reflected in the Master Fee Schedule. 
All such fees for subdivisions located within the corporate area of the City shall be paid to the City Clerk. 
Where only a portion of an approved preliminary plat is submitted for final approval, a final plat of the remaining area may be submitted at any time within two (2) years of the preliminary approval without payment of an additional filing fee by the subdivider, providing the final plat for the additional area conforms substantially with the approved preliminary plat. 
Any developer and/or owner is hereby required to apply for and obtain from the Urban Development Department of the City a Site Preparation Permit, Subdivision Road Grading Permit and Erosion Control Permit, in addition to any other required building or zoning permits, for any development under the jurisdiction of these regulations. There is hereby imposed a fee for each such permit as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 12-417. - Exemptions. 
Plats containing four (4) lots or fewer may be exempted from the provisions of all or part of procedural provisions of these regulations upon written approval of the Planning Commission, but such exemption shall not change or diminish the requirements relating to design or to improvements or to other provisions of these regulations.  
Sec. 12-418. - Application—Sketch plat. 
A.  Discussion of requirement for a sketch plat. Before preparing the preliminary plat for a subdivision, the subdivider is encouraged to and at the option of the Planning Commission may be required to prepare a sketch plat after a conference with the Planning Commission Staff. If a sketch plat is required, the subdivider will be advised of the following: 
1.  The procedure for approval of a subdivision plat; 
2.  Relevant provisions of the comprehensive plan, zoning code, these regulations and other development related regulations; 
3.  Requirements as to the general layout of streets and for reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection and similar matters; 
4.  Availability of existing services and utilities; and 
5.  Where applicable, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those officials and departments which must eventually approve those aspects of the subdivision plat coming within their jurisdiction. 
B.  Procedures. The following procedures must be followed in the processing of a sketch plat: 
1.  A minimum of ten (10) copies of the sketch plat shall be submitted to the Planning Commission Staff at least three (3) weeks prior to the meeting of the Technical Advisory Committee; 
2.  The Planning Commission Staff shall transmit the sketch plat for review to the applicable officials or agencies and notify any City, town or county within three (3) miles of the proposed subdivision; 
3.  The Technical Advisory Committee shall review the sketch plat and make a report and recommendation to the Planning Commission at the next regular meeting; 
4.  At the subdivider's request, the Planning Commission will review the sketch plat and the report and recommendation of the Planning Staff and Technical Advisory Committee; 
5.  After the Planning Commission meeting at which the sketch plat is first reviewed, the Planning Commission, if necessary, may schedule a field trip to the site of the proposed subdivision, accompanied by the Planning Staff, and the subdivider or subdivider's representative; 
6.  After review and discussion of the sketch plat, the recommendations and reports of the Planning Commission Staff and Technical Advisory Committee, the Planning Commission shall advise the subdivider of any specific changes or additions that will be required in the layout and character and extent of required improvements and reservations that will be required as a prerequisite to approval of the subdivision plat. The Planning Commission may also require additional changes to the proposed subdivision in later stages of the review and approval process as a result of further study and review of the subdivision plat; and 
7.  The Planning Commission shall approve with conditions or disapprove the sketch plat at its next regularly scheduled meeting.  
Sec. 12-419. - Preliminary plat and preliminary construction plans. 
A.  Application procedures and requirements. The subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat for approval. A minimum of twenty-five (25) copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted for review and approval and shall: 
1.  Be accompanied by an application, a certified list prepared by a licensed abstractor of all abutting property owners of record in the office of the County Clerk in which the property being subdivided is located, a minimum of three (3) copies of the preliminary construction plans and a filing fee as established by the Planning Commission; 
2.  Comply in all aspects with the approved sketch plat, if applicable; 
3.  Be filed with the Planning Commission at least four (4) weeks prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which it will be considered; and 
4.  Include for review by the TAC and Planning Commission staff public and private covenants and deeds of dedications that will appear on the face of the final plat. See appendix for recommended language. 
B.  Review. 
1.  The Planning Commission staff shall: 
a.  Distribute copies of the preliminary plat to applicable officials, agencies, or departments, and if a sketch plat was not processed notify any City or town within three (3) miles of the proposed subdivision and the county in which the plat is located; 
b.  Field check the area being platted; 
c.  Review the preliminary plat for conformance with the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, planned unit development conditions, Board of Adjustment actions, and these regulations and prepare the applicable report and recommendations. This report shall include specific recommendations on any modifications of these regulations requested by the subdivider; and 
d.  Send written notice of the application to all abutting property owners at least seven (7) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting. 
B.  The subdivider shall submit preliminary construction plans for the proposed improvements at the time of application for approval of the preliminary plat to the following departments and/or agencies as applicable: 
1.  The City Engineer shall review and approve the preliminary construction plans for improvements regarding drainage, storm sewers, streets, sidewalks and pedestrian ways, in accordance with the adopted engineering design criteria standard specifications; 
a.  The City's Public Works Department and/or applicable water or sewer authority shall approve preliminary sanitary sewer and water improvement plans in accordance with the adopted engineering design criteria standard specifications; and 
b.  The Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality shall approve preliminary plans for water and sanitary sewer improvements in accordance with adopted standards if the subdivision is to be served by private water or sewer disposal systems. 
c.  The Technical Advisory Committee shall review the preliminary plat and make a recommendation to the Planning Commission at the Planning Commission's next regularly scheduled meeting. This recommendation shall include specific recommendations on any modifications of these regulations requested by the subdivider. 
C.  Hearing and approval. 
1.  The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing on approval of the preliminary plat. Notice of such hearing shall be given to all abutting property owners and to the subdivider by mailing a written notice at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing before the Planning Commission. 
2.  After the Planning Commission has reviewed the preliminary plat, the report and recommendation of the Planning Staff and Technical Advisory Committee and any other municipal recommendations, testimony and exhibits at the hearing, the subdivider shall be advised of any changes and/or additions required in order to comply with these regulations. 
3.  The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the preliminary plat at such meeting or within thirty (30) days (including the hearing date) after the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission at which the hearing on preliminary approval was held and closed. 
4.  If the preliminary plat is approved with a modification of any requirements of these regulations, the reasons therefore shall be noted in the record of the review and approval proceedings of the Planning Commission. 
5.  If the preliminary plat is approved with conditions, the Planning Commission may require the subdivider to submit a revised preliminary plat. 
6.  If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval shall be recorded in the review and approval proceedings of the Planning Commission. 
7.  One (1) copy of the proposed preliminary plat as acted upon by the planning Commission with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and the reasons therefore shall be retained in the Planning Commission offices. 
8.  One (1) copy of the proposed preliminary plat as acted upon by the Planning Commission shall be returned to the subdivider with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval with the reasons therefore accompanying the plat. 
9.  The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of two (2) years from the date of the approval by the Planning Commission unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission for an extended period of time at the end of which time approval of the final plat must have been obtained from the Planning Commission and City council. Any preliminary plat not receiving approval within the period of time set forth herein, including any extensions approved by the Planning Commission, shall be null and void. 
10.  Every plat shall conform to the existing regulations applicable at the time of approval of the preliminary plat unless modifications have been granted by the Planning Commission. 
11.  Subsequent to approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may commence construction of the public improvements in accordance with final construction plans approved by the applicable governing authority after arranging for inspection by the responsible public body of said improvements during construction.  
Sec. 12-420. - Final construction plans. 
The subdivider shall submit a minimum of three (3) copies of the final construction plans for proposed improvements prior to or simultaneous with the application for approval of the final plat. The plans shall be submitted for review to the following departments and/or agencies as applicable and in form and content as required by that agency or department as follows: 
A.  The City Engineer shall review and approve the final construction plans for improvements regarding streets, sanitary sewer and water improvements, drainage and storm sewers located within a public right-of-way and sidewalks and pedestrian ways in accordance with adopted engineering design criteria standard specifications; and 
B.  The Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality shall review and approve final plans for improvements if the subdivision is to be served by private water or sewage disposal systems in accordance with adopted standards and regulations.  
Sec. 12-421. - Final plat. 
A.  Application procedure and requirements. Following approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall file with the Planning Commission an application for final approval of the subdivision plat. The application for approval of the final plat shall: 
1.  Be made as prescribed in these regulations; 
2.  Comply in all respects with the preliminary plat as approved by the Planning Commission; 
3.  Be accompanied by a minimum of thirty (30) copies of the final plat as described in these regulations; 
4.  Be filed with the Planning Commission at least four (4) weeks prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which it will be hard; and 
5.  Include a final plat filing fee as established by the Planning Commission. 
B.  Review. 
1.  The Planning Commission Staff, City Engineer as applicable, shall review the final plat for compliance with the preliminary plat as approved by the Planning Commission. 
2.  The Planning Commission Staff shall make a recommendation to the Planning Commission on whether: 
a.  There has been compliance with all conditions, restrictions and requirements of these regulations and all other applicable regulations or laws; 
b.  All conditions attached to the approval of the preliminary plat have been complied with; and 
c.  The Planning Commission should approve or disapprove the subdivision plat. 
C.  Planning Commission review and determination. 
1.  The final plat shall be submitted for final approval of the Planning Commission and City Council, for final approval the final plat within one (1) year of the date of approval of said preliminary plat. 
2.  The Planning Commission shall at that submittal meeting or within thirty (30) days thereafter: 
a.  Review the final plat and report of the Planning Commission staff; and 
b.  Approve the plat if the conditions of approval of the preliminary plat have been met, or disapprove the plat if the conditions of approval of the preliminary plat have not been met and state in detail in the record of the meeting any reasons for disapproval. 
3.  If the governing body of any city or town in the County protests against a subdivision plat of any land lying within three (3) miles of the limits of the incorporated area of such City or town, the plat shall be approved by not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the Planning Commission with the reasons therefore stated in the minutes of the meeting. 
4.  The requirement for approval and certification of the completion of the required public improvements in accordance with the approved final construction plans shall be received by the Planning Commission staff in the form of release letters from the applicable City Departments or agencies as required in these regulations prior to approval of the final plat. 
D.  Endorsement of approval on the final plat. 
1.  No final approval shall be endorsed on the final plat until all requirements of final plat approval have been met. 
2.  When the subdivider has chosen to install improvements prior to endorsement of the final plat, approval shall not be endorsed on the plat until after all conditions of approval have been satisfied and all improvements satisfactorily completed. 
3.  When the subdivider has chosen to guarantee construction of the improvements by written agreement, approval shall not be endorsed on the plat until after the agreement has been executed by the subdivider, delivered to the Planning Commission and City Council for their review and approval, and all other conditions of approval pertaining to the plat have been satisfied. 
4.  Prior to beginning construction. 
a.  The contractor or developer shall furnish maintenance bond(s) or irrevocable letter(s) of credit and certificate of insurance prior to beginning construction. Bonds and insurance will be sent to the City Attorney for approval and returned to the City Engineer. A copy of a contractor's bid or proposal should accompany the bond or irrevocable letter of credit or the Consulting Engineer's cost estimate will be used in determining the amount of the bond. 
b.  In any case where the council or board does not require a bond for the improvements required herein, no building shall be permitted on any lot or in any area in a subdivision where the proposed construction will produce runoff or require utility services that affect other areas or lots located within or outside the subdivision unless a bond, in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost, is posed for the portion of the drainage or utility improvements that will protect the affected area. 
5.  The parties responsible for endorsing approval on the face of the final plat shall be as follows: 
a.  The City Manager or the authorized designee of the City Manager; 
b.  The Planning Commission Chairperson or Vice Chairperson so authorized to sign for said Chairperson; and 
c.  The Mayor of the City of Sapulpa upon approval of the City Council. 
6.  The format of the endorsements of the face of the final plat shall be as specified in Figure 2 of these regulations. 
E.  Filing of the final plat. The approved original final plat shall after being endorsed by all required officials as described in these regulations be filed in the office of the County Clerk in which the property being subdivided is located. 
F.  Distribution of the final plat. After the final plat has been endorsed by all the required officials as described in these regulations and filed of record with the County Clerk in the county in which the property is located, the Planning Commission staff shall distribute copies to the applicable officials, agencies or departments and the remaining signed copies to the subdivider.  
Sec. 12-422. - Planned unit development. 
The platting of a planned unit development (PUD) shall proceed in accordance with these regulations upon approval of the PUD by the City Council, as applicable, in accordance with the applicable sections of the zoning ordinance and the conditions of approval of the PUD. The conditions of approval of the PUD, where applicable and as required by these regulations and the zoning ordinance, shall be endorsed on the face of the plat and officially made a part thereof.  
Sec. 12-423. - Platting accuracy. 
Plats shall be prepared with the following accuracy: 
A.  Sketch plats shall be prepared to the scale specified herein and may be submitted in free-hand form. 
B.  Preliminary plats shall be drawn to the scale specified herein, with such accuracy as to determine the location of lot, block, property and boundary lines, utility lines and other facilities, to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot. 
C.  Final plats shall be prepared with a minimum linear closure of 1:20,000. The following information shall be submitted on the final plat: 
1.  Traverse data for the plat, including the coordinates of the boundary of the subdivision with error of closure; 
2.  The computation of all distances, angles and courses that are shown on the final plat unless measured in the field; and 
3.  All stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground in use to determine the boundaries of the plat.  
Sec. 12-424. - Sketch plat. 
A.  The subdivider is encouraged and at the option of the City of Sapulpa may be required to submit a sketch plat (see Figure 3) and to receive comments and recommendations from the Technical Advisory Committee, Planning Commission Staff and Planning Commission that will facilitate processing of the preliminary plat. 
B.  The sketch plat may be drawn in free-hand pencil to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, except where the size or amount of detail requires another scale, and may be superimposed over a topographic map or aerial photograph. 
C.  The sketch plat shall show the following: 
1.  The proposed layout of streets, lots and public areas; 
2.  Boundary lines of the proposed subdivision; 
3.  Location and width of streets adjacent to the property; 
4.  Existing utilities on or adjacent to the property showing type, location and size; 
5.  Existing watercourses, floodplains based upon the regulatory flood and storm drainage; and 
6.  A topographic map of the area proposed to be subdivided with contour lines having two (2) foot contour intervals based on the United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey Datum.  
Sec. 12-425. - Preliminary plat. 
A.  The preliminary plat (see Figure 4) submitted for approval shall be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor. The application shall include the names and addresses of the area being subdivided. 
B.  The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet; provided, that if the property to be subdivided is less than two (2) acres, the scale may be one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet. If the property being subdivided exceeds one hundred (100) acres, the scale may be one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet. 
C.  The preliminary plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  The name and addresses of the owner or owners of the land to be subdivided; 
2.  The name and address of the registered professional land surveyor preparing the proposed subdivision; 
3.  The date of preparation of the plat, north arrow and scale (written in graphic presentation); 
4.  Key or location map showing the location of subdivisions within the mile section; 
5.  An accurate legal description; 
6.  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the proposed subdivision to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot. 
7.  The names of all adjacent subdivisions and the names, locations and widths of all existing and proposed streets, easements, drainage ways and other public ways adjacent to the property. 
8.  The location and widths of easements of all oil, gas and petroleum products pipelines and the location and widths of easements of existing utilities on the adjacent to the property, and any required building setbacks therefrom; 
9.  The location of oil or gas wells, either existing active or inactive wells, plugged or unplugged abandoned wells, as shown by the records of the Oklahoma Corporation Commission and by such other oil and gas well service records as may be required by the City of Sapulpa; 
10.  The location and description of all existing structures, water bodies and watercourses, and other natural or man-made features (including but not limited to mines that are active or abandoned, caves, etc.) on the property being platted; 
11.  Areas subject to flooding based upon the regulatory flood; 
12.  Names, locations and widths of all proposed streets; 
13.  The location of drainage ways, pedestrian ways, bike paths, parks, playgrounds, public ways, or other public or private reservations; 
14.  All proposed lots numbered, lot dimensions and building setback lines; 
15.  All blocks numbered consecutively; 
16.  A topographic map of the area proposed to be subdivided with contour lines having two (2) foot contour intervals based on the United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey datum; and 
17.  Any other information, including covenants and deeds of dedications, as may be deemed by the Planning Commission as reasonably necessary for the full and proper consideration of the proposed subdivision.  
Sec. 12-426. - Preliminary construction plans. 
The preliminary construction plans for improvements shall be submitted for review and preliminary approval with the preliminary approval with the preliminary plat, and shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Oklahoma. Plans shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the department or agency having jurisdiction over the improvements and shall show: 
A.  The location and proposed width of each street, sidewalk and pedestrian way; 
B.  The location of proposed sanitary sewers and water distribution systems; 
C.  The proposed plans and specifications for any privately owned water or sanitary sewage system if such a system is to be used; 
D.  The results of soil percolation tests, if septic tank sewage disposal systems are to be used; 
E.  A drainage plan indicating the location of proposed storm sewers, location and width of proposed open drainage ways; and 
F.  The proposed location and size of stormwater detention or retention facilities if said facilities are required.  
Sec. 12-427. - Final construction plans. 
The final plans for improvements shall be submitted for review and approval prior to approval of the final plat and shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the department or agency having jurisdiction over the improvements and include, at a minimum, the following information: 
A.  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along the center lines of each proposed street, with existing and proposed grades; 
B.  Cross-sections of each proposed street, pedestrian way and sidewalk showing the type and width of pavement; 
C.  Plans and profiles showing the location of proposed sanitary sewers, with the grades and sizes indicated; 
D.  Plans and specifications for privately owned water or sanitary sewage system, if such a system is to be used; 
E.  Results of soil percolation tests, if a septic tank sewage system is to be used; 
F.  Plans and profiles of proposed water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and the location of all valves and fire hydrants; and 
G.  A drainage plan showing all existing and proposed storm sewers, manholes, catch basins, retention or detention facilities, watercourses, culverts and other drainage structures within the tract, or adjacent thereto, with pipe sizes, grades and water openings. The drainage plan shall also show the size of dedicated easements reservations for all detention facilities and drainage ways and whether private of public maintenance is proposed.  
Sec. 12-428. - Final plat. 
A.  The final plat shall be drawn at the same scale as the preliminary plat, and include all the information required as a condition of approval of the preliminary plat and be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor. 
B.  The final plat shall be drawn in accordance with the requirements of Oklahoma State Law and these regulations (see Figure 5). The County Clerk may accept variances to these requirements because of the state of the art of reproductive capabilities. 
C.  The following information shall be required on the final plat: 
1.  Name of the subdivision; 
2.  The name and address of the owner or owners of the land to be subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider if other than the owner and the name and address of the registered land surveyor preparing the final plat; 
3.  The date of preparation of the plat, north arrow and scale (written and graphic presentation); 
4.  Key or location map showing the location of subdivisions within the mile section; 
5.  An accurate legal description of the property; 
6.  The total acres and total number of lots in the subdivision; 
7.  The names of all adjacent subdivisions and the names, locations and widths of all existing and proposed streets, easements, drainage ways and other public ways, adjacent to the property; 
8.  The boundary of the subdivided area, block boundary, street and other right-of-way lines and distances, angels and/or bearings, and where these lines follow a curve, the central angle, radius, points of curvature, length of the cure and the length of intermediate tangents; 
9.  The accurate dimensions of all property to be offered for dedication for public use and all property for the common use of the property owners within the subdivision with the purpose of use stated on the plat; 
10.  The dimensions of all lots and lot lines and the bearings of all lot lines not parallel or perpendicular to the street right-of-way line; 
11.  All easements shall be denoted by fine dashed lines, clearly identified and dimensioned, and if already of public record, the recorded reference of such easements, the width of the easements with sufficient ties to accurately locate it with respect to the subdivision must be shown; 
12.  The boundary lines of the fully urbanized one hundred (100) year flood plain shall be delineated on the face of the plat and the following certifications shall be placed on the face of the plat: "The contents of the fully urbanized floodplain are contained within the drainage easements and/or reserve areas as shown." 
13.  Easements located outside the boundaries of the plat and required for plat approval; 
14.  The deeds of dedication and any deed restrictions applicable to the subdivision shall be shown; 
15.  The location of every oil or gas well, either existing active or inactive wells, plugged or unplugged abandoned wells, as shown by the records of the Oklahoma Corporation Commission and by such other well service records as may be required by the City of Sapulpa; 
16.  The location of any mines (active or abandoned), caves, and other similar man-made or natural geological features; 
17.  Blocks shall be consecutively numbered and all lots within each block shall also be consecutively numbered; 
18.  The basis of all bearings shall be noted on the face of the plat; 
19.  The size, location, description, and identification of all monuments to be set. The size, location, and identification of all monuments found, found and accepted, retagged, recapped, and replaced in making the survey shall be shown to assure the perpetuation or re-establishment of any point or line of the survey; 
20.  Coordinates of all block corners, points of intersection, points of curve, points of tangent, points of reverse curve, points of compound curve, center of the cul-de-sac, and center of the eyebrow; 
21.  Any other information as may be deemed by the Planning Commission as necessary for the full and proper consideration of the proposed subdivision; and 
22.  The final plat certificate of approval block, shall be marked on the face of the final plat. 
B.  The following written certifications will be required prior to final plat approval by the Planning Commission, City Council: 
1.  Certification by the registered professional land surveyor as to the accuracy of the survey and of the plat and that the monuments and benchmarks are accurate as to location shown; 
2.  Certification by a registered professional engineer that the design of the required improvements is in conformance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications and other standards, requirements, and provisions of the applicable agency or department of these regulations; 
3.  Certification by the City Engineer that the subdivision plat conforms to all locally adopted standards, specifications, these regulations and the engineering design criteria standard specifications; 
4.  Certification by the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality that the subdivision conforms to the applicable health regulations; and 
5.  Certification by the City Public Works Department or other applicable authority that the subdivision conforms to all applicable regulations concerning public water supply and sanitary sewer facilities. 
C.  The following supplemental information shall be submitted with the final plat: 
1.  Current certification by a bonded abstractor of the names of the last grantees of record owning the entire interest in the property being subdivided plus holders of mortgages and liens filed of record; 
2.  The consent of all owners of the subject property to the plating of the property; 
3.  Certificate of notice as to the platting of the property to the holders of mortgages and liens thereon; and 
4.  Current certification from the Oklahoma Corporation Commission setting forth the status of all oil and gas drilling and related activity on said property and as otherwise required in these regulations.  
Sec. 12-429. - General planning design requirements. 
The design of each subdivision shall be in accordance with the applicable zoning regulations, the policies, goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan, these regulations and the engineering design criteria standard specifications. Each subdivision shall relate harmoniously to the existing and planned surrounding development and to the community as a whole. The development of each subdivision shall proceed in an orderly, safe, efficient, and attractive manner once construction is started. The following planning and design requirements shall be addressed in each subdivision: 
A.  Neighborhood concept. The neighborhood concept shall be recognized in the design and development of each subdivision as described in the comprehensive plan. This concept is shown graphically in Figure 6. 
B.  Site characteristics. Each subdivision plat shall, to the extent practical, be designed to retain the natural topography and vegetation of the site in the building and recreational areas. 
C.  Parks and open spaces. Each subdivision shall contribute to the provision of parks and open spaces (see Figure 7) as required in these regulations and in accordance with the comprehensive plan. Areas purchased or otherwise set aside for public parks and open spaces shall include tracts of land on which unique natural features should be preserved, as well as those lands of suitable size and shape for development as passive and active recreational areas. Environmentally sensitive areas, such as steep slopes, timbered areas, streams and floodplains may, only with the approval of the City of Sapulpa be designated by the subdivider as public park and/or open space areas and utilized as amenities to the development. 
D.  Circulation. The street and sidewalk system of a subdivision shall be appropriately designed and related to the proposed land use. The density of the proposed development will determine the size of right-of-way and paving in keeping with the areas being served as well as being in accordance with these regulations, the adopted engineering design criteria standard specifications, the comprehensive plan and the major street and highway plan. Residential streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Arterial streets should serve as the boundaries of neighborhoods.  
Sec. 12-430. - Streets. 
A.  General. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to these regulations, the engineering design criteria standard specifications, the comprehensive plan and the major street and highway plan. Further, the relationship of existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience, and safety, and the proposed uses of the land to be served shall be considered in determining the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets. Where streets are not shown on the comprehensive plan or the major street and highway plan, the arrangement of such streets in a proposed subdivision shall: 
1.  Provide for the continuations or applicable projections of existing streets in the surrounding areas; 
2.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood as reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council unless to meet a particular situation in which topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to exiting street patterns impracticable; and 
3.  Where the plat to be submitted includes only a part of the tract owned or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed future street system for the undivided portion of the tract may be required by the Planning Commission. 
B.  Access. 
1.  Each lot in a proposed subdivision shall be provided with access to a public street or highway to assure the convenience of the lot owner, and including but not limited to access for the following public purposes: For adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, solid waste collection, access of firefighting apparatus, police and other emergency vehicles, parking lots, parks, light and air, and for the avoidance of congestion. 
2.  Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where the control of such reserve strips is placed with City of Sapulpa under conditions reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council. 
3.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned arterial street: 
a.  Non-access provisions controlling ingress and egress to such arterial streets may be required by the Planning Commission in accordance with adopted standards to assure traffic safety and to relieve congestion at intersections. 
b.  The Planning Commission may require reverse frontage lots with limits of access or non-access reservations along the rear property line or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties affording separation of arterial traffic from ingress and egress to individual lots. 
C.  Border streets. Where a subdivision borders or contains a railroad right-of-way, drainage way, park, open space area, or limited access highway, the Planning Commission may require a street (see Figure 8) approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way or areas at a suitable distance while providing for the applicable use of the intervening land, such as fore park or open space uses in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in applicable districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grade and future grade separations. 
D.  Marginal access streets. Where a residential street abuts or contains an existing or proposed street and the subdivider elects to design lots that front the arterial street, the Planning Commission may require marginal access streets from adequate protection of these properties and to afford separating of arterial traffic from the ingress and egress to individual residential lots. 
E.  Dedication of right-of-way. Whenever an existing major street is located adjacent to the outer edge of a subdivision, one-half (½) of the right-of-way or areas at a suitable distance while providing for the applicable use of the intervening land, such as for park or open space uses in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in applicable districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grade and future grade separations. 
F.  Alignment. The design speed of residential streets and minimum distance between the centerlines of intersecting streets shall be in accordance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications. 
G.  Right-of-way widths. The right-of-way widths of all proposed streets shall be in accordance with the Major Street and Highway Plan (see Figure 9) and where not designated therein, the minimum width shall not be less than the following: 
TYPE OF STREET 	RIGHT-OF-WAY 
Freeway/Beltway 	As per ODOT and City 
or County Standards 
Primary Arterial 	120'* 
Secondary Arterial and Secondary Arterial Alternate 	100'** 
Commercial Collector/Industrial 	80' 
Collector, Commercial/Industrial Street with Open Drainage, Commercial Business District Residential Collector, Residential 	60' 
Street with Open Drainage, Commercial/Industrial Street Residential or Minor Street 	60' 
Alleys 	
 Commercial and Industrial 	20' 
 Residential 	20' 
 
*One hundred thirty (130) feet minimum right-of-way is required for a right turn lane at the intersections of all primary arterials to extend a distance of three hundred eighty-eight (388) feet paralleling the right side of said street. See Figure 10. 
**One hundred ten (110) feet minimum right-of-way is required for a right turn lane at the intersections of all secondary arterials to extend a distance of three hundred eighty-eight (388) feet paralleling the right side of said street. See Figure 10. 
1.  If green ways or drainage ways influenced by topographical features, streams or ponds, ravines, wooded areas, or other natural features are to be provided within the proposed plat, then the width and location of the right-of-way shall be ultimately determined by the City of Sapulpa as may be deemed necessary to preserve such features. 
2.  The pavement width, standards for street surfacing, curb and guttering, storm sewer design or open space drainage shall be in accordance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications. 
H.  Cul-de-sacs. 
1.  As a general rule, cul-de-sacs shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length, measured from the entrance to the center of the turn-around, and shall have a turn-around radius at the property line of not less than fifty (50) feet. 
2.  If a cul-de-sac is more than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length, it shall be provided with a turnaround having a radius of not less than fifty (50) feet at the property line and not less than forty (40) feet at the curb line. 
3.  When topography or other physically limiting factors and the needs of specific situations make changes to cul-de-sac design standards necessary to secure the best overall design, a variance from these regulations by the Planning Commission, upon a recommendation from the Technical Advisory Committee, may be allowed. 
I.  Intersections. Street intersections shall be designed as follows: 
1.  Streets shall be designed to intersect at right angles as permitted by topography and other limiting factors. 
2.  Four-way intersections of minor streets shall be avoided. Three-way T-intersections shall be used for minor interior residential streets wherever practicable. Any conflict with other applicable design principles and standards should be avoided. 
3.  Street jogs with centerline offsets or less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided. 
4.  Points of access to arterial streets should be limited in number. 
5.  Minor street intersections with arterial streets should be no closer than six hundred (600) feet from the intersections of other minor and arterial streets. 
J.  Grades. Street grades shall be designed as follows: 
1.  The maximum grade for non-arterial streets shall be in accordance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications. 
2.  All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves and designed for safe stopping sight distances and otherwise be in accordance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications. 
3.  The maximum grade of a residential street when intersecting an arterial street shall be in accordance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications. 
4.  The maximum grade of residential streets at intersections with other residential streets shall be in accordance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications. 
5.  Street grades shall be established in such a manner as to avoid excessive grading or removal of tree growth whenever possible. 
K.  Curvature. The radius of curvature on the centerline of all streets shall be designed to reflect the associated design speed and be in accordance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications. 
L.  Street names and numbers. 
1.  No names shall be used that will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names and numbering shall be in accordance with the adopted policy of the City of Sapulpa. Where a street or avenue is an extension of an existing street or avenue, new names or numbers may only be used subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and City Council. 
2.  Lot address numbers shall be assigned by the Planning Department and shown on an address plat prepared by the developer.  
Sec. 12-431. - Sidewalks. 
The relationship to existing and planned streets, topography, public convenience and safety, and the proposed use of the land being subdivided shall be considered in determining the requirements, arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications and as follows: 
A.  Sidewalks shall be constructed within the dedicated right-of-way and shall be required in accordance with these regulations. 
B.  All sidewalk layouts and designs for primary and secondary arterial streets the central business district and other commercial and industrial areas shall be furnished by the City Engineer. 
C.  Sidewalks shall provide for safe and convenient access for persons with disabilities, including those persons in a wheelchair. Curb ramps shall be constructed in accordance with standard details. 
D.  The Planning Commission may require (in order to facilitate pedestrian access to schools, parks, playgrounds) perpetual unobstructed easements of not more than ten (10) feet in width to provide adequate pedestrian circulations.  
Sec. 12-432. - Alleys. 
Alleys shall be designed and provided as follows: 
A.  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the Planning Commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking, that is consistent with and adequate for the intended uses. 
B.  The right-of-way width for alleys serving commercial and industrial areas shall be not less than thirty (30) feet. 
C.  Alleys are not required for residential areas, but when provided, the right-of-way width for residential alleys shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
D.  Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment should be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. 
E.  Dead-end alleys should be avoided, but where necessary shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead-end, as determined by the Planning Commission.  
Sec. 12-433. - Blocks. 
The length, width and shape of blocks shall be suited for the planned use of the land, be consistent with zoning requirements and the need for convenient access, control and safety of street traffic and the limitations of the topography. Block length and width shall be designed as follows: 
A.  Length. Block lengths in residential areas shall not be greater than fifteen hundred (1,500) feet. In those cases where length of the block exceeds one thousand (1,000) feet, the Planning commission may require easements for pedestrian ways through the block which shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet and a paved sidewalk constructed in accordance with the Engineering Design Criteria Standard Specifications and these regulations. 
B.  Width. Blocks for residential areas shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of applicable depth except on the boundaries of the subdivision or as required to separate residential development from other types of through traffic. Blocks intended for commercial or industrial uses should be of a width suitable for the intended use, with due allowance for off-street parking and loading facilities. Blocks for such uses should not normally exceed six hundred (600) feet.  
Sec. 12-434. - Building lines. 
Building lines shall be provided for all residential subdivisions as follows: 
A.  A front building line shall be located not less than twenty-five (25) feet back of the street right-of-way line. 
B.  On any lot abutting a major street or highway front yard, setback lines shall be established parallel to and a minimum distance of seventy-five (75) feet from the center line of the major street, but in no case shall any setback line be located less than twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way line of the major street. On any corner lot formed by the intersection of two (2) major streets or highways, the lot shall be considered as abutting on both major streets or highways and the same setback requirements shall apply to both front and side yards. 
C.  A side yard building line on the side of a corner lot abutting the street shall be located a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet back of the street right-of-way when such lot is back to back with another corner lot, and not less than twenty (20) feet back of the street right-of-way line in every other case. 
D.  A side yard building line shall be provided not less than ten (10) feet back of a crosswalk right-of-way line on the side on a lot abutting a mid-block crosswalk. 
E.  Restrictions shall be made requiring that all buildings to be used for residential purposes to set back from side lot lines at least five (5) feet on all interior side lot lines and not less than twenty-five (25) feet from rear lot lines. 
F.  Restrictions requiring buildings to be located within the building lines shown on the plat shall be set forth on the plat or on a separate recorded instrument. 
G.  Restrictions requiring buildings to be located within the building lines shown on the plat shall be set forth on the plat or on a separate recorded instrument.  
Sec. 12-435. - Lots. 
Lots shall be designed as follows: 
A.  Configuration. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and the proposed type of development. 
B.  Access. Every lot shall have frontage on and abut a public street dedicated and maintained by the City or abut a publicly approved private street in a planned unit development, or have other publicly approved access. 
C.  Zoning requirements. Lot dimensions, yards, building setback lines and lot area shall conform to the minimum requirements of the zoning code unless varied by the Board of Adjustment or superseded and specified to be otherwise in a planned unit development or be as provided below: 
1.  Residential lots shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet in width at the front building line and shall abut a street a minimum distance of thirty-five (35) feet; except that a corner lot shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet in width at the front building line. 
2.  Side lot lines should be approximately at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street center lines. 
3.  The depth of residential lots shall be not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
4.  The area of residential lots shall be not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
5.  In residential subdivisions where septic tank or individual sewage disposal devices are to be installed, the area of the lot shall be not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and the minimum width of the lot at the front building line shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
6.  Lots are not required for subdivisions for commercial and industrial use, but when provided should be of applicable size and arrangement to provide for adequate off-street parking and loading facilities based on the intended use. 
7.  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where they are needed to provide for the separation of development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
8.  A planting screen easement of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided along the portion of the lots abutting such traffic artery or other use where screening is required. There shall be no right of access across a planting screen easement. 
D.  Private sewer and/or provide water. Where a proposed subdivision is not served by a public sewer and/or public water system, lot dimensions and area shall conform to the requirements of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
E.  Corner lots. Lots at the intersections of streets should exceed the minimum zoning code lot area requirements to provide adequate building areas and building setbacks from intersecting streets. 
F.  Lot depth. Excessive lot depth in relation to lot width is discouraged. A proportion of 1:1 or 2:1 will normally be considered applicable. 
G.  Lot lines. Side lot lines should be at approximately right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
H.  Parking and loading. Commercial and industrial lots should be of an appropriate size and shape to provide adequate off-street parking and loading facilities. 
I.  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from through traffic or to overcome disadvantages of terrain and orientation. 
J.  Acre lot subdivisions. When land is subdivided into one (1) acre lots or grater, consideration should be given to the opening of future streets and further subdivision.  
Sec. 12-436. - Easements. 
Proposed subdivisions shall provide for easements (see Figure 12) as follows: 
A.  General. Easements shall be provided and dedicated in accordance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications and these regulations. Regarding the dedication of required easements, the subdivider shall stipulate that no building, structure, or other above or below ground obstruction shall be placed, erected, installed or permitted on such easement in a manner that will, in the judgment of the City of Sapulpa, interfere with installation, operation, maintenance, repairing, removing, or replacing of utilities. 
B.  Width. Easements, where necessary, shall be of a minimum width of twenty-two (22) feet, eleven (11) feet on each side of all rear lot lines and seventeen and one-half (17.5) feet for perimeter easements or of a width and location as specified by the Technical Advisory Committee and when necessary, be provided along other lot lines for poles, wires, conduits, sanitary sewers, gas, water, power, communications, and other utility lines. 
C.  Drainage easements. Suitable drainage easements, as required by the engineering design criteria standard specifications, shall be required on all proposed subdivisions. 
D.  Technical advisory committee review. The locations, width and alignment of all easements shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Technical Advisory Committee and Planning Commission prior to approval and acceptance by the City of Sapulpa. 
E.  Standard location of underground utilities. The standard location of underground utilities shall be in accordance with Figure 12 of these regulations.  
Sec. 12-437. - Floodplain areas. 
Lands that are identified on the official maps of the City of Sapulpa as being subject to flooding hazards and periodic inundation, shall not be subdivided into lots, tracts or parcels for any use which would be incompatible with such flooding hazards except as follows: 
A.  Improvements meeting the standards and requirements of the City of Sapulpa and designed to render such land safe for residential or other uses are made, or satisfactorily guaranteed on such land meeting the approval of the City Engineer as being in accordance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications; and: 
1.  The intended use of the land is permitted by the adopted ordinances and regulations of the City because such use has a low flood damage potential and will not otherwise obstruct the flow of flood water or increase the flooding hazard to property already developed; or 
2.  The intended use of the land is permitted by a special exception, variance, or by other adopted policy of the City of Sapulpa.  
Sec. 12-438. - Stormwater drainage and detention facilities. 
Stormwater drainage and detention facilities shall be required in accordance with these and other City of Sapulpa regulations and policies as follows: 
A.  The stormwater drainage system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and requirements of the engineering design criteria standard specifications to receive and to pass the runoff from a one hundred (100) year frequency rainstorm under conditions of full urbanization. Full urbanization is defined as the total development that is anticipated. The entire flow shall be contained within said stormwater drainage system. 
B.  Stormwater detention facilities, when required, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the engineering design criteria standard specifications. 
C.  Any construction project with a common plan of development or sale of five (5) or more acres must apply for an OPDES General Construction Permit (Oklahoma Construction Permit). The owner/operator is the party or parties that either individually or taken together meet the following two criteria: 
1.  They have operational control over the site or project specification including modification to the specifications), and 
2.  They have day to day operational control of the activities at the site or project necessary to ensure compliance with the plan requirements and permit conditions. 
There is a two hundred forty dollar ($240.00) application fee per construction site for processing and renewing permits. Applicants will be billed at the time they receive their permits. The environmental Protection Agency has delegated that the responsibility for storm sewer discharge associated with construction sites throughout the state be permitted under the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality through this permit.  
Sec. 12-439. - Park and recreation development fee. 
As land is developed for residential use, the need for additional park land and improved recreational facilities to serve the community is created. In order to provide funds for this need, a park and recreation development fee shall be imposed on each residential building permit. 
The park and recreation fee shall be assessed and paid as follows: 
A.  Applicability and amount of fee. Before a residential building permit is issued to construct any residential dwelling unit the park and recreation development fee as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule, shall be paid with the building permit application. 
B.  Determination of the fee. 
1.  The number of bedrooms in each proposed dwelling unit shall be determined from the building plans filed with the building permit application and shall include as bedrooms, all rooms however, labeled on the plans (other than living rooms, dining rooms, dens, kitchens, and bathrooms) that are suitable for conversion to bedrooms. The number of bedrooms attributable to a unit shall include not only those areas labeled as bedrooms on the plans, but may include any area in the dwelling unit that (because of its size, location, facilities or relationship to other areas of the dwelling unit) is deemed divisible so as to create one (1) or more additional bedrooms. 
2.  In the case of mobile or manufactured homes, the fees as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule shall be paid at the platting stage of the development. The applicable fee will be required to be paid before the final plat is signed and released for recording. 
3.  The total amount of the park and development recreation fee shall be determined by the Building Inspector of the City of Sapulpa based upon the plans submitted with the building permit application. If the applicant does not agree with the required fee as determined by the Building Inspector, the decision of the Building Inspector may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. 
C.  Exemptions from the park and recreation development fee. The fees imposed by the above sections shall not apply to the following types of construction: 
1.  Reconstruction of a dwelling unit or portion thereof that has been damaged or destroyed by fire, flood or other causes over which the owner has not control; or 
2.  Expansion, remodeling and/or alteration of a dwelling unit where an additional bedroom is created. 
D.  Park and recreation capital fund. The proceeds of the park and recreation development fee shall be set aside in a fund entitled the "Park and Recreation Capital Fund" to be used exclusively for the acquisition of new park land and/or capital and maintenance improvements thereon as follows: 
At such time as the City Council, based upon the recommendation of the Park Board (as to the desirability of the tract) and Planning Commission (as to the appropriateness of the intended land use), determines that sufficient funds have been accumulated in the park and recreation capital fund from and for a certain area for the purchase of new park land and/or to make improvements thereon, the governing body of the applicable jurisdiction shall initiate the necessary procedures for such expenditures to be made.  
Sec. 12-440. - Sewage disposal and water supply. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  All subdivisions shall utilize a public water supply approved by the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality, the City of Sapulpa, or other applicable authority. 
2.  All plans pertaining to the collection and treatment of public sewage must be approved by the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality, the City of Sapulpa, or other applicable authority. 
3.  All plans pertaining to the distribution and treatment of drinking water must be approved by the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality, the City of Sapulpa, or other applicable authority. 
4.  Proposed subdivisions that seek or require a tie-on to the public sewer system must be located within the corporate limits of the City of Sapulpa or be annexed into said corporate limits as a condition of and prior to the initiation of such service. 
B.  Sanitary sewage systems. The subdivider shall provide an internal sanitary sewer collection system that is available to each lot within the subdivision. The system shall be designed and constructed as approved by the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality and in accordance with these regulations, the engineering design criteria standard specifications, and all other applicable regulations. The following additional requirements shall apply: 
1.  Where an approved public sanitary sewer system is not available to the subdivision, as determined by the City of Sapulpa regulations, and in order to allow development during the time required to extend the public sanitary system into these areas, a central treatment plant may be allowed on a temporary basis. The plant shall meet all applicable water quality criteria and be designed, constructed and approved by the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality and the City of Sapulpa and otherwise meet all other applicable standards and specifications of the City of Sapulpa. 
2.  In those cases where the development is planned to initially utilize septic tank sewage disposal systems, the developer shall submit soil percolation test results (as required by the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality) the City of Sapulpa, as applicable, for each lot in the subdivision to be served by said system demonstrating a soil percolation test rate in accordance with the regulations of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
3.  Restrictive covenants shall be approved and filed with the subdivision plat that state that the use of said systems shall only be in accordance with these regulations and all other applicable regulations of any approving authority. 
4.  Private sewage systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the standards and specifications of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality, and all other applicable regulations of any approving authority. 
C.  Where a public sanitary sewer system is not available to the subdivision, but where plans for the installation of sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the subdivision are currently being designed by the City Engineer, the developer shall install such sewers in conformity with the plans. If immediate connection to that system is not possible and until such time as a connection can be made, the use of private sewage systems may be permitted subject to approval by the City of Sapulpa.  
Sec. 12-441. - Hillside development. 
The development of hillside areas or any areas with a slope greater than eight (8) percent shall be designed to minimize grading and filling and in such a manner as to retain the maximum feasible amount of natural ground cover. Areas with slopes in excess of twenty (20) percent shall be utilized as open space or developed as a planned unit development in accordance with the applicable provisions of the zoning code and these regulations.  
Sec. 12-442. - Planned unit development. 
A.  General requirements. When a subdivision is to be developed as a planned unit development (see Figure 13) in accordance with the applicable provisions of the zoning code and these regulations, the Planning Commission and the City Council may vary the requirements of these regulations in order to allow the subdivider more freedom in the arrangement of the subdivision. However, all such development must be done in a manner so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare and future residents of the area, while being consistent with the spirit and intent of these regulations and the comprehensive plan. Any and all variances from these regulations shall only be granted in accordance with the procedural requirements as provided herein. 
B.  Private streets and mutual access easements. Private streets and mutual access easements may be allowed in planned unit developments subject to approval by the City of Sapulpa. All such streets shall be reviewed, inspected and built to the same standards as public streets and be maintained by the owners of land within such subdivisions. Private streets and mutual access easements shall always remain open to police, sheriff, fire, and other official vehicles of all municipal, county, state, and federal agencies. The following additional requirements shall apply: 
1.  Prior to the sale of any land within subdivisions where private streets and mutual access easements have been approved, the subdivider shall erect signs and otherwise assure the maintenance of said sign at all entrances to the subdivision and within the private drive and street right-of-way and mutual access easement indicating that said street is a private street. The manner in which the sign is constructed and installed shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
2.  No deed of conveyance shall ever be filed of record for any land within said subdivision unless said deed clearly states that "all property owners within this subdivision shall automatically become a member of a homeowners association, whose responsibility shall include development, complete maintenance and replacement of all private streets and common areas within the planned unit development." 
3.  In order to assure that private streets and common areas are properly installed and inspected, no building permit shall be issued for any lot in said subdivision until all improvements, public and private, have been installed in compliance with the approved plan or said installation is assured to the satisfaction of the City Council.  
Sec. 12-443. - Monuments. 
Monuments must be set in sufficient number and be of such durability as not to be readily disturbed, and to assure that together with monuments already existing, the perpetuation or re-establishment of any line or point in the survey is possible. Monuments shall be constructed of material capable of being detected with conventional instruments for finding ferrous or magnetic objects. Monuments shall further be in accordance with the following standards and criteria: 
A.  Be placed at each point in the boundary of the subdivision and be a minimum of fifteen (15) inches long with a minimum diameter of one-half (½) inch and be made from iron pope or bar or be made of such other materials and be of a size as approved by the City Engineer. 
B.  Be placed at the corner of each lot in the subdivision and be a minimum of fifteen (15) inches long with a minimum diameter of three-eights ( 3/8 ) inch and be made from iron pipe or bar or be made of such other materials and be of a size as approved by the City Engineer. 
C.  Be placed along the centerline of each street at all street intersections, points of curve, points of tangency, points of compound curve, points of reverse curve, center of cul-de-sacs and center of an eyebrow. 
D.  In such cases where the placement of a required monument at the required location is impractical as determined by the City Engineer, a witness corner or reference monument must be placed, preferably on a line of survey, with the data given to show its location upon the ground in relation to the subdivision boundary or lot corner. 
E.  Benchmarks for vertical control shall be established in accordance with the provisions of the engineering design criteria. Vertical control monuments must be placed at an interval of one brass cap per twenty (20) acres or part thereof and spaced proportionately throughout the subdivision.  
Sec. 12-444. - Change of limits of access. 
A.  Intent. When land has been platted under these regulations, or under other applicable law, and the owner of all land affected by the proposal seeks to add limits of access to the plat, or to remove or otherwise alter said limits of access on the plat, such action shall not require replatting nor shall it require vacation of the existing plat. 
B.  Application. The property owner, or the owner's agent with written permission from the owner shall submit the change of limits of access application which shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  Drawings. Ten (10) copies of a scaled drawing which should not be of a greater size than eight and one-half (8½) inches by eleven (11) inches and be drawn on forms provided with the application. 
2.  Specifications. The drawing shall include the proposed changes and all existing curb cuts, drives, parking areas, easements, buildings and other relevant information with the distances and dimensions shown from lot lines and adjacent streets. 
C.  Processing. 
1.  Planning staff review. The Planning Commission staff and the City Engineer shall review and evaluate the impact of the proposed changes on traffic flow, utility easements, and the implementation of the various plans as adopted by the City, or on the flow of traffic on private streets and adjacent or abutting property owned by persons other than the applicant. Staff comments shall be forwarded to the Technical Advisory Committee. 
2.  Technical Advisory Committee review. The Planning Commission staff shall present the application to the Technical Advisory Committee for review and comment. The recommendation of said Committee shall be compiled with that of the Planning Commission staff and City Engineer and transmitted to the Planning Commission. 
3.  Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission shall review the proposed change and either recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be subject to final approval by the City Council. 
4.  City Council review and approval. The City Council shall review the proposed change of access and either approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the application. 
5.  Filing of the final document. The owner or the owner's agent, upon satisfaction of any conditions of approval, or upon receiving an unconditional approval from the City Council, shall file the approved documents with the County Clerk of the County in which the property is located and return a certified copy of the filed document to the City Clerk of the City of Sapulpa.  
Sec. 12-445. - General requirements for improvements. 
A.  Installation of improvements. Following the approval of the final construction plans, and prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall complete in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer, all improvements required, and said improvements shall be free and clear of all liens, claims, and encumbrances. 
B.  Assurances guarantying installation of improvements. In-lieu-of the installation of the required improvements prior to the final plat approval, the subdivider shall agree in writing with the Sapulpa City Council to complete all required improvements in a manner satisfactory to the City. To evidence this agreement, the subdivider shall execute a document entitled "Agreement Guarantying Installation of Improvements" as required by the Engineering Design Criteria. 
C.  Time limit. Prior to granting approval of the final plat, the subdivider and Planning Commission shall agree upon a deadline for the completion of all required improvements. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the Planning Commission in the action approving the final subdivision plat and shall not exceed two (2) years from date of final approval, unless extended by the Planning Commission for good cause as determined by the Planning Commission. 
D.  Vacated plats. Vacation of the plat, as provided by Oklahoma State Statute, shall remove the obligation to construct improvements.  
Sec. 12-446. - Improvements required. 
A.  Street improvements. 
1.  The subdivider shall design, grade, oversee, test and otherwise improve all streets which are designated on the approved plat or which directly serve the subdivision in accordance with the engineering design criteria as directed by the City Engineer. 
2.  Whenever a subdivision contains a major street that requires a major street facility that is more costly than is required to serve the future occupants of the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to pay only the portion of the cost of the major street that would equal the cost of an improvement required to serve only the subdivision, as determined by the Planning Commission. 
3.  All driveways that connect with the public streets shall be constructed in accordance with "Standard Design of Driveway Entrances for Oklahoma Highways," Revised August, 1960, and subsequent amendments, thereto, as prepared by the Oklahoma Department of Transportation. 
B.  Street traffic control devices, signs and names. The developer shall provide the initial street name identification signs and poles and the City shall install all traffic control devices and signs on public streets. Street names shall be subject to the final approval of the City Council after review and recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
C.  Street lights. The subdivider shall provide adequate street lighting in the subdivision in accordance with the specifications of the engineering design criteria. 
D.  Monuments and markers. Permanent reference markers shall be placed according to the specifications of the engineering design criteria and as provided in these regulations. The location of brass caps shall be shown on the face of the final plat. 
E.  Public water supply. Where an approved public water supply is reasonably accessible, as determined by the City of Sapulpa, the subdivider shall install water lines and fire hydrants to connect with such water supply and make it available to each lot within the subdivided area. The final plat shall not receive City Council approval until it is certified by the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality that there has been compliance with the regulations of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality and where indicated, meets other jurisdictional governing body requirements. 
F.  Stormwater drainage and detention facilities. The subdivider shall provide a stormwater drainage system that is designed and constructed in accordance with the engineering design criteria. 
G.  Sanitary sewer system. 
1.  Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible as determined by the City of Sapulpa, the subdivision and each lot within said subdivision shall be provided with a connection thereto. All connections shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer or County Engineer and be in accordance with the regulations of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality and the engineering design criteria standard specifications. 
2.  Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible but where plans for the installation of sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the subdivision are currently being designed by the City Engineer, the subdivider shall install sewers in conformity with such plans. Where immediate connection is not possible and until such connection with the sewer system can be made, the use of private sewage treatment facilities may be permitted, provided such disposal facilities are installed and maintained in accordance with the regulations of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
H.  Utilities. Electric cable, television lines, and other utilities shall be installed in the easements specified on the subdivision plat and otherwise as shown in Figure 12 of these regulations.  
Sec. 12-447. - Plans and improvements required. 
A.  Three (3) sets of prints of the proposed final construction plans and specifications for all improvements required by these regulations and the engineering design criteria shall be prepared by a qualified registered professional engineer and submitted to the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall approve or require modification of those construction plans. 
B.  The subdivider shall be required to participate in a pre-construction meeting with the applicable City staff. 
C.  Following the approval of the final construction plans, the subdivider shall complete in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer all required improvements and said improvements shall be free and clear of all liens, claims and encumbrances, except or unless as agreed to in the "Agreement Guarantying Installation of Improvements" as required by the engineering design criteria. 
D.  The final plat may then be approved and released by the City for filing in the office of the County Clerk in which the property is located.  
Sec. 12-448. - Inspections and certifications. 
The City Engineer shall inspect or otherwise secure the inspection of the construction of the required improvements of conformance with the approved plans and specifications. Upon completion of the improvements, the City Engineer shall file with the City Council, a statement either certifying that the improvements have been completed in accordance with these regulations and the engineering design criteria or that the improvements are defective, listing the defects.  
Sec. 12-449. - Record drawings. 
A.  Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider and his engineer shall file with the City Engineer one (1) mylar set of record drawings, certified and signed by a registered professional engineer for said improvements. Said record drawings shall be filed with the City prior to the issuance of building permits in the platted area or within a schedule of time agree to by the developer and Planning Commission staff. The record drawings shall certify: 
1.  That all required improvements are complete; 
2.  That the subdivision improvements are in compliance with these regulations and the engineering design criteria standard specifications; and 
3.  That the improvements have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. 
B.  Subdividers with the capabilities of generating record drawings as computer layouts and system drawings for plats, water, sanitary sewer, street, drainage, grading, etc. shall provide the City with computer files of such drawings.  
Sec. 12-450. - Improvements acceptance or forfeiture. 
The City Council shall accept by formal recorded action any or all improvements before such improvements become public property, provided that all statements and agreements specified above have been received and that record drawings have been submitted. The maintenance bond shall begin with the acceptance of said improvements by the City Council. Approval of the record drawings by the City Engineer shall not be construed to mean that the maintenance bond is void. No building construction shall be permitted on any lot on which improvements have not been completed, or said completion guaranteed in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and the engineering design criteria and no municipal utility service shall be furnished to such lot until the approved record drawings have been received by the City Engineer.  
Sec. 12-451. - Maintenance bond. 
Prior to acceptance of these improvements by the City Council, the subdivider shall obtain a maintenance bond or irrevocable letter of credit from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma. The bond shall be filed with City Clerk and shall be payable to the City. The amount of the bond shall be equal to one hundred (100) percent of the entire cost of said improvements including all water lines, sanitary sewer lines, paving, grading and drainage improvements. The duration of the maintenance bond for streets and drainage improvements shall be two (2) years from the date of acceptance of said paving and drainage improvements by the City Council. The duration of the maintenance bond for all other improvements shall be one (1) year from the date of acceptance of said improvements by the City Council.  
Sec. 12-452. - Lot split procedures—Authority. 
The Planning Commission, pursuant to the powers and jurisdiction vested through Oklahoma State Statutes does hereby exercise the power and authority to review, approved and disapprove transfer of land hereinafter referred to as lot splits.  
Sec. 12-453. - Same—Intent and purpose. 
The provisions contained in this section are intended to establish minimum procedures and standards for lot splits in order to accomplish the policy and purposes set forth in these regulations.  
Sec. 12-454. - Lot splits—City of Sapulpa. 
Any conveyance of land lying within the City of Sapulpa resulting in parcels meeting the definition of "lot split" shall be exempt from the requirements of preparing, filing, and seeking Planning Commission approval of a subdivision plat. Such conveyances, however, must be approved by the subdivision plat. Such conveyances, however, must be approved by the Planning Commission as a "lot split" and must show such approval by stamp upon the instrument of transfer in accordance with Oklahoma State Statutes. Planning Commission approval of such conveyances shall be conditioned upon the following: 
A.  All resulting lots must comply with the provisions of the applicable "Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance or Regulations", and the "Detention Ordinance"; 
B.  All resulting lots must have written approval from the Creek County Health Department for sewage disposal systems; 
C.  All resulting lots must have access to public utilities by proper easement or other approved right-of-way; 
D.  All resulting lots shall have frontage upon a public maintained and dedicated public road; and 
E.  All resulting lots shall meet the minimum bulk and area requirements of the zoning district within which they are located.  
Sec. 12-455. - Usage of terms. 
A.  For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in this section. 
B.  Unless the contest clearly indicated the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means "in these regulations" the word "Regulations" means "these Subdivision Regulations." 
C.  A "person" includes a corporation, a partnership and an incorporated association of persons such as a club; "shall" is mandatory and not directory; "may" and "should" are directory and not mandatory; the "building" includes a "structure", a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof; "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."  
Sec. 12-456. - Words and terms defined. 
Abutting in addition to the customary meaning, abutting, for the purpose of providing notice, shall mean contiguous or separated therefrom only by a non-arterial street. 
Alley means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street. 
Applicant means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises for purposes of any application submitted under these subdivision regulations. 
As-built construction plans. See Record Drawings. 
Block means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities. 
Board of Adjustment means the Board of Adjustment of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
Board of County Commissioners means the Board of Commissioners of Creek County, Oklahoma. 
Bond means any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the City of Sapulpa. All bonds shall be approved by the City of Sapulpa wherever a bond is required by these Subdivision Regulations. 
Building means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and includes any structure. 
Building line or setback line means the line or lines designating the area outside of which buildings may not be erected. 
Capital improvements program means a proposed schedule of all future projects listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. All major projects requiring the expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual local government's operating expenses, for the purchase, construction, major repairs and major maintenance, or replacement of the physical assets of the community are included in the capital improvement program. 
City means the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
City Council means the City Council of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. See also Governing Body. 
City Engineer means the City Engineer or the designated representative of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
Comprehensive plan means the general plan for development of the City of Sapulpa, prepared and adopted by the Planning Commission and submitted for review and approval by the City Council of Sapulpa, pursuant to Oklahoma State Statutes, including any part of such plans separately adopted and made a part thereof and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
Construction plans means the maps or drawing accompanying a preliminary and final subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the City of Sapulpa as a condition to the approval of the final plat. 
Cul-de-sac. See Street, Cul-de-sac. 
Developer means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or the owner's representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises if the owner is not the developer for the purpose of any application submitted under these subdivision regulations. 
Double frontage means a situation in which a lot has access on two (2) streets that do not intersect. 
Easement means authorization by a property owner for a general or specific use by another, of any designated part of, or tract of land. 
Engineering design criteria means the latest edition of the engineering standards and design criteria used in the design and construction of subdivision improvements as adopted and as amended by the City of Sapulpa. A short form of reference to the document entitled, "Engineering Design Criteria and Standard Specifications for Construction." 
Escrow means a deposit of cash with the City of Sapulpa in-lieu-of an amount required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond. Such escrow funds shall be deposited, upon receipt by the City of Sapulpa, in a separate account. 
Final plat. See Plat, Final. 
Floodplain means the area adjoining the channel of a river, creek, stream or watercourse, or lake or any other body of standing water or area which may from time to time be covered by floodwater. The floodplain areas shall be those areas as described and delineated on maps contained within the offices of the City Engineer. 
Frontage means that part of a lot abutting on a street or way and that is ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered as the ordinary side of a corner lot. 
Full Urbanization means the total development that is anticipated in a given area in accordance with the comprehensive plan and other land use regulations of the City of Sapulpa. 
Governing body means the body of the local government having the power to adopt ordinances, being the City Council of the City of Sapulpa. 
Grade means the slope of a road, street, or public or private way, specified in terms of percentage (%). 
Health Department means the agency designated by the City of Sapulpa to administer the health regulations of the local and state government and referred to as the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality of Creek County, or the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
Highway, limited access means a freeway or expressway providing a traffic way for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property on lands and other persons have no legal right to access to or from the same, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such traffic way. 
Improvements means grading, streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, culverts, drainage ditches, bridges, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, force mains and lift stations, storm sewer lines, other utilities, and other features required to support a development. 
Improvements, off-site means a utility, structure, or modification of topography located outside the property to be subdivided. 
Improvements, private means any street, sidewalk, utility line, drainageway or other facility not provided by the City and which may or may not be required as a condition of approval of a development by the City nor which will be maintained by the City, nor which will be maintained by the City. 
Improvements, public means any street, sidewalk, utility line, drainage way or other facility for which the City may ultimately assume the responsibility for construction, maintenance and operation. 
Improvements required means any improvement required by the City as a condition of approval of a subdivision plat and development. 
Individual sewage disposal system means a septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device. 
Joint ownership. Joint ownership among persons shall be construed as the same owner; also referred to as "Constructive Ownership" for the purpose of imposing these subdivisions. 
Local government for the purpose of these subdivision regulations, shall mean the City of Sapulpa acting by and through its duly constituted boards, councils, commission and bodies. 
Lot means a tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building and development. 
Lot, corner means a lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two (2) or more streets. 
Lot, double frontage means a lot that runs through a block from street to street and that abuts two (2) or more streets that do not intersect but not including a corner lot. 
Lot, reverse frontage means a double frontage lot that is designed to be developed with the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress and egress provided on a miner street. 
Lot of record means any parcel of land meeting one (1) of the following three (3) conditions: 
An unplatted parcel of land which was filed of record by district instrument in the office of the Creek County Clerk prior to October 21, 1986; or any whole lot as shown on a subdivision plat properly filed of record in the office of the Creek County Clerk after October 21, 1986, which plat has shown on its face the approval of the Metropolitan Area Planning Commission. 
Lot area means the total area measured on a horizontal plane, included within the lot boundaries. 
Lot split means the division of a lot of record into no more than four (4) parcels of less than ten (10) acres in size. 
Major street and highway plan means the Sapulpa Major Street and Highway Plan map and documentation established and adopted by the City of Sapulpa showing area major streets and highways, the required rights-of-way and any amendments or additions adopted by the City of Sapulpa. 
Major subdivision means all subdivisions not classified as a minor subdivision, including but not limited to a subdivision of more than four (4) lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the local governmental facilities, or the creation of any public improvements. 
Minor subdivision means any subdivision containing not more than four (4) lots and fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, or the extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any public improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the comprehensive plan, major street and highway plan, zoning ordinance, or these subdivision regulations. 
Monument means a permanent marker properly located and as required by these subdivision regulations for the location and identification on the land of reference points in the subdivision, such as, but not limited to, the corners of the subdivision, corners of blocks and lots and radii for street curvature. 
Owner means any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these subdivision regulations. 
Park Board means the Park Board of the City of Sapulpa or Creek County, Oklahoma. 
Resubdivision means a change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or are reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line; or such other change if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling said subdivision. 
Reserve area means a tract of land that by public authority is withdrawn or otherwise set aside from sale or settlement and is applicable to a specific public purpose such as for drainage. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road electrical and communication services, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for the purpose of platting land shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Right-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade trees, or other use involving construction or maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. All such dedications are subject to the final approval and acceptance by the City Council of Sapulpa. 
Roads, classification means a system established for the purpose of providing for the development of the streets, highways, roads and rights-of-way in the City of Sapulpa and for the future improvement, reconstruction, realignment and necessary widening, including provision for curbs and sidewalks, for each existing street, highway, road and right-of-way, and those located on approved and filed plats designated on the Major Street and Highway Plan of the City of Sapulpa. The classification of each street, highway, road and right-of-way is based upon its location in the respective zoning districts and its present and estimated future traffic volume and its relative importance and function as specified in the comprehensive plan of the City of Sapulpa. The required improvements shall be measured as set forth for each street classification on the major street and highway plan. 
Sale or lease means any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any possessor interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise, and interstate succession, or transfer of an interest in a subdivision of part thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise, interstate succession, or other written instrument. 
Setback means the distance between a building and the street right-of-way line nearest thereto. 
Street means a public or private right-of-way that affords the primary means of access to abutting property or serves as a thoroughfare for vehicular traffic, or both, but excluding alleys. 
Street, arterial means a thoroughfare designated on the major street and highway plan that carries a significant portion of the interurban vehicle traffic at moderate speeds with some traffic stops. Also see Street, Primary Arterial and Street, Secondary Arterial, in this section. 
Street, border means a street located adjacent to a railroad, drainageway, park, open space area or limited access highway. 
Street, collector means a thoroughfare designated on the major street and highway plan that is intended to move traffic from minor to arterial streets, including the principal entrance and circulation street or streets of a development. 
Street, commercial collector/industrial collector means a category of trafficway that provides circulation to and from commercial and industrial areas to connect with major streets or highways. 
Street, Commercial Business District means a category of trafficway that provides circulation within the Central Business District. 
Street, commercial/industrial means a category of trafficway that provides circulation within commercial and industrial areas. 
Street, cul-de-sac means a minor street with only one (1) outlet and having a terminus for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement including all emergency and service vehicles. 
Street, frontage or service means a minor street auxiliary to and located on the side of a major street for service to abutting properties and adjacent areas and for control of access. 
Street, major means highway, arterial and collector streets as shown on the major street and highway plan. 
Street, marginal access means any existing street to which the parcel of land to be subdivided abuts only one (1) side. Marginal access streets are designed to separate access to lots fronting on arterial streets from arterial street traffic. 
Street, minor (local) means a trafficway of limited length, not classified as a major street or highway, that provides direct access to abutting tracts of land and access to more heavily traveled streets, and that is designed in such a manner to discourage its use by through traffic. 
Street, primary arterial means a thoroughfare designated on the major street and highway plan that carries a portion of both intra-urban and interurban vehicle traffic at a moderate rate of speed with some traffic stops. 
Street, secondary arterial means a thoroughfare designated on the major street and highway plan that carries a significant portion of the interurban vehicular traffic having some traffic stops. 
Street, service road means a minor street that is parallel and adjacent to major streets, trafficways, highways or railroad rights-of-way and that provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Subdivider means any person who: (1) having an interest in land, causes it directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or who (2) directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises for sale, lease, or development, any interest, lot parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision, or, who (3) engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, or developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a subdivision of any interest, lot parcel, site, unit, or plat in a subdivision, and who (4) is directly or indirectly controlled by, or one who is under the direct, or indirect common control of any of the foregoing. 
Subdivision means any land, vacant or improved, that is divided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease and whereon there is constructed permanent structural improvements, or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions, including resubdivision. Subdivision includes the division or development of residential and on residentially zoned land, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded instrument. 
Subdivision agent means any person who represents, or acts for or on behalf of, a subdivider or developer, in selling, leasing, or developing, or offers to sell, lease, or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site, or plat in a subdivision, except at attorney-at-law whose representation of another person consists solely of rendering legal services. 
Subdivision, major. See Major Subdivision. 
Subdivision, minor. See Minor Subdivision. 
Subdivision plat means the final map or drawing, described in these subdivision regulations, on which the subdivisions' plan or subdivision is presented to the Planning Commission, City Council, for approval and which, if approved, may be submitted to the County Clerk of the County in which the property is located for filing of record. 
Subdivision regulations means the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Sapulpa. 
Technical Advisory Committee means a committee composed of public officials and utility company representatives to review and study all plats and lot split proposals and to make recommendations and findings to the Planning Commission, City council concerning the proposed subdivision. 
Temporary improvement means improvements built and maintained by a subdivider during construction of the subdivision and prior to release of the performance bond. 
Zoning ordinance means the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sapulpa or Creek County, Oklahoma.  
CHAPTER 5. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 12-501. - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the City of Sapulpa are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.  
Sec. 12-502. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.  
Sec. 12-503. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.  
Sec. 12-504. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application: 
Accessory structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Examples of accessory structures include but are not limited to garages and storage sheds. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within the City of Sapulpa subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation means that elevation, expressed in feet above mean sea level, to which flooding can be expected to occur on a frequency of once in every one hundred (100) years, or which is subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
BFE means base flood elevation. 
CFR means Code of Federal Regulations. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Development permit means a permit issued by the City of Sapulpa Floodplain Administrator which authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in accordance with this chapter. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built, in the case of a building in Zones AE, A, and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones AE, A, and X, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 4, 1972. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
FIRM means flood insurance rate map. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
A.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters, or 
B.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map means an official map of the City of Sapulpa on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the City of Sapulpa. 
Flood insurance study is the official report provided by FEMA for City of Sapulpa which contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocity. 
Floodplain Administrator means a person accredited by the OWRB and designated by the City Council of the City of Sapulpa to administer and implement laws, ordinances and regulations relating to the management of floodplains. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flood). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose regulations and ordinances (such as floodplain, grading and erosion control regulations and ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within City of Sapulpa subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. A floodway is located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 12-506. A floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles. 
Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
A.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
B.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
C.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
D.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of Title 44 CFR. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the City of Sapulpa's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Sapulpa City Council and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the City of Sapulpa Floodplain Board. 
OWRB means the Oklahoma Water Resources Board. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
A.  Built on a single chassis; 
B.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
C.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
D.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Public Law 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
A.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions, or 
B.  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance is a grant of relief by the City of Sapulpa City Council to a person from the terms of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of Title 44 CFR.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this City of Sapulpa flood damage prevention ordinance. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.  
Sec. 12-505. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This flood damage prevention ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Tulsa County and Incorporated Areas" dated October 16, 2012, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are hereby referenced to be effected on October 16, 2012, and declared to be a part of this Code as well as the Flood Insurance Study for Creek County and Incorporated Areas dated May 18, 2009. This chapter amendment goes into effect on October 16, 2012, at not before. 
(Ord. 2674, 10/01/2012)  
Sec. 12-506. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Creek County, Oklahoma and Incorporated Areas" dated May 18, 2009, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This chapter shall go into effect on May 18, 2009.  
Sec. 12-507. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this floodplain management ordinance.  
Sec. 12-508. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.  
Sec. 12-509. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.  
Sec. 12-510. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.  
Sec. 12-511. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Sapulpa or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.  
Sec. 12-512. - Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. 
The City Council of the City of Sapulpa designates the Director of Urban Development and/or his/her designee as Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of National Flood Insurance Program regulations in Title 44 CFR pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 2652)  
Sec. 12-513. - Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with Title 82 O.S. §§ 1601—1618, as amended. 
B.  Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
C.  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by this chapter. 
D.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which prior approval are required. 
E.  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). 
F.  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the FEMA. 
G.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
H.  When base flood elevation data contemplated by Section 12-506 has not been provided by FEMA, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from any Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Sections 12-516 and 12-517. 
I.  When a floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE as delineated on the Creek County FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City of Sapulpa. 
J.  After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in the City of Sapulpa, determine if the residential and non-residential structures and manufactured homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce the substantial improvement requirement. 
K.  Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a decision of the City Council. 
L.  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 12-514. - Permit procedures. 
A.  An application for a development permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and 
2.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
B.  Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
2.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
3.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
4.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
5.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
6.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
7.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
8.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
9.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and 
10.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
C.  The Floodplain Administrator or City Council, as applicable, may approve certain development in Zone A or AE delineated on the Creek County FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the applicant for the Development Permit in that case first complies with 44 CFR Section 65.12.  
Sec. 12-515. - Variances. 
A.  General provisions. 
1.  The City Council of the City of Sapulpa may grant variances for uses which do not satisfy the requirements of the Oklahoma Floodplain Management Act or this chapter, if the applicant for the variance presents adequate proof that (i) compliance with this chapter will result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property without sufficient benefit or advantage to the people and (ii) satisfies the pertinent provisions of Section 12-515. Provided, however, no variance shall be granted where the effect of the variance will be to permit the continuance of a condition which unreasonably creates flooding hazards. 
2.  Any variance so granted shall not be construed as to relieve any person who receives it from any liability imposed by the Oklahoma Floodplain Management Act or by other laws of the state. 
3.  In no case shall variances be effective for a period longer than twenty (20) years. 
4.  Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the City Council, accompanied by a filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
5.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in Section 12-514.B and provisions of Section 12-515 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
6.  Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the base flood elevation will be issued a notice signed by the Chairman of the City Council which states that (i) the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built lower than the base flood elevation, and (ii) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
7.  At such time as the City Council deems the petition ready for notification to the public, the City Council shall schedule a hearing and direct the applicant to publish notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in Creek County at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. 
8.  The City Council shall conduct the hearing and make determinations in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. The City Council shall exercise wide discretion in weighing the equities involved and the advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to the public at large when determining whether the variance shall be granted. 
9.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances; and 
d.  A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
10.  Upon consideration of the factors stated in this section and the intent of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives stated in Section 12-502 of this chapter. 
11.  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance; and a copy of any variance issued by the Floodplain Board shall be sent by the Floodplain Administrator to the OWRB and FEMA within fifteen (15) days after issuance of the variance. 
B.  Special provisions. 
1.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
2.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
3.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
4.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria of Section 12-515.A.5; Section 12-515.A.9; Section 12-515.B.2; and Section 12-515.B.3 of this chapter are met, and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.  
Sec. 12-516. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
A.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
B.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
C.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
D.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
E.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
F.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
G.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.  
Sec. 12-517. - Same—Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevations have been provided or are otherwise determined as set forth in Section 12-506, Section 12-513.H, or Section 12-518.A, the following provisions are required: 
A.  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. 
B.  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. 
C.  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
D.  Manufactured homes. 
1.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on the Creek County FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at least thirty-six (36) inches above grade or at least at or above the base flood elevation. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. The home shall be installed by a licensed installer according to Oklahoma state law and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the Floodplain Administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home. 
2.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zone AE on the Creek County FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the I-beam for the manufactured home is elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. A licensed installer shall install the home in accordance with state law and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the Floodplain Administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home. 
3.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zone AE on the Creek County FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of Paragraph D of this section be elevated so that the bottom of the I-beam of the manufactured home is at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. A licensed installer shall install the home in accordance with state law and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the Floodplain Administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home. 
E.  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A and AE on the Creek County FIRM either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 12-514, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
F.  Accessory structure. Accessory structures to be placed on sites within Zones A and AE on the Creek County FIRM shall comply with the following: 
1.  The structure shall be unfinished on the interior; 
2.  The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage; 
3.  The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited activities or uses include but are not limited to working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom use; 
4.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be elevated to or above the BFE; 
5.  The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
6.  The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential and constructed with flood resistance materials; 
7.  The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; 
8.  Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the structure; 
9.  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below the BFE; and 
10.  The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent and nearby structures.  
Sec. 12-518. - Standards for subdivisions. 
A.  The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located in Zones A and AE which is fifty-one (51) or more lots or greater than five (5) acres shall generate the base flood elevation data for that subdivision. 
B.  All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
C.  All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.  
Sec. 12-519. - Floodways. 
The following provisions shall apply to floodways: 
A.  Encroachments, including but not limited to fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development are prohibited within the adopted floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the City of Sapulpa during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  If Section 12-519.A above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 12-516 and 12-517. 
C.  The City of Sapulpa may permit encroachments within the adopted floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the applicant for the development permit complies with all of 44 CFR Section 65.12.  
Sec. 12-520. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.  
Sec. 12-521. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate or other certifications required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than one year or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council of the City of Sapulpa or its City Attorney from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.  
Sec. 15-522. - Certification. 
It is hereby found and declared by the City Council of the City of Sapulpa that severe flooding has occurred in the past within its jurisdiction and will certainly occur within the future; that flooding is likely to result in infliction of serious personal injury or death, and is likely to result in substantial injury or destruction of property within its jurisdiction; in order to effectively comply with minimum standards for coverage under the National Flood Insurance Program, and in order to effectively remedy the situation described herein, it is necessary that the ordinance from which this chapter is derived become effective immediately.  
CHAPTER 6. - GATED COMMUNITIES 
 
Sec. 12-601. - Restriction on gated access. 
No public street shall be obstructed. Gated access will only be considered and allowed for private streets, approved planned unit developments, apartment projects, or two (2) acre private street developments, or other subdivision plats approved by the City Council.  
Sec. 12-602. - General location requirements. 
Any gate shall be located a sufficient distance from a public street allow three (3) cars to line up at the gate without interfering with vehicles utilizing a public street; the minimum acceptable distance from the gate to public street shall be no less than sixty (60) feet.  
Sec. 12-603. - Turn around lane. 
A turn around lane shall be provided for vehicles unable to enter the gated development.  
Sec. 12-604. - Prohibition of tire damaging devices. 
Road spikes, barbs, or other tire damaging devices are prohibited.  
Sec. 12-605. - Council approval of circulation plans. 
The City Council shall approve all circulation plans for any gated access development and may require multiple entrances.  
Sec. 12-606. - Applicability of City standards to controlled access developments. 
All City standards for streets, sidewalks, fire lanes, fire hydrants, and other engineering requirements shall apply to any controlled access development.  
Sec. 12-607. - Homeowners association responsibilities. 
A homeowners association shall be established for each gated community and shall provide the names, addresses, and emergency contact numbers to the Fire Department. Each homeowners association shall be responsible for the following: 
A.  Maintenance and repair of the private streets and/or fire lanes, and to provide the funds therefor through the use of assessments; 
B.  Maintenance testing and repairs of all functions of any access gate; 
C.  Equipping each access gate with a rapid entry key lock box, which shall be located at or near the main entrance to the property. The rapid key entry lock box shall be mounted at a height of six (6) feet above final grade, or as designated by the fire chief. 
D.  Accompanying Fire Department officials during annual inspection and testing of opening systems of the gated community. 
E.  Maintaining a service agreement with a qualified contractor to insure year round maintenance.  
Sec. 12-608. - Minimum gate width. 
The minimum gate opening width, including clearance for all improvements related to the gate, shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.  
Sec. 12-609. - Emergency release required. 
An emergency release hitch pin shall be installed on the control arm of any access gate. This hitch pin, when removed, will detach the control arm from the gate and allow the gate to swing open freely with manual intervention.  
Sec. 12-610. - Electrical battery backup required. 
A back-up battery electrical system shall be provided for each access gate. These batteries will be trickle charged to maintain electrical energy and in the event of loss of normal electrical current cause the gate to open and remain open until reset by the homeowners association.  
Sec. 12-611. - Rapid entry key lock requirements. 
The location of all rapid entry key lock boxes, hitch pins, related equipment, operation of gate, signage, opening design, swinging or sliding operation of any gate or any other design specification shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the plans approved by the appropriate City officials, including without limitation, the City Building Inspector, City Planner and Fire Marshal.  
Sec. 12-612. - Minimum lane width established. 
The minimum paving width for all lanes entering and exiting the development shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width. There shall be no parking on said twenty (20) foot roadway. Appropriate signage shall be provided. If parking is requested on said roadway, the minimum width of the same shall be twenty-six (26) feet.  
Sec. 12-613. - Events requiring open gate established. 
Should any problem occur in the operation of the gate or any violation of any provision of this article, each access gate shall remain open and access to the development available until such time as the problem is resolved and/or the gate is repaired and tested.  
Sec. 12-614. - Covered entry structure requirements. 
When a covered structure is requested, the minimum height shall be no less than sixteen (16) feet and the minimum width shall be no less than twenty (20) feet.  
Sec. 12-615. - Access agreement with Fire Department required. 
Each gated community must enter into an access agreement with the City Fire Department prior to installation of any gate.  
Sec. 12-616. - Fire Department approval of access agreement. 
The Fire Department shall approve an access agreement with the developer, homeowners association, or other responsible property owners that provides for annual inspection of each gate to insure the same is tested to meet all of the construction requirements prior to being approved for operation or continued operation at any point the gate fails to meet these standards. The verification of the access agreement and a copy will be kept on file at the Fire Department with the contractor's name, address, twenty-four (24) hour a day telephone numbers, and the developer, homeowner's representative, or responsible property owner's name, address and telephone number. This information shall be a minimum requirement for approval of an annual inspection of each gate.  
Sec. 12-617. - Registration fee. 
A registration fee as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule shall be paid by the owner or developer to the Fire Department for plan review and inspections costs related to gated access developments.  
CHAPTER 7. - EARTH CHANGE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 12-701. - Purpose and scope. 
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of protecting the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Sapulpa from the hazards and danger of flooding, inadequate or improper drainage and erosion of soil by imposing standards and conditions upon the excavation, filling, grading, regrading, berming, paving, and diking of land within the City of Sapulpa.  
Sec. 12-702. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application: 
City means the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
Earth change means excavating, filling, grading, regrading, berming, paving, or diking of land within the City of Sapulpa. Earth change will also include the clearing or removal of trees as outlined in the City tree ordinance on a parcel, or activities commonly called clearing and grubbing within the boundaries of the regulatory floodplain. 
Tract means any parcel of land subject to the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 12-703. - General provisions; rules for interpretation. 
This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Sapulpa. 
No land shall hereafter be developed, redeveloped, graded, filled, excavated, bermed, diked, or cleared of its trees and undergrowth without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable articles. 
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of their inconsistencies. 
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be considered as minimum requirements as determined by the City of Sapulpa; and shall be deemed neither to limit or repeal any of the other powers granted under state statutes. 
Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study and computations. This article does not imply that land uses permitted will be free from hydraulic or wind erosion, or flooding. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma or any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
Plans to be prepared by professionals. All plans prepared and submitted by any person proposing development shall be prepared under the supervision of a registered professional engineer registered in the State of Oklahoma.  
Sec. 12-704. - Earth change permit required. 
Unless specifically exempted, an earth change permit, as defined and regulated by this article, shall be obtained from the Director of Urban Development prior to the commencement of any excavating, grading, regrading, landfilling, berming or diking of any property within the City of Sapulpa. Unless specifically exempt, an earth change permit shall be required prior to the clearing of land, including the removal of healthy trees within the regulatory floodplain or performing any other work constituting an earth change under this chapter. A separate permit shall be required for each separate noncontiguous tract, and no permit shall be transferable without the prior written consent of the Director of Urban Development. 
Prior to the granting any earth change permit, the Director of Urban Development shall attach such conditions thereto as may be deemed necessary to prevent hazards to public or private property resulting from the blockage, obstruction, alteration or impairment of any storm sewer drain or surface water course and to prevent the work thereby authorized from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property, or otherwise likely to create a public nuisance. Such public nuisances should be deemed to include, but not be limited to, erosion, avulsion, or siltation anywhere within the storm sewer system or surface water system of the City of Sapulpa; or any conditions that exist contrary to the adopted regulations of the City of Sapulpa. Conditions attached to the permit may include, but are not limited to: Submission of a drainage plan, drawings specified to finish grade land contours, installation of retaining walls, drains, detention facilities, other drainage facilities, specified erosion control measures, the furnishing of any necessary public easements; and a specified methodology for performing the authorized work, and the disposition of waste generated.  
Sec. 12-705. - Permit review. 
An earth change permit shall expire at one (1) year after it is issued. Permits on ongoing projects shall be reviewed each nine (9) months for compliance.  
Sec. 12-706. - Application for earth change permit. 
General requirement. Unless excepted by the provisions of this article, any person desiring to effect an earth change shall file a written application for an earth change permit with the Director of Urban Development. Application shall be in such form and content as the Director of Urban Development shall establish, and shall be accompanied by the payment of a permit fee, the amount of which shall be recommended by the Director of Urban Development and approved by the City Council of the City of Sapulpa. The site plan and design standards established by the applicant and approved by the City, or imposed by the City, shall become conditions upon the issuance of the earth change permit; no changes in an approved plan or design standard shall be made without prior written approval of the City. 
Contents of permit application. Each earth change permit application shall contain the following information: 
The name and address of the legal owner of the property for which the permit is requested; 
A vicinity sketch of the site for which a permit is requested, including a legal description of such property, and a boundary line survey as may be requested by the City; 
Site drawings indicating each separate land area to be excavated, filled, graded, or leveled, the finished depth of each separate land cut or fill, the present and future (as completed) points of entry and discharge for surface water on the subject property, and identification of all temporary or permanent structures or other devices to be erected or established for the purpose of controlling or regulating surface water and erosion of such property; 
The applicant's plans for controlling on-site erosion and off-site sedimentation for the purpose of minimizing the deposit of sediment from the tract under application upon any other off-site public or private property or watercourse during all phases of project construction; 
The applicant's plans for receipt of surface water on his property and discharge of surface water from his property during periods of construction, and a statement specifying the anticipated time period for the completion of all drainage improvements. Provided, however, that if the Director of Urban Development is unable to determine from the application submitted that it meets the policies and standards governing the issuance of the requested permit, the Director Urban of Development shall request the applicant in writing to furnish such additional information which may be essential to such determination; and 
Owner's statement and signature certifying that the approved plans will be implemented under the direct supervision of a registered professional engineer.  
Sec. 12-707. - Earth change policies and standards. 
The issuance of the earth change permits shall be governed by the following policies of the City of Sapulpa: 
A.  No earth change shall be permitted which creates a public hazard upon any property within the City of Sapulpa through the obstruction, impairment, sedimentation, blockage or alteration of any storm sewer drain or any existing surface water course. 
B.  No earth change shall be permitted which will channelize, obstruct, or impede any water course in a manner which is inconsistent with accepted engineering practices and/or the adopted drainage standards of the City of Sapulpa. 
C.  All earth changes shall be designed, constructed and competed in a manner which minimizes the time of exposure of bare earth to the elements. 
D.  Construction activity on individual tracts shall be conducted only if appropriate sedimentation facilities are installed and maintained throughout the construction period to minimize sediment from any such tract being deposited upon any off-site public or private property or water course during all phases of project construction. 
E.  As may be applicable to any tract of land for which an approved drainage plan exists, the requirements and conditions of the drainage plan shall be incorporated as a condition upon the issuance of any earth change permit. 
F.  The redesign of any drainage structures required and presently existing as a result of the previous processing of an approved drainage plan shall not be required as an incident or condition for the subsequent issuance of an earth change permit unless the proposed earth change materially alters the character of the approved drainage plan. 
The policies governing earth changes shall be implemented by the adopted City drainage standards which shall specifically regulate the following considerations: 
A.  The adopted City drainage standards shall regulate the design, installation and utilization of all detention and drainage, facilities and structures. 
B.  The adopted City drainage standards shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance and removal of sedimentation and erosion control procedures; facilities and structures and shall establish acceptable methods and practices for controlling soil sedimentation and erosion.  
Sec. 12-708. - Earth change exemptions. 
An earth change permit shall not be required for the following activities: 
A.  Bona fide agricultural and farming operations which constitute the principal use of a tract of ground in the City of Sapulpa and which meet the requirements of the zoning code of the City of Sapulpa. 
B.  Home gardening. 
C.  Excavating and/or grading, and/or leveling, and/or landfilling requiring less than twelve (12) inches of cut or fill at any one point. 
D.  The common or routine maintenance and clearing of a floodplain which does not expose the earth or ground to erosion. 
Provided, however, that exemptions C and D are not applicable to: 
Such activities when occurring upon any tract of record regardless of size or depth of cut or fill, located within the regulatory flood area; or 
Such activities when occurring upon any tract of record, regardless of size or depth of cut or fill when such tract contains any natural or man-made watercourse, with a drainage area of over forty (40) acres. 
E.  Emergency repairs of a temporary nature made on public or private property which are necessary for the preservation of life, health, or property, and which are made under such circumstances where it would be impossible or impracticable to obtain an earth change permit. 
F.  Temporary excavation for the purpose of maintaining or repairing any public street, public utility, or any service lines related thereto.  
Sec. 12-709. - Enforcement and penalties. 
Notification of noncompliance. If at any time the work being performed in accordance with an earth change permit does not conform to the approved permit, including conditions and approved modification thereof, a written notice to comply shall be given to the permit holder by the Director of Urban Development stating the nature and location of the alleged noncompliance, and specifying what remedial steps are necessary to bring the project into compliance. The permit holder shall have such time as may be allowed in writing by the Director of Urban Development to correct all noted deficiencies; the time allowed shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of the deficiency and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. 
Temporary suspension of earth change permit. An earth change permit may be temporarily suspended by the Director of Urban Development upon the existence of any condition or the conducting of any act constituting or creating a condition which endangers human life or may cause severe property damage to others. The Director of Urban Development may issue an immediate stop work order. The Director of Urban Development shall, upon issuance of a temporary suspension, shall give the permit holder written notice specifying the grounds of such temporary suspension and advising the permit holder of his right of appeal to the City Council. 
Revocation or suspension of earth change permit. An earth change permit may be revoked or suspended by the City Council after a public hearing. The permit holder shall be given ten (10) calendar days advance written notice specifying the grounds for such contemplated revocation or suspension, and advising the property owner of the date, place and time of hearing before the City Council. An earth change permit may be revoked or suspended upon the occurrence of any one (1) of the following events: 
A.  Violation of any material condition of the permit; or 
B.  Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the earth change permit; or 
C.  Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangering human life or property of others. 
Upon the revocation of an earth change permit by the City Council, or as may be specifically directed by the City Council in cases where an earth change permit is suspended, the Director of Urban Development shall issue a stop work order on all construction activity on the permit holder's property which may be directly or indirectly related to site drainage and which is being performed pursuant to any permits, licenses, franchises or contracts issued or approved by the City of Sapulpa; such order may order a work stoppage on all construction activity on buildings or structures and all appurtenances thereto, including building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and street work, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, and all utilities including gas, electric, telephone, and cable TV. Notices and orders required by this subsection shall be served upon the parties concerned either personally or by certified mail, addressed to the individual contracting party(ies) or permit holder at the address given on the permit application filed with the City. 
Fine imposed. Any person, firm or corporation, or other legal entity, violating the requirements of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by Section 1-108 of the Code. Each day's violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
Fine not exclusive penalty. In addition to fine or imprisonment, the City may institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of the provisions of this article or adopted City drainage standards or to correct violations thereof, and, if applicable and appropriate, the City may institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or equity against any surety company, escrow holder, or any third party who has affirmatively acted as surety or guarantor for the faithful performance of the permit holder's work.  
CHAPTER 8. - SPECIFIC USE PERMIT 
 
Sec. 12-800. - General purpose. 
The City Council may, after a public hearing and recommendation by the Sapulpa Metropolitan Area Planning Commission and after conducting a public hearing as is required in accordance with the provisions of this section, authorize for specific parcels of land, the issuance of a specific use permit. 
The uses listed in the specific use list are so clarified because of the size of the land they require or the specialized nature of the use, or they may more intensely dominate the area in which they are located, or their effects on the general public are broader in scope than other types of uses permitted in the district. 
The designation of a specific use permit as possible on the specific use list does not constitute an authorization or an assurance that such use will be permitted. Rather, each specific use permit application shall be valued as to its probable effect on the adjacent property and community welfare and may be approved or denied as the findings indicate appropriate.  
Sec. 12-801. - Conditions for approval. 
A.  Application. Prior to submission of a request for a specific use permit, the Urban Development Director may require one (1) or more pre-application conferences with the potential applicant. In considering and determining its recommendation to the City Council relative to any application for a specific use permit, the Planning Commission may require that the applicant furnish preliminary site plans and data concerning the operation, location, function and characteristics of any use of land or building proposed. 
B.  Planning Commission requirements. The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council the requirement of certain safeguards and conditions concerning setbacks, ingress and egress, off-street parking and loading arrangements and location or construction of buildings and uses and operation. If the Planning Commission fails to review and make a recommendation within forty-five (45) days from the date the application is accepted for processing, the City Council can take action on the application. 
C.  City Council requirements. The City Council, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with the intent of this chapter and the Sapulpa Comprehensive Plan, may deny a specific request or require such development standards and operational conditions and safeguards as are indicated to be important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property and the community as a whole and be compatible with the natural environment and the planned capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use. This may include the requirement of having the property platted and/or the requirement of the dedication of sufficient right-of-way or easement as necessary to further the public good. The City Council may impose conditions including, but not limited to, permitted uses, lot sizes, setbacks, height limits, required facilities, buffers, open space areas, lighting, noise levels, signage, landscaping, parking and loading, compatibility, and land use density as may be indicated depending upon the proposed use and its potential effect on adjacent areas or the community. 
D.  Site plans. A site plan (plot plan) setting forth the conditions specified may be required of the applicant and such plan when accepted shall be made a part of the permit issued for the specific use. 
E.  Time limits for implementation. If for any reason the approved specific use ceases operation for a period of two (2) years, then the approval of said specific use shall be considered void and will require another public hearing review by the Planning Commission and City Council. This shall also apply to any approved specific use that does not begin operation within one (1) year of approval. This voiding of approval shall not apply if orderly progress toward completion of construction is taking place. Uses existing before the adoption of the specific use permit ordinance including non-conforming uses and their incidental and accessory uses must receive a specific use permit before any expansion of the use is permitted.  
Sec. 12-802. - Specific use permit list. 
A.  Specific uses. The following uses are allowed in all zoning districts by specific use permit process approved by the City Council: 
Accessory dwelling units—ADU (guest cottages, in-law quarters); 
Airport; 
Automobile sales—New or used; 
Automobile salvage yard; 
Bars, taverns, night clubs; 
Bed and breakfast inn—Including Air BNB (short-term rental)*; 
Bus station; 
Cemetery; 
Churches; 
College or university; 
Commercial theme parks; 
Convalescent homes; 
Convict pre-release center; 
Commercial resort facilities (minimum acreage requirement of forty (40) acres); 
Crematory; 
Cultural or heritage centers, public or private attractions; 
Day care center; 
Detention center juvenile—Adult; 
Electric generation plant and/or substation; 
Fire protection facility; 
Fire station; 
Flea market (indoor or outdoor); 
Golf course; 
Golf driving range; 
Governmental services; 
Gun club; 
Halfway house; 
Heliport; 
Hospital; 
Industrial uses: Use Units 24, 25, 26 (minimum requirement forty (40) acres); 
Juvenile delinquency center; 
Kennel; 
Library; 
Mausoleum; 
Marijuana commercial growth facility**; 
Marijuana processor/packager/storage facility**; 
Marijuana retail dispensary/establishment**; 
Mini-storage; 
Museum; 
Nursing homes; 
Offices: Use Unit 11 when located on a forty (40) acre or greater tract; 
Other residential uses: 
Tiny home (structure less than nine hundred (900) square feet); 
Transitional living center; 
Homeless shelter; 
Multi-family in multi-story structure; 
Post office; 
Private schools, with comprehensive education curriculum; 
Public schools; 
Recreational vehicle park; 
Recycling center; 
Refuse transfer station; 
Retail nursery; 
Rifle and skeet range; 
Sanitary landfill; 
Sewer disposal facility; 
Sexually oriented businesses; 
Sober living facility; 
Trade schools; 
Transmitting tower (excluding amateur radio tower); 
Water treatment facility and/or water storage facility; 
Use Unit 20 (outdoor recreational facilities); 
Use Unit 23 (mining and mineral processing). 
*Short-term rental (STR) uses: 
1.  Two types of short term rentals: 
Type 1: Owner occupied (single-family residence or duplex). 
Type 2: Not owner occupied (single-family residence or duplex). 
2.  STR can only be rented for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
3.  Only one (1) rental contract at a time is allowed. Maximum of two (2) guests per bedroom; no more than eight (8) guests at one time. Hosts required to leave a welcome packet for guests that includes appropriate contact information and instructions on City services. 
4.  STR locations cannot be used for special events, parties, or receptions. 
5.  Property owner must obtain a City business license in addition to obtaining an STR License. 
6.  An application fee will be assessed annually in accordance with the Master Fee Schedule and shall expire on April 30 of each year. Renewals shall be reviewed every year. 
7.  STR licensees will be required to pay a fee of five and one-half (5.5) percent of the listing price, including any fees for reservations, and any other applicable fees associated with their STR. 
8.  There is not a requirement of an in-person inspection but the licensee must certify that under penalty of perjury that their STR has a fire extinguisher, CO detector, smoke alarm, and liability insurance to cover bodily and property damage. 
9.  License number is required to be placed in advertisements. 
10.  STR must have public access to the location, adequate off-street parking, and be in compliance with all City Codes. 
11.  An accessory dwelling unit may be used for STR by a property owner who is living in the primary structure on the property. Only one (1) STR license will be allowed per property. 
**Marijuana uses. 
1.  Each commercial medical marijuana facility shall be operated from the permitted premises on the permitted property. No commercial medical marijuana facility shall be permitted to operate from a moveable, mobile, or transitory location, except for a permitted and licensed secure transporter when engaged in the lawful transport of marijuana. 
2.  Commercial operators will need to submit their security plan with their application for a specific use permit, and shall include the following: 
a.  Security surveillance cameras installed to monitor all entrances, along with the interior and exterior of the permitted premises; 
b.  Alarm systems which are professionally monitored and operated twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week; 
c.  A locking safe permanently affixed to the permitted premises that shall store all marijuana and cash remaining in the facility overnight; 
d.  All marijuana in whatever form stored at the permitted premises shall be kept in a secure manner and shall not be visible from outside the permitted premises, nor shall it be grown, processed, exchanged, displayed or dispensed outside of the permitted premises; and 
e.  All the security recordings shall be preserved for at least seven (7) days by the permit holder and made available to any law enforcement upon request for inspection. 
3.  Operating hours. No retail dispensary/establishment shall operate between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
4.  No commercial medical marijuana facility shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another medical marijuana facility; unless and except the medical marijuana facility is located within the Central Business District then no commercial medical marijuana facility shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of another commercial medical marijuana facility. 
5.  Sign restrictions. No pictures, photographs, drawings or other depictions of marijuana or marijuana paraphernalia shall appear on the outside of any permitted premises nor be visible outside of the permitted premises on the permitted property. The words "marijuana," "cannabis" and any other words used or intended to convey the presence or availability of marijuana shall not appear on the outside of the permitted premises nor be visible outside of the permitted premises on the permitted property. 
6.  All activities of commercial medical marijuana facilities, including without limitation, distribution, growth, cultivation, or the sale of Marijuana, and all other related activity under the permit holder's license or permit must occur indoors. The facility's operation and design shall minimize any impact to adjacent uses, including the control of any odor by maintaining and operating an air filtration system so that no odor is detectable outside the permitted premises. 
7.  A patient may not grow his or her own marijuana at a commercial medical marijuana facility. 
8.  All necessary building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical permits must be obtained for any part of the permitted premises. 
9.  The permit holder, owner and operator of the facility shall use lawful methods in controlling waste or by-products from any activities allowed under the license or permit. 
10.  The City Council may impose such reasonable terms and conditions on a commercial medical marijuana facility specific use permit as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to obtain compliance with the requirements of applicable law.  
Sec. 12-803. - Use conditions. 
A.  Compliance with district and use unit requirements. Specific uses permitted shall comply with the most restrictive yard and height requirements of the district in which located and in addition shall comply with the requirements as specified in Use Unit 2 or identified use unit for a particular use of the City of Sapulpa Zoning Code, except as may be modified by City Council as provided in Section 8-101.C. 
B.  No oil or gas related wells drilled after granting of specific use permit. 
1.  No permit for the drilling of any oil or gas related well shall be allowed in an AG, or IM zoned area if a Specific Use Permit affecting the area has been previously approved by the Sapulpa City Council unless the previous specific use permit was oil or gas well related. 
2.  Drilling operations for oil and gas require additional permits as specified under Sections 5-1101 through 5-1102 of the Sapulpa City Code. Conditions established under the required City Code application shall be in addition to the land use requirements established through the specific use permit process.  
Sec. 12-804. - Administration. 
A.  Filing of a petition for specific use permit. An application for a specific use permit shall be filed with the Planning Commission by the owner(s) of the property concerned, by the duly authorized representative thereof; by the holder of an option to purchase the affected real estate or by the purchaser in a contract to purchase realty. Such petition shall be on a standard form furnished by the commission. All petitions for a specific use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed area showing the location of buildings, parking, and other pertinent data concerning the operation of the proposed use. 
B.  Fees for permit. An application fee and a processing fee shall be required with the specific use permit application in accordance with the Master Fee Schedule. All costs associated with required postings in newspaper having general circulation within the community will be billed to the applicant. 
C.  Notice of hearing (ref: 11 O.S. § 43-104(A) and (B)). 
1.  Notice of the public hearing to consider a specific use permit shall be mailed at least twenty (21) days before the public hearing held by the Planning Commission by mailing written-notice by staff to the Planning Commission to all owners of property within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. The notice shall contain: 
a.  The date, time, and place of the public hearing. 
b.  The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the specific use permit. 
c.  The legal description of the property and street address or approximate location in the municipality. 
2.  In addition to the notice required in subsection 1 of this section, if the specific use permit requests the use of treatment facilities, multiple family facilities, transitional living facilities, halfway houses and any housing or facility that may be used for medical or non-medical detoxification as these terms are defined pursuant to Section 3-403 of Title 43A of the Oklahoma Statutes, the entity proposing the change in district regulation, restriction, or boundary shall mail a written notice within thirty (30) days of the hearing to all real property owners within one-quarter (¼) of a mile where the area to be affected is located and shall be responsible for all costs incurred in mailing this notice. 
D.  Appeals. An applicant may appeal a recommendation of denial by the Planning Commission to the City Council by providing written notice of its intent to appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the date of recommended denial by the Planning Commission. The City Council may reverse the recommendation of the Planning Commission by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the members of City Council.  
Part 13 - PUBLIC SAFETY  
CHAPTER 1. - FIRE PREVENTION  
ARTICLE A. - FIRE PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Adoption of fire prevention code. 
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Sapulpa, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Sapulpa in the State of Oklahoma regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said fire prevention code on file in the office of the City of Sapulpa are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 13-102 of this chapter. 
The International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted and amended by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (OUBCC), is adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Sapulpa in the State of Oklahoma by the City for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided and each and all of the regulations design, construction, quality of materials, repair, alteration, change of use or occupancy, addition or relocation of existing buildings and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the International Fire Code, as well as any Appendices referenced, as adopted and amended by the OUBCC are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code, said amendment, incorporation and codification occurring automatically upon: (i) the publication of such later edition by the International Code Council and OUBCC; and (ii) the receipt and approval of said edition by the City Fire Marshal. At least one (1) copy of the Code is to be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk or his or her designee. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 10-22, as amended; Ord. 2110; Ord. 2662, 05/21/2012) 
Cross reference— Fire district delineated, see Part 5 of this Code.  
Sec. 13-102. - Additions, insertions, and changes. 
The following sections of the fire code are hereby revised as follows: 
A.  Section 101.1. Insert: "City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma." 
(Prior Code, Sec. 10-25, Ord. 2110; Ord. 2662, 05/21/2012)  
Sec. 13-103. - Limits within which storage of explosives are prohibited. 
That the geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2009 International Fire Code are hereby designated to be those areas located within the municipal limits of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 10-26; Ord. 2110; Ord. 2662, 05/21/2012)  
Sec. 13-104. - Modifications. 
The City Manager and Fire Chief, with the approval of the City Council, shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code provided that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the manager, Fire Chief, and City Council thereon shall be entered upon the records of the City Council, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.  
Sec. 13-105. - New materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permits. 
The City Manager, the Chief of the Fire Department, and one person appointed by the City Council shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire code. The Fire Chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.  
Sec. 13-106. - Appeals. 
Whenever the Fire Chief or the City Manager shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the City Manager to the City Council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed.  
Sec. 13-107. - Penalties. 
A.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of the fire prevention code hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the City Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally for every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 10-29)  
Secs. 13-108, 13-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B. - CONTROLLED OPEN BURNING 
 
Sec. 13-110. - Lawful and unlawful burning. 
A.  The open burning of permissible materials by any person shall be unlawful within the City except as allowed only upon authorization and issuance of a permit from the City Fire Marshal as provided for herein. The open burning of any impermissible materials by any person shall be unlawful within the City. 
B.  Permissible materials shall mean all naturally occurring materials such as wood products, tree limbs, branches, shrubbery, clippings, leaves, etc. Impermissible materials shall mean tires, asphalt shingles, paints, plastics or other products containing rubber, styrofoam, or leather. 
(Ord. 2531, 08/20/2007)  
Sec. 13-111. - Permit requirements. 
An adult person within the City limits may burn permissible materials only from sunrise to sunset provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  Any burning must occur during daylight hours on a lot of at least one hundred (100) feet by fifty (50) feet in dimension and must occur on a non-combustible surface or in a non-combustible container which is no closer than fifty (50) feet to any structure other than a structure owned by the permit holder burning said materials. The amount of permissible materials to burn shall not exceed in size a five (5) foot by five (5) foot by five (5) foot dimension and no burning shall be allowed during a time when wind conditions exceed ten (10) miles per hour. In addition, commercial pit burning shall be allowed only under the following conditions: (i) any such burning must occur on a lot of at least one (1) acre or more in a fire pit located no closer than three hundred (300) feet to any structure other than a structure owned by the permit holder burning said materials, (ii) blowers must be used to accelerate the rate of combustion; and (iii) compliance with the following provisions. 
B.  The person shall obtain a permit from the City at a cost set forth in the Master Fee Schedule, said permit identifying the adult in charge of this use by name and address, and also identifying the proposed location on the permit holder's property. No application shall be approved unless applicant produces documentation of ownership of the site location and proof of insurance on the property where the controlled burn will take place. All applications for said permits shall be made available and accepted at the Sapulpa Fire Department Central Station on Monday thru Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. and 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. and are valid only for seventy-two (72) hours following approval from the Fire Marshal's office. No permits will be issued after 4:00 p.m. 
C.  The adult permit holder in charge of the use must be physically present during the controlled burn and have the permit available for examination by any law enforcement officer or Fire Department personnel. Adequate fire extinguishing equipment shall be on-site and available for immediate use by the person at all times during the controlled burn. 
D.  Notwithstanding the issuance and approval of any permit, the Fire Marshal, or his designee retains the authority to prohibit, delay, or cancel any open burning if atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such burning hazardous, offensive, or objectionable. 
E.  No offsite materials shall be burned on any site for commercial purposes unless the site has been approved as a commercial pit burn. 
F.  No more than four (4) residential burn permits may be issued for any one (1) site during a calendar year period and at least thirty (30) days must exist between expiration and issuance of any permits. 
(Ord. 2531, 08/20/2007; Ord. 2703, 09/15/2014)  
Sec. 13-112. - Liability for burning. 
Any person engaged in the actual burning of materials pursuant to this article shall at all times remain liable for any damages, injuries, or other consequences which may result from such conduct; the City does not assume any responsibility and hereby disclaims any and all liability for any claims or damages that may result from such conduct even when conducted in compliance with these provisions. 
(Ord. 2531, 08/20/2007)  
Sec. 13-113. - Penalty. 
Failure to comply with any of the foregoing provisions of this chapter and/or any violation thereof shall constitute an offense punishable under Section 1-108 of the Code. Each day any such provision is violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2531, 08/20/2007)  
CHAPTER 2. - FIRE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICE  
ARTICLE A. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 13-201. - Fire Department, Chief of the Department. 
There shall be a Fire Department, the head of which shall be the Chief of the Fire Department. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be an officer of the City and shall have supervision and control of the Fire Department. There shall be such additional firefighters as may authorized. It is the duty of the Fire Department, among others, to extinguish fires; to rescue persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate, and to administer first aid to, persons injured in or about burning structures, or elsewhere in case of an emergency; to promote fire prevention; and unless otherwise provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and safety of persons from fire. 
State Law reference— Fire departments in general, 11 O.S. § 29-101 et seq.; volunteer departments, 11 O.S. § 29-201 et seq.  
Sec. 13-202. - Fire marshal. 
A.  The office of Fire Marshal within the Fire Department of the City is hereby established. The Fire Marshal shall have such qualifications and duties as prescribed by the City and shall, within twelve (12) months of his appointment be certified by the State as a full time peace officer. 
B.  The position of assistant Fire Marshal is hereby established and shall be filled by the Fire Marshal. 
C.  The Fire Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals shall perform those duties necessary for the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires and explosions of a suspicious nature within the City and as otherwise directed by the Fire Chief, including duties relating to the enforcement of all laws and ordinances pertaining to fire protection and prevention. 
D.  The Fire Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals shall be deemed peace officers with full power to execute within the corporate limits any and all legal process, to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses, issue citations, and effect arrests. The Fire Marshal, subject to direction of the Fire Chief and Police Chief, shall have jurisdiction over all investigations of the loss of life or property which occur as the result of fire or explosion or which occur as a result of or are associated with the crime of arson as defined by state law. 
E.  The Fire Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed by the provisions of this article, to enter upon or within any building, structure, vehicle or property and examine the same in regard to any fire or explosion having occurred therein, provided that in all instances said Fire Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals shall exercise discretion in so entering said locations and shall do so at all times consistent with applicable law. 
F.  The Fire Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals shall have the right, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or structure (except single-family dwellings), to enter upon said property for the purpose of investigating such complaint during reasonable hours and upon notification of inspection. 
G.  Whenever the Fire Marshal shall find any building or other structure especially hazardous or determines that the same endangers other buildings or property and is a fire hazard, or whenever he shall discover a violation of applicable ordinances or other law or improper or dangerous conditions by reason of the construction or additions of appurtenances thereto; or by the use of gas pipes, fixtures or appliances; or the improper use or arrangement of electric accessories, services or fixtures; or dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds or any other combustible or flammable material or refuse; or any condition which may be dangerous in its character and capable of creating fire or explosion or render any place or premises hazardous to the members of the Fire Department in fighting fires thereon, or to the occupants of such place; then in any of these cases, the Fire Marshal shall issue a written order that the cause of such danger or hazard abated or removed, and shall order the owner or the person in possession of such premises to immediately abate or remove the cause of the dangerous condition with a stated period of time, and thereupon it shall be the duty of the owner, agent or occupant of such place to comply with said order. When such order is made by the Fire Marshal, the owner or occupant may, within forty-eight (48) hours, appeal the requirements of said order to the Chief of the Fire Department by stating such appeal and the reasons therefore in writing. In the event of such appeal, the chief shall immediately review such order and render a written opinion thereupon, and unless by his authority the order of the Fire Marshal is revoked or modified, said order shall remain in full force and compliance required as provided. Failure to comply with such order of the Fire Marshal shall constitute a violation of this Code punishable under Section 1-108, and each day of non-compliance thereafter shall be considered a separate violation. The maintenance of or continuance of any dangerous condition after expiration of the time in which the Fire Marshal shall have ordered that same removed or abated shall constitute a public nuisance. 
H.  Service of any notice or order herein mentioned may be made upon the owner, agent, or occupant of the premises either by delivering a copy of same to such occupant personally, or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the premises and mailing a copy thereof to the owner at his last known address. 
(Prior Code, Secs. 10-47—10-49; Ord. 2025, 11/06/1989)  
Sec. 13-203. - Hazardous materials cleanup, reporting. 
A.  The Fire Chief is authorized to clean up or abate or cause to be cleaned up or abated the effects of any hazardous substance or waste unlawfully, accidentally, or negligently released, discharged, or deposited upon or into any property or facilities within the City's jurisdiction. The following persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for the payment of all costs incurred by the City as a result of such cleanup or abatement activity: 
1.  The person whose accidental, negligent or wilful act or omissions proximately caused such release, discharge or deposit; 
2.  The person who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous substance or waste at the time of such release, discharge, or deposit without regard to fault or proximate cause; and 
3.  The person who opened or had custody or control of the container which held such hazardous waste or substance at the time or immediately prior to such release, discharge, or deposit without regard to fault or proximate cause. 
B.  In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order of the Fire Chief or other City official to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous substance or waste negligently, unlawfully, or accidentally released, discharged, or deposited upon or into any property or facilities within the City, the Fire Chief may take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup or abatement. The persons described in subsection A of this section shall be liable to the City for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or verification. 
C.  For the purpose of this section: 
1.  "Costs incurred by the City" shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following: Actual labor costs of City personnel, including benefits and administrative overhead; cost of equipment operation; cost of any contract labor and materials; 
2.  "Hazardous material" means any material that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment. 
D.  An adjustment by a budget amendment to the Fire Department budget will be made for the cost incurred from overtime and loss of or damage to equipment or apparatus pursuant to this section. 
E.  The remedies provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
F.  The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the Fire Department. 
G.  The Fire Chief is authorized to request a report of hazardous materials information from any person, business, and/or industry within the City limits and from those persons, businesses and industries outside City limits that have contracts for fire protection from the City fire department. Every person, business, industry, or facility having hazardous materials in sufficient quantity according to the Oklahoma Hazards Communications Standard, is hereby required to annually submit a hazardous materials information report to the Fire Chief between January 1 and March 1 of each year, and to pay a filing fee in the amount reflected by the Master Fee Schedule, which fees shall [be] used for the purchase and/or maintenance of equipment and materials used by the Hazardous Materials Office of the Fire Department. Failure to file said report shall operate to alleviate the Fire Department from any responsibility to conduct an interior fire attack on a facility until an authorized representative of said facility provides a complete and verified list of chemicals and other hazardous materials and their locations within the structure. In addition, failure of any person, business, or industry from submitting the required report within the stated time frame shall constitute a violation of this Code punishable under Section 1-108 of the Code, and the Fire Chief shall notify the EPA and State Insurance Commission of said failure to report. Each day of non-compliance after March 1 shall constitute a separate violation punishable under Section 1-108. For purposes of this provision, "hazardous material" shall mean any substance with a sufficient health, detonative, explosive, or reactive character, or potential and in sufficient quantity or concentration, that it requires reporting to the Fire Department under the Oklahoma Hazard Communications Standard. 
(Ord. 2142; Ord. 2238, 02/02/1998)  
Sec. 13-204. - Rescue and recovery defined. 
For purposes of this section, "rescue" is defined as the efforts and equipment associated with the locating and removal of human persons whether alive or dead; "recovery" is defined as the efforts and use of equipment associated with the locating and removal of any private property incidental to an actual on scene rescue operation and as specifically requested by the person, business entity, or their agents.  
Sec. 13-205. - Rescue and recovery fees, charges and disposition. 
No charge shall be levied for any rescue activities or for any mutual aid assistance rendered to any other Fire Department or law enforcement agency except as otherwise provided by this Code. A fee as set by the Master Fee Schedule is hereby imposed for recovery activities involving private property and shall be paid by the person, business entity, or their agents requesting the recovery. Fifty (50) percent of any funds received for recovery activities shall be deposited into the Fire Department sales tax fund for repairs, replacement and/or upgrading rescue related equipment; the remaining fifty (50) percent of said funds shall be deposited into the General Fund of the City. 
(Ord. 2165, 12/18/1995)  
ARTICLE B. - CALLS OUTSIDE LIMITS 
 
Sec. 13-206. - Contracts authorized outside City limits. 
A.  The City is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into contracts or agreements with individuals, firms, private corporations or associations, or political subdivisions of the State for fire protection, fire prevention and first responder rescue, resuscitation, first aid and basic life support services, outside the corporate limits of the City (collectively "outside fire run services"), and to contract to provide such services jointly with other organizations and municipal subdivisions of the State in furnishing, maintaining, and operating fire equipment for outside aid or mutual aid upon such terms and conditions as it may deem to be in the best interest of the contracting parties. 
B.  The contract specified in the preceding subsection may be entered into by the City Clerk on behalf of the City when furnished satisfactory evidence that the person has in force with a reputable insurance company a policy of insurance providing for the payment of a minimum sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to the City for fire protection services. The contract shall be executed by the City Clerk only after approval by the Fire Chief or his deputy who shall endorse his approval on the contract when satisfied that the City can afford such protection to the property covered thereby without foreseeable or hazardous lessening of the fire protection to the property within the City, giving consideration to the location of the property, its accessibility and other facts which might enter into the making of a response to the location requesting Outside Fire Run Services. 
(Prior Code, Secs. 10-12—10-14; Ord. No. 2828 , § 1, 11-4-2019) 
State Law reference— Mutual aid, fire contracts outside limits, 11 O.S. §§ 29-106 to 29-109.  
Sec. 13-207. - Contract terms, fees for service. 
Any contract entered into by the City with an individual owner, firm, private corporation, or association, for outside fire run services, outside aid, and/or mutual aid for fire protection, shall provide for the payment by the owner, firm, private corporation, or association, or political subdivision to the City for such fire apparatus and personnel and for annual contracts at the rates and charges as set by Master Fee Schedule. All monies received from the calls shall go into the general fund or fire pension fund, all as may be directed by the City Council. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 10-13, in part; Ord. No. 2828 , § 1, 11-4-2019)  
Sec. 13-208. - Authority to answer calls. 
The Fire Department of the City is hereby authorized to answer calls for outside fire run services within the area enclosed by the outside corporate limits of the City, or when the location for such service is within the City E911 emergency response area. In the event such a call is answered on a location without an annual contract for outside fire services, the property owner of the location responded to shall be obligated to pay the charges and fees set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. The Fire Chief, however, is authorized to refuse to make such runs or to prevent the use of firefighting personnel and equipment when in his judgment it is not expedient to do so on account of: (i) emergency response needs within the City, (ii) broken or insufficient apparatus or equipment, (iii) dangerous roadways or access, and/or (iv) any other condition which in the opinion of the Chief makes it necessary to hold back firefighting equipment and personnel for protection of lives and property within the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 10-15; Ord. 2085, 04/20/1992; Ord. No. 2828 , § 1, 11-4-2019)  
Sec. 13-209. - Firefighters serving in regular line of duty. 
All firefighters of the Fire Department of the City attending, serving and rendering outside fire run services work outside the corporate limits of the City, as herein provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular line of duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of the City. The firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any firemen's pension and relief fund in the same manner as if the firefighting, fire prevention and/or first responder work was being done within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 10-16; Ord. No. 2828 , § 1, 11-4-2019)  
Sec. 13-210. - Department considered agent of State. 
All firefighters of the Fire Department of the City attending, serving, and rendering outside fire run services work outside the corporate limits of the City, as herein provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular line of duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of the City. The firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any firefighters' pension and relief fund in the same manner as if the firefighting, fire prevention and/or first responder work was being done within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 10-16; Ord. No. 2828 , § 1, 11-4-2019)  
CHAPTER 3. - POLICE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICES  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 13-301. - Police Department created, chief. 
There is a Police Department, the head of which is the Chief of Police, or Police Chief. The Police Chief has supervision and control of the police department. 
State Law reference— Municipal police department generally, 11 O.S. § 34-101 et seq.  
Sec. 13-302. - Duties. 
It is the duty of the Police Department to apprehend and arrest on view or on warrant and bring to justice all violators of the ordinances of the City; to suppress all riots, affrays, and unlawful assemblies which may come to their knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve all warrants, writs, executions, and other processes properly directed and delivered to them; to apprehend and arrest persons violating Federal or State law as provided by law, and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all duties pertaining to the offices of police officers.  
Sec. 13-303. - Emergency duties in other cities. 
A.  Approval is hereby given for service of members of the regular Police Department of this City as police officers of any other city or town, in an emergency situation, in the state, not more than one hundred (100) miles distant from this City, when such service is requested by the Mayor or Chief of Police of the city or town. 
B.  Requests for service under this section shall be made by writing or by telephone, or other means of communications, to the Chief of Police, and in his absence, the City Manager who, if he determines that the request can be granted consistently with the continuance of the proper police protection to the inhabitants of this City, shall cause to be furnished the number of officers requested and to arrange their transportation to the requesting municipality. 
C.  The City Manager or Police Chief is hereby authorized to request assistance from police departments of other cities or towns in case of an emergency in the City necessitating such assistance. 
(Prior Code, Secs. 21-14 to 21-16)  
Sec. 13-304. - Police dogs. 
A.  The use of police dogs by the Police Department in performing the duties of the department is hereby authorized subject to such rules as may be adopted by the Police Chief and City Manager. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torment, beat, strike, injure, disable, or kill any dog used by the Police Department of the City in the performance of the functions or duties of such department or to interfere or meddle with any such dog while being used by the department or any officer or member thereof. 
(Prior Code, Secs. 21-1, 21-2) 
State Law reference— See also state law for police dogs.  
Secs. 13-305—13-309. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B. - POLICE RESERVE 
 
Sec. 13-310. - Established. 
A reserve police force for the City is hereby authorized and directed for the purpose of assisting the regularly constituted law enforcement officers of the City. The Chief of Police has authority over the reserve police force and its members. His decisions in all matters in connection therewith shall be final. 
(Prior Code, Secs. 21-17, 21-19)  
Sec. 13-311. - Rules and regulations. 
The Police Chief shall promulgate rules and regulations for the police auxiliary force. When such rules and regulations are established, they shall be approved by the City Manager and shall govern the membership, dues, and functions of the reserve police force. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 21-18)  
Sec. 13-312. - Selection and compensation. 
A.  The Police Chief and the City Manager shall select members of the reserve police force. The reserve police officer shall meet the requirements established by state law and shall have the authority granted by state law. 
B.  Members of the reserve police force shall serve without compensation and shall not be considered members of the Police Department of the City. 
(Prior Code, Secs. 21-20, 21-21)  
Secs. 13-313—13-319. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE C. - 911 EMERGENCY NUMBER SERVICE 
 
Sec. 13-320. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to establish the telephone number 9-1-1 as the primary emergency telephone number for use throughout the City in order to expedite the response of law enforcement, fire, medical, rescue, and other emergency services to any person requiring such assistance.  
Sec. 13-321. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency telephone service means any telephone system utilizing a three (3) digit number, 9-1-1, for reporting an emergency to the appropriate public agency providing law enforcement, medical, or other emergency services, including ancillary communications systems and personnel necessary to pass the reported emergency to the appropriate emergency service and personnel. 
Local exchange telephone company means any company providing exchange telephone services to any service user in this City. 
Person means any service user, including but not limited to any individual, firm, partnership, copartnership, joint venture, association, cooperative organization, private corporation, whether organized for profit or not, fraternal organization, nonprofit organization, estate, trust, business, or common law trust, receiver, assignee for the benefit of creditors, trustee, or trustee in bankruptcy, the United States of America, the State, any political subdivision of the State, or any Federal or State agency, department, commission, board, or bureau, or any other service user. 
Service user means any person not otherwise exempt from taxation, who is provided exchange telephone service in this City. 
Tariff rate means the rate or rates billed by a local exchange telephone company stated in tariffs applicable for such company, as approved by the Oklahoma Corporation Commission, which represent the recurring charges of such local exchange telephone company for exchange telephone service or its equivalent, exclusive of all taxes, fees, licenses, or similar charges whatsoever. 
VoIP means voice over internet protocol. 
VoIP carrier means a person who offers a dial tone telephone service to a customer under authority of the Federal Communications Commission and who is required to collect a fee for funding of emergency telephone service.  
Sec. 13-322. - Emergency telephone service and fee. 
A.  The City hereby provides for the operation of an emergency telephone service within the City and hereby imposes an emergency telephone fee in accordance with state law upon customers and providers of dial tone for all service within the City. The emergency telephone fee shall be imposed only as permitted by State law. If an applicable tariff rate exists for services provided by that carrier with customers located in the City, the City hereby imposes an emergency telephone fee at the rate set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. For any provider of dial tone or telephone service in the City whose charges are not regulated by the Oklahoma Corporation Commission, and whose fee has not been established by State law, the Council hereby imposes a fee upon such providers that is equal to the cost of providing emergency telephone and dispatch services, in the same ratio as the number of customers for that carrier bears to all customers in the City. All local exchange telephone companies having customers in the City shall provide an annual census of customers to the City no later than sixty (60) days after the first day of each calendar year. 
B.  The City hereby adopts and imposes a fee upon VoIP customers whose businesses or residences are located within the City at the rate set forth in the Master Fee Schedule in accordance with State law. The emergency telephone fee shall be imposed only as permitted by State law. All VoIP carriers having customers in the City shall provide an annual census of customers to the City no later than sixty (60) days after the first day of each calendar year. 
C.  All wireless carriers having customers whose businesses or residences are located within the City according to the records of the wireless carrier shall provide to the City a census of customers located or residing in the City upon request. 
D.  Every billed service user shall be liable for any fee imposed pursuant to this article until it has been paid to the local exchange telephone company or other provider of dial tone. Fees imposed pursuant to the authority of this article and that are required to be collected by the local exchange telephone company or other provider of dial tone shall be added to and may be stated separately in the billings to the service user. 
E.  The local exchange telephone company or other provider of dial tone shall have no obligation to take any legal action to enforce the collection of any fee imposed pursuant to authority of this article; however, should any service user tender a payment insufficient to satisfy all charges, tariffs, fees, and taxes for telephone service, the amount tendered shall be credited to the emergency telephone fee in the same manner as other taxes and fees. The local exchange telephone company or other provider of dial tone shall annually provide the City Treasurer with a list of amounts uncollected along with the names and addresses of those service users which carry a balance that can be determined by the local exchange telephone company or other provider of dial tone to be nonpayment of any fee imposed pursuant to the authority of this article. 
F.  Any fee imposed pursuant to the authority provided by this article shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the charges for telephone service in accordance with the regular billing practice of the telephone company.  
Sec. 13-323. - Collection of fee. 
The fee imposed pursuant to authority of this article and the amounts required to be collected are due monthly. The amount of fee collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the City Treasurer no later than thirty (30) days after the close of the month in which such fees were collected. On or before the last day of each month, a return for the preceding month shall be filed with the City Treasurer in such form as the City Treasurer shall require. The local exchange telephone company or other dial-tone provider required to file the return shall deliver the return together with a remittance of the amount of the fee payable to the City Treasurer for deposit into a special revenue fund. The local exchange telephone company or other provider of dial tone shall maintain records of the amount of any fee collected in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such records shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years from the time the fee is collected unless a shorter holding period is authorized by State law. From every remittance to the City Treasurer made on or before the date when the same becomes due, the local exchange telephone company or other provider of dial tone required to remit the same shall be entitled to deduct and retain, as an administrative fee, an amount not exceeding three (3) percent thereof.  
Sec. 13-324. - False alarm, complaint; violations and penalty. 
No person shall call the number 9-1-1 for the purpose of making a false alarm or complaint or reporting false information which could result in the dispatch of emergency services from any public agency. Any person violating the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of an offense punishable under Section 1-108 of the Code.  
CHAPTER 4. - CIVIL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 13-401. - Purpose of civil emergency management organization. 
The purpose of this chapter is to create a Civil Emergency Management Organization for the City to be prepared for, and to function in the event of, emergencies endangering the lives and property of the people of the City. The duty of the Civil Emergency Management Organization shall be the protection of the lives and health of the citizens of the City and of property and property rights, both public and private, and to perform all functions necessary and incident thereto. 
(Prior Code Sec. 8-1; Ord. 2302, 10/18/1999)  
Sec. 13-402. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning: 
Civil emergency management shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which primary responsibility is assigned elsewhere by Federal, State, or local law or ordinance, to protect the public peace, health, and safety and to preserve lives and property in the City during an emergency or catastrophe in or near the City and involving imminent or actual peril to life and property in the City. The functions include admission, organization, planning, recruiting, training, education, information, welfare service, relief service, police service, warden service, fire service, rescue service, medical service, health service, transportation service, communication service, streets and sewer service, utility service, general engineering service, radio-logical service, plant protection service supply service, mutual aid, mobile support, evacuation, public shelter use and management, warning, and all other functions necessary or incidental to the preparation for and the carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Co-Directors shall mean the Co-Directors of the Civil Emergency Management Organization. 
Curfew shall mean a prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises, excepting persons officially designated to duty with reference to the emergency. 
Disaster shall mean any occurrence or catastrophe resulting in or imminently threatening substantial damage or injury to persons or property in the City whether such occurrence is caused by an act of nature or of man, including an enemy of the United States. 
Disorderly shall mean a course of conduct by a person which: 
A.  Causes public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, or recklessly creates a risk thereof, by: 
1.  Engaging in fighting or in violent, tumultuous, or threatening behavior; or 
2.  Making an unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance, gesture, or display, or addressing abusive language to any person present; or 
3.  Dispersing any lawful procession or meeting of persons, not being a peace officer of this City and without lawful authority; or 
4.  Creating a hazardous or physically offensive condition which serves no legitimate purpose; or 
5.  Engages with at least one (1) other person in a course of disorderly conduct as defined in subsection A above which is likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, and refuses or knowingly fails to obey an orderly to disperse, made by a peace officer to the participants. 
State of emergency shall mean an emergency and shall be deemed to exist whenever, by reason of any disaster, such proper authority proclaims same to exist as provided in this chapter, and such state of emergency shall continue until terminated by proclamation of proper authority as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2302, 10/18/1999)  
Sec. 14-403. - Co-Directors—Generally. 
The Chief of Police and Fire Chief of the City are hereby designated as Co-Directors. The Co-Directors shall serve as executive heads of the Civil Emergency Management Organization. The Co-Directors shall perform such other duties pertaining to safety as may be assigned by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 2302, 10/18/1999)  
Sec. 13-404. - Same—Planning, training, and functions. 
Prior to an emergency, and within the limits of any funds appropriated or received by grant therefore, the Co-Directors shall: 
A.  Prepare an operational plan of the departments of City government which shall provide a coordinated assignment of activities and responsibilities to each department in the event of an disaster or state of emergency as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Establish necessary emergency operation centers. 
C.  Establish public warning systems and acquire and cause to be installed such devises as may be necessary to implement such systems. 
D.  Establish and carry out recruiting and training program for purposes of developing qualified civil emergency management volunteer works. 
E.  Plan, supervise, and conduct drills and exercises under simulated disaster conditions. 
F.  Plan and develop mutual aid arrangements for reciprocal civil emergency management assistance consistent with State and Federal plans of civil emergency management. 
G.  Plan and develop a public shelter system to include identification, marking and stocking of public shelters and shelter use and management training. 
(Ord. 2302, 10/18/1999)  
Sec. 13-405. - Co-Directors' general powers during emergencies. 
If an actual emergency is proclaimed by the City Manager of the City Council, as provided in this chapter, the Co-Directors, with the approval of the City Manager of City Council as provided in this chapter, may exercise the power to enforce all rules and regulations relating to civil emergency management during such emergency. 
If the Co-Directors are acting under the authority of the City Manager as an agent of the Governor of this State, then the Co-Directors may take control of all means of transportation and communications, all stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine, and supplies and all facilities including buildings, and plants, and exercise all power necessary to secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, to the extent necessary as provided by law.  
Sec. 13-406. - Other functions. 
The Co-Directors shall properly coordinate the activities of the Civil Emergency Management. They are specifically charged in such emergency with the collection, evaluation and dissemination of information to all agencies both public and private participating in the City's Civil Emergency Management or cooperating in any such emergency. 
The Co-Directors shall have the power to recommend appropriate action, but they shall not otherwise exercise control over the participating agencies. 
The Co-Directors shall recommend to the City Council the allocation of any funds received from the Federal or State Governments or from any other source to alleviate distress and aid in restoring normal conditions. 
(Ord. 2302, 10/18/1999)  
Sec. 13-407. - Authorization and termination of emergency powers. 
The emergency powers conferred in this article shall be effective immediately upon the issuance of a proclamation of the existence of emergency: 
A.  By a proper officer or agency of the State as provided by law; or 
B.  By resolution of the City Council if the Council finds that the disaster causing the emergency is local to the City and its environs and is locally controllable, and it is so noted in the resolution. 
If the urgency of the situation requires, the City Manager is authorized to declare the existence of emergency until such time as the City Council may meet and determine that a state of emergency exists. The exercise of the emergency powers conferred in this article is limited to the duration of emergency as determined according to law and by the provisions of this chapter. 
During the period of such local emergency the exercise of emergency powers shall be in conformity with all applicable provisions of the City Charter. 
Locally proclaimed states of emergency shall be terminated upon adoption by the City Council of a resolution of termination not in conflict with State laws. 
(Ord. 2302, 10/18/1999)  
Sec. 13-408. - Proclamation of state of emergency. 
The Mayor, after finding that a public disorder, disaster, or riot exists which affects life, health, property, or the public peace, may proclaim a state of emergency in the area affected. The proclamation of a state of emergency and other proclamations issued pursuant to this section shall be in writing and shall be signed by the Mayor and filed with the City Clerk. 
The Mayor shall give as much public notice as practical through the news media of the issuance of proclamations pursuant to this section. 
The state of emergency shall cease to exist upon the issuance of a proclamation of the Mayor declaring its termination; provided that the Mayor shall terminate the proclamation when order has been restored in the area affected. 
(Ord. 2302, 10/18/1999)  
Sec. 13-409. - Mayor's emergency powers. 
A.  The Mayor, during the existence of a state of emergency, by proclamation, may in the area affected by public disorder, disaster, or riot at the time the proclamation is issued, prohibit: 
1.  Any person being on the public streets, or in the public parks or at any other public place during the hours declared by the Mayor to be a period of curfew; 
2.  A designated number of persons from assembling or gathering on the public streets, parks, or other areas either public or private; 
3.  The manufacture, transfer, use, possession, or transportation of a Molotov Cocktail or any other devise, instrument, or object designed to explode or produce uncontained combustion; 
4.  The transporting, possessing or using of gasoline, kerosene, or combustible, flammable, or explosive liquids or materials in a glass or uncapped container of any kind except in connection with the normal operation of motor vehicles, normal home use or legitimate commercial use; 
5.  The possession of firearms or any other deadly weapon by a person (other than a law enforcement officer) in a place other than that person's place of residence or business; 
6.  The sale, purchase, or dispensing of alcoholic beverages. 
7.  The sale, purchase, or dispensing of other commodities or goods, as he reasonably believes should be prohibited to help preserve and maintain life, health, property, or the public peace; 
8.  The use of certain streets, highways, or public ways by the public; and 
9.  Such other activities as he reasonably believes should be prohibited to help preserve and maintain life, health, property, or the public peace. 
In imposing the restrictions provided for in this section, the Mayor may impose them for such times, upon such conditions, with such exceptions and in such areas he from time to time deems necessary.  
Sec. 13-410. - Riots. 
No three (3) or more persons shall assemble together or act in concert to do any act with force or violence against the peace, or to the terror of others or make any movement or preparation therefore. No person who is present at the meeting or assembly shall fail to endeavor to prevent the commission or perpetration of such an act. 
(Ord. 2302, 10/18/1999)  
CHAPTER 5. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 13-501. - Complete record required. 
All personal property which comes into the possession of any police officer, which has been found or stolen or taken off the person or out of the possession of any prisoner or person suspected of, or charged with, being a criminal, and which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto, shall be, by the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge of the Chief of Police. The Chief shall, in a permanent record book kept for that purpose, make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and circumstances of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from whom it was taken and the place where it was found; and the record shall also disclose the subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the purchaser, and the amount for which it was sold. 
Charter reference— See Sec. 16 of Article IV on sale of abandoned equipment and property. 
State Law reference— Disposition of personal property by Police Chief, procedures, application to destroy, 11 O.S. § 34-104; Uniform unclaimed property disposition act, 60 O.S. § 655; relating to finders of lost goods, 15 O.S. § 511 et seq.; disposal of stolen or embezzled property coming into hands of police officers, 22 O.S. § 1321 et seq.; disposal of liquor and gambling equipment seized by police officers, 22 O.S. § 1261 et seq.; alcoholic beverages seized in violation of law, 37A O.S. § 6-127.  
Sec. 13-502. - Disposition of unclaimed property. 
Any unclaimed personal property, other than animals, which remains in the possession of the Chief of Police, unclaimed, or the ownership of which is not to him satisfactorily established, for a period of more than thirty (30) days, shall be sold, or disposed of in the manner required by law, except such personal property as in the opinion of the City Manager can be more advantageously used by some department or office of the City government.  
Sec. 13-503. - Property found by a private person. 
Any personal property found by a person other than a public official or employee, which is delivered to any police officer for identification, if not claimed or identified within thirty (30) days, shall, within ten (10) additional days thereafter, if requested by the finder, be returned to him, and a record of such disposal made thereof. If the finder does not request return of the property to him within such additional ten (10) days, then the Chief of Police shall sell the property in the manner required by law as if it had been found by a public official or employee, or on instruction by the City Manager deliver it to some department or office of the City government for its use.  
Sec. 13-504. - Recovery by owner. 
If any property is sold as herein provided, and the owner thereof takes and recovers possession of same from the purchaser, the amount paid therefor shall be returned to the purchaser, upon verified claim being submitted and approved by the City Council.  
Part 14 - STREETS AND PUBLIC WORKS  
CHAPTER 1. - USE AND OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS 
 
Sec. 14-101. - Trees and shrubbery to be trimmed. 
A.  The owner of any premises abutting on any street of this City shall trim all trees and shrubbery growing in the parking area, between the sidewalks and the roadway of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any part of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley, in such manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct the view or free and convenient passage and travel along the streets, sidewalks, and alleys. When such premises are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the trees and shrubbery in the same manner as hereinafter required of the owner. Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or foliage shall not be lower than fourteen (14) feet above the roadway of a street or alley, nor lower than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. 
B.  Any owner or occupant who shall fail, refuse, or neglect to trim trees and shrubbery as provided in this section, after receiving five (5) days' notice from the head of the department in charge of streets to do so, shall be guilty of an offense against the City punishable under Section 1-108 of the Code. Every day that the owner or occupant shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim the trees or shrubbery, after the expiration of the five (5) days' notice, shall be a separate offense. 
C.  In order to protect the public welfare and safety, the City Manager may effect immediate removal of any object found in violation of this section or abate any such obstruction. Any costs for such removal or abatement shall be borne by the owner or occupier of the property. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 24-3, in part)  
Sec. 14-102. - Unlawful to injure trees and shrubbery. 
It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or alley in the City provided that this shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care and removal of such trees and shrubbery.  
Sec. 14-103. - Unlawful to obstruct sidewalks, streets with merchandise, exceptions, permits. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to place upon or permit to be placed upon the sidewalks, parkways, public property, streets, and alleys of the City any goods, wares, articles of merchandise or any automobile, other device, goods or obstruction, and leave same thereon; or to use the same as a place to carry on a business or trade or solicitation except as provided herein. 
B.  The City Manager may, subject to Section 14-104, permit the use of public streets or alleys for special events for promotion of matters of community interest which may include display or sale of merchandise in accordance with such regulations as the City may require. An applicant shall file an application with the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of such event and shall provide such information and comply with such regulations as are required by the City. 
C.  The City Manager may, subject to Section 14-104, permit the use of public sidewalks by dealers or merchants for the sale, display, or storage of goods and merchandise deemed to be in the City's best interest, or at special events for promotion of matters of community interest. The City Manager shall hear request for such approval and shall be guided in the decision to grant permits according to his best judgment and pursuant to the following: 
1.  No area as determined by the City Manager may be granted approval for use of public sidewalks for a period or at a frequency greater than as follows: 
a.  Seventy-two (72) hour permit: Once per thirty (30) days; or 
b.  Annual permit: Once per year; provided that any annual permit is limited and available only for the provision of edible food and/or beverages to be consumed on site where seating is provided by the vendor. 
2.  Application for sidewalk permits shall be submitted for approval no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the requested date of use; 
3.  No permit shall be granted until the applicant has paid the fee required therefor as provided by the Master Fee Schedule; and 
4.  Such other information or requirements shall be provided as may be required by the City. 
D. Any permit granted pursuant to this section may not become effective until the applicant furnishes liability insurance in such an amount as shall be deemed necessary by the City, conditioned to protect and save harmless the City from all claims for personal injury and property damage resulting the use of such streets and sidewalks by the public. 
E. Any violation of this section shall, upon conviction, constitute a misdemeanor punishable under Section 1-108 of this Code.  
Sec. 14-104. - Unlawful to obstruct unduly sidewalks and streets. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to use or obstruct the streets, sidewalks or other public places of the City in any manner so as to interfere unduly with traffic, pedestrian traffic or to prevent access or to create a hazard, or to use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the City in any manner so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon. 
B.  In order to protect the public welfare and safety, the City may effect immediate removal of any object found in violation of this section. Any costs for such removal shall be borne by the owner or occupier of the grounds fronted thereon or at the expense of the person owning or placing the encroachment thereupon. Each day such blockage or obstruction remains shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 24-2)  
Sec. 14-105. - Unlawful to deposit trash upon streets or sidewalks. 
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, throw, or sweep into or upon the streets, alleys, parking or sidewalks of the City any paper, rubbish, grass, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes, or other refuse of any kind.  
Sec. 14-106. - Owner or occupant not to permit sidewalk or sidewalk area to become a hazard. 
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or sidewalk area.  
Sec. 14-107. - Street not to be obstructed so as to interfere with drainage. 
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any street, sidewalk, or alley, by placing any approach driveway or other obstruction or substance whatever that will obstruct or prevent the natural flow of water, into the storm sewers or drains, or dam the same so as to back any water upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or gutter.  
Sec. 14-108. - Duty to keep sidewalk and gutter clean, good repair. 
It is the duty of the occupant of any lot or piece of ground abutting upon any street where there is a sidewalk or gutter on the street to keep such sidewalk or gutter clean and to remove therefrom all materials, snow or ice, trash, weeds, refuse, rubbish or hazards of any kind and to keep the sidewalk and gutter in good repair. If there is no such occupant of any such lot other than the owner, it is the duty of the owner to do the same.  
Sec. 14-109. - Drainage of polluting substances into streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any residence or business to allow drainage of a polluting substance or to allow drainage of water which may become a hazard into any street, alley or sidewalk. A polluting substance is one so defined under Section 926.1 of Title 82 of the Oklahoma Statutes.  
Sec. 14-110. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code.  
CHAPTER 2. - CUTTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 14-201. - Excavations on streets or sidewalks. 
It is unlawful for any person to cut, alter, excavate, or change in any manner for any purpose, any paved or traveled portion of any street or alley, or any curb, gutter, catch basin, or any other appurtenance of any street or alley or any sidewalk in the City without first securing a permit from the City to make such cut, alteration, or change; provided this requirement shall not apply to any person repairing or replacing a sidewalk under a sidewalk permit, provided such person changes only the sidewalk.  
Sec. 14-202. - Permits. 
A.  Any person desiring to cut, alter, mutilate, or change in any manner for any purpose, any paved or traveled portion of any street or alley, or any curb, gutter, catch basin, or any other appurtenance of any street or alley, shall apply to the building inspector of the City for a permit therefor, and pay to the City clerk the permit fee required as set by the Master Fee Schedule. 
B.  Upon the payment of the fee and after approval by the City Manager or his designee and compliance by the applicant with City requirements, the building inspector shall issue to such applicant a permit in accordance with the application therefor.  
Sec. 14-203. - Cutting of pavement. 
Before removing pavement for the installation or repair of subsurface utilities, all sides of the proposed cut shall be sawed with an approved concrete saw to a depth as required by the City. Where it is necessary to cut paving for emergency repairs, paving may be removed without sawing, provided any damaged sections of paving are removed prior to making of repair. If it is further necessary to remove additional paving, the sawing process shall be repeated, covering the outer edges of the pavement to be replaced and the replacement of all paving cut shall be done by the applicant at his cost, but under the direct supervision of the City.  
Sec. 14-204. - Warning signals. 
It is the duty of any person doing any type of constructing or excavating work upon or adjacent to any street, alley, sidewalk, or public ground in the City to maintain substantial guard rails and barriers around such work or excavation in such a manner as to protect pedestrians, animals, and vehicles using such street, alley, or walk, in conformance with the uniform traffic code adopted by the City. Similar barriers shall be placed around any materials or equipment with which contact would be dangerous to pedestrians, animals or vehicles. It is the duty of all such persons to display and maintain warning lights during non-daylight times such work, excavation, or obstruction exists. Such lights shall be of a type approved by the City, and shall be placed on or sufficiently near such place in a number and manner sufficient to warn the traveling public from any direction. It is an offense for any person to fail to provide such safeguards, and each day of such omission shall constitute a separate offense. Subsequent offenses by the same person or business shall subject the person or business to the maximum penalty prescribed.  
Sec. 14-205. - Removal of danger signals. 
It is unlawful for any person to remove or destroy any barrier or danger signal placed or erected under the provisions of this Code, unless such act is done at the direction of the person in charge of such work or the City.  
Sec. 14-206. - Penalty. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 19-22)  
CHAPTER 3. - PUBLIC WORKS ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 14-301. - Specifications and criteria adopted. 
A.  The "Engineering Design Criteria and Construction Specifications" dated August 19, 2014, and attached as Exhibit A (to Ordinance No. 2707), as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and shall be controlling and applicable upon all engineering design criteria of privately or publicly financed public works projects in the City. 
B.  The engineering design criteria and standard specifications consists of the following divisions: 
Section I. Engineering design criteria : 
1.  Division 100 General; 
2.  Division 200 Design Criteria for Water Mains; 
3.  Division 300 Design Criteria for Sanitary Sewers; 
4.  Division 400 Design Criteria for Streets; 
5.  Division 500 Stormwater Drainage Criteria; 
6.  Division 600 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control. 
Section II. Standard specifications: 
1.  Division 1100 General Specifications; 
2.  Division 2200 Water and Sewer Material Specifications; 
3.  Division 2300 Water and Sewer Construction Specifications. 
(Ord. 2140, 01/17/1995; Ord. 2707, 08/19/2014)  
CHAPTER 4. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 14-400. - Findings of fact. 
The City makes the following findings of fact: 
A.  Because of its physical terrain and geographical location, the City is particularly subject to damage from stormwaters which, from time to time, overflow from existing watercourses and drainage facilities; 
B.  The presently existing stormwater drainage facilities of the City require continuous operation, maintenance, renewal, replacement, and expansion; 
C.  A comprehensive approach to managing stormwater runoff is required to address existing and future needs; 
D.  Previous regulations addressing drainage requirements for new land development must be replaced by a comprehensive approach; and 
E.  Natural and manmade hazards exist and present a threat to the City.  
Sec. 14-401. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this section to promote public health, safety, and welfare by providing for operating, constructing, equipping, maintaining, acquiring, and owning within the City a stormwater drainage system and implementing a hazard mitigation program to regulate non-stormwater discharges to the City of Sapulpa Stormwater Drainage System to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This section establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) and the Oklahoma Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (OPDES) permit requirements. The objectives of this section are: 
A.  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by stormwater discharges by any person; 
B.  To control the introduction to the municipal separate storm sewer system of spills, dumping, or the disposal of materials other than stormwater; 
C.  To prohibit illicit connections and illicit discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
D.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with this section; 
E.  To establish procedures for enforcement of this section; 
F.  To establish abatement and remediation procedures for this section; and 
G.  To establish penalties for noncompliance with this section.  
Sec. 14-402. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean: 
Accelerated erosion means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action; 
Applicant means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a permit; 
Authorized Enforcement Agency means the City of Sapulpa or its designated representative; 
Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage; 
Building means temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property; 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water; 
Clean Water Act shall mean the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto; 
Clearing means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover; 
Conservation means the preservation, protection and improvement of the components of the natural environment through a comprehensive management and maintenance program administered by a public authority for individual or public use; 
Conservation and wildlife sanctuary means land left in its natural state for the purpose of providing sanctuary, habitat and breeding grounds for wild birds, animals, and plant-life and includes a forest reserve; 
Conservation easement means a legal document which provides permanent, property-specific protection for natural features on private land through legal agreements to restrict the management and use of affected areas; 
Construction activity means activities include but are not limited to clearing, grubbing, grading, regrading, land filling, excavating, berming, and diking of land, and includes land disturbance activities for the purpose of constructing a structure at some time; 
Construction site means a site where construction activities occur; 
Contaminated site means the property or lands that, for reasons of public health and safety, are unsafe for development as a result of past human activities, particularly those activities that have left a chemical or radioactive residue. Also, a site which has been identified as a former industrial or waste disposal site, where the presence of toxic chemicals and/or gas pose an unreasonable risk of injury to health, property, and/or the environment; 
Contamination means the introduction of materials including, but not limited to pesticides, herbicides, septic leaks, or other toxic substances into a natural system; 
Contractor means any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, realtor, or corporation engaged in the business of accepting orders or contracts, either as a general contractor or subcontractor, for construction of model homes and other residential dwellings for sale the public and/or licensed by the State of Oklahoma as a contractor; 
Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use; 
Detention means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants; 
Detention facility means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates; 
Developer means a person who undertakes land disturbance activities; 
Development means a change in the use of any land, building, or structure for any purpose, and shall include the carrying out of building, engineering construction or other operation in, on, over or under land, or the construction, addition or alteration of any building or structure; 
Discharge means to cause or allow to throw, drain, release, dump, spill, empty, emit, or pour any liquids, pollutants or other materials into the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
Drainage easement means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes; 
Drainage way means any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout a site; 
Dry weather means a period of at least seventy-two (72) hours in which there has been no measurable rainfall; 
Dry weather field screening means inspection and/or testing of outfalls conducted during dry weather to evaluate outfalls for pollutants; 
Environmental Administrator means the City of Sapulpa Environmental Administrator or his/her designee(s); 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency; 
Erosion means the mobilization of soil as a result of loss of vegetative cover, scouring by runoff, or associated with slope instability; 
Erosion control means a measure that prevents erosion; 
Grading means excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof; 
Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed; 
Hotspot means an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater; 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the stormwater drainage system, except as exempted in Section 14-408.C of this chapter; 
Illicit connections means an illicit connection is defined as either of the following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the stormwater drainage system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the stormwater drainage system and any connections to the stormwater drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or, any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the stormwater drainage system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency; 
Impervious surface means any hard surfaced area which prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil in the manner and to the extent that such water entered the soil under natural conditions, causing water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow than was present under natural conditions, causing water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow than was present under natural conditions, such as but not limited to rooftops, asphalt or concrete sidewalks, paving, driveways and parking lots, walkways, patio areas, storage areas, and oil macadam or other surfaces which similarly affect the natural infiltration or run-off patterns of real property in its natural state; 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14); 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies; 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil; 
Infiltration facility means any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade; 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation; 
Land disturbance activity means activities include but are not limited to clearing, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse. Any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface; 
Landowner means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land; 
Maintenance agreement means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices; 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that are owned or operated by the City and are designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis; 
Nonpoint source pollution means pollution discharged over a wide land area, not from one specific location. These are forms of diffuse pollution caused by sediment, nutrients, organic and toxic substances originating from land-use activities, which are carried to lakes, rivers, and streams by surface runoff; 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the stormwater drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater; 
ODEQ means the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality; 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity; 
OKR10 permit means the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality General Permit OKR10 for stormwater discharges from construction activities within the State of Oklahoma; 
On-site facility means a stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity; 
OPDES means Oklahoma Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; 
Outfall means the place where a sewer, drain, or stream discharges; the outlet or structure through which reclaimed water or treated effluent is finally discharged to a receiving water body; 
Perimeter control means a barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin; 
Permittee means owner of the land or an agent of the landowner to whom a permit is issued; 
Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent; 
Phasing means clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next; 
Plat means a map showing the location, boundaries, and ownership of individual properties, planned and developed as a single project; 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: Paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects; floatables; pesticides, insecticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage; fecal coliform; pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; sediment, wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure and/or altering premises; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind; 
Pond means a small body of standing water, naturally or artificially formed with a depth not to exceed six (6) feet in depth and having an area of less than one (1) acre; 
PPM means parts per million; 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips; 
Public utility means a private business organization, subject to governmental regulation, that provides an essential commodity or service, such as water, electricity, transportation, or communication, to the public; 
Recharge means the replenishment of underground water reserves; 
Redevelopment means any construction, alteration or improvement in areas where existing land use is high density commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family residential; 
Right-of-way means an area of land that is legally described in a registered deed for the provision of public access; 
Riparian habitat means areas adjacent to rivers and streams with a differing density, diversity, and productivity of plant and animal species relative to nearby uplands; 
Sediment means the course particles (such as sand, silt and gravel) and organic particulates transported by storm runoff and streamflow. Also, solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below water level; 
Sediment and erosion control permit means a permit designed to review, evaluate, modify, or any other action necessary to ensure sediment and erosion control on a construction site; 
Sediment and erosion control plan means a set of plans indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a construction site; 
Sediment control means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving a site; 
Site means a parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation; 
Site plan means a scale drawing showing the relationship between the lot lines and their uses, buildings or structures, existing or proposed on a lot, including such details as parking areas, access points, landscaped areas, building areas, setbacks from lot lines, building heights, floor areas, densities, septic tank tile fields, utility lines and currents, or a special or particular use; 
Slope means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal expressed in percentage or degrees; 
Stabilization means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding; 
Start of construction means the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages; 
Stop work order means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped; 
Stormwater drainage system means any facility, structure, improvement, development, equipment, property or interest therein, or other structural or nonstructural element made, constructed, used or acquired for the purpose of collecting, containing, storing, conveying and controlling stormwater and other discharges wherever located including, but not limited to, storm sewers, conduits, natural and manmade channels, pipes, culverts, and detention ponds whether public or private; 
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation; 
Stormwater management means the use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates; 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site; 
Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation; 
Stormwater treatment practices (STPs) means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies; 
Structure means anything constructed or erected occupying more than two hundred (200) square feet of area, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something located on the ground but not including pavements, curbs, walks, or open air surfaced areas or moving vehicles; 
Summary abatement means action taken by the City of Sapulpa or its agents to abate a violation without prior notice to the property owner or other interested parties; 
SWP3 means a stormwater pollution prevention plan developed in compliance with ODEQ permit requirements; 
Unstable slopes means slopes which are or may be subject to erosion such as mass movement, slumping, landslides, mudflows, or rock falls. Also, slope or land which has a potential to collapse or slide if development occurs on, or adjacent to, such an area; 
Variance means a relaxation of the terms of an ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship; 
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility; 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel or conduit through which water flows; 
Waterway means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain; 
Watershed means the land area that drains water, sediment, dissolved materials, and other matter to a common receiving body or outlet such as a stream, river, or lake. The term is not restricted to surface water runoff and includes interactions with subsurface water; 
Zoning means categorizing the use or activity of land, buildings, structures, or activities permitted in delineated areas; and 
Zoning code means a set of local government regulations and requirements that govern the use, placement, spacing, and size of buildings and lots (as well as other types of land uses) within specific areas designated as zones primarily dedicated to certain land use types or patterns within the City limits.  
Sec. 14-403. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the stormwater drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.  
Sec. 14-404. - Responsibility for administration. 
The Environmental Administrator shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 14-405. - Ultimate responsibility. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.  
Sec. 14-406. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.  
Sec. 14-407. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater or the stormwater drainage system, said person shall notify the City of Sapulpa. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the Environmental Administrator in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years.  
Sec. 14-408. - Illicit discharge prohibitions. 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal stormwater drainage system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any unlawful discharge is prohibited. 
B.  It is unlawful for any residence or business to allow drainage of a polluting substance or to allow drainage of water which may become a hazard into any street, alley, or sidewalk. A polluting substance is one so defined under Section 926.1 of Title 82 of the Oklahoma Statutes. 
C.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this section unless the Environmental Administrator determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing contamination of surface water, stormwater, or groundwater; causes overload or damage to the municipal separate storm sewer system or has the potential to endanger public health and safety; or is causing the City of Sapulpa to violate its NPDES or OPDES permit for stormwater discharges: 
1.  Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washing, non-commercial or charity washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated), fire hydrant flushings, firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
2.  Discharges specified in writing by the Environmental Administrator as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
3.  Dye testing (using non-toxic dye) is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal or written notification to the Environmental Administrator prior to the time of the test; and 
4.  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the stormwater drainage system.  
Sec. 14-409. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
A.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the stormwater drainage system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
B.  A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.  
Sec. 14-410. - Construction activities. 
A.  General performance standards. Any person subject to a construction activity NPDES and/or OPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit(s). Proof of compliance with said permit(s) may be required in a form acceptable to the Environmental Administrator prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. All construction activities including but not limited to the development, excavation, clearing, grading, regrading, paving, land filling, berming, and diking of land shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize erosion and prevent the discharge of pollutants, including but not limited to rock, sand, soil, discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste into the City of Sapulpa municipal separate storm sewer system. Persons conducting the construction shall implement and maintain adequate structural and/or nonstructural BMPs for controlling erosion and preventing the discharge of pollutants to the MS4. All construction site stormwater runoff control BMPs and post-construction stormwater runoff BMPs shall comply with the current City of Sapulpa Engineering Design Criteria and Standard Specifications. 
B.  Responsible person. The person with overall responsibility of the construction, such as the general contractor, shall be jointly responsible with the person at whose direction the construction is being conducted for compliance with subsection A of this section. 
C.  Record keeping. The person or persons responsible shall retain, and make available to the Environmental Administrator, for inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained under this section or order issued hereunder. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years after expiration of the applicable permit. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this section, or where the person or persons responsible have been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Environmental Administrator. 
D.  Permitting purpose. The purpose of permitting is to obtain and review proposed sediment and erosion control plans for any construction activities. 
E.  Sediment and erosion control permit . 
1.  Applicability. Unless specifically exempted, a sediment and erosion control permit, as defined and regulated by this section, shall be obtained from the Environmental Administrator for any construction activities causing land disturbance. The sediment and erosion control permit must be obtained prior to commencement of any construction activities including, but not limited to any development, excavation, clearing, grading, regrading, land filling, berming, and diking of land. 
2.  Exemptions. A sediment and erosion control permit shall not be required for the following: Customary and incidental routine grounds maintenance, landscaping, and home gardening; construction activities related to bona fide agricultural, ranching, and farming operations which constitute the principal use of a tract of ground in the City of Sapulpa and are under the jurisdiction of the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food, and Forestry; construction activities occurring at oil and gas exploration and production related industries and pipeline operations that are under the jurisdiction of the Oklahoma Corporation Commission; and construction activities occurring on Indian Country lands (as defined in 18 USC Section 1151). 
3.  Application for sediment and erosion control permit. For each sediment and erosion control permit a written application from the owner of the site, or his/her authorized representative, shall be provided to the Environmental Administrator in the form and with the content prescribed in this section, and shall be accompanied by a minimum of three (3) copies of a sediment and erosion control plan with the content prescribed in this section, and the required sediment and erosion control permit fee as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. The permit application shall include the following information: 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of the legal owner of the property for which the sediment and erosion control permit is requested; 
b.  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, if different from the property owner; 
c.  Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of any and all contractors, subcontractors or persons actually doing the land disturbing or land filling activities; 
d.  Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the person(s) responsible for the preparation of any required vicinity map; 
e.  Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the person(s) responsible for preparation of the sediment and erosion control plan and any required reports; 
f.  Legal description of the site and the address of the site (if a valid address has been assigned and/or accepted by the City of Sapulpa); 
g.  Size of the construction site, measured in acres; 
h.  Proposed start date of the project; 
i.  Proposed completion date of the project; 
j.  Date of the application; and 
k.  Signature(s) of the owner(s) of the site or an authorized representative. 
4.  Sediment and erosion control plan requirements. These plans shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed construction activities on water resources, and the best management practices and other measures proposed to minimize soil erosion and prevent off-site sedimentation. All sediment and erosion control measures must be properly selected, installed, and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and good engineering practices. All construction activities including but not limited to the development, excavation, clearing, grading, regrading, landfilling, berming, and diking of land shall be performed in strict accordance with the approved plan. 
a.  For construction sites less than one (1) acre that are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one (1) acre or more, the following information shall be included in any plan: 
i.  A project narrative describing the nature of the construction activity; 
ii.  A description of any surrounding watercourses, water bodies and other significant geographical features; 
iii.  Legal description of the site and the address of the site (if a valid address has been assigned and/or accepted by the City of Sapulpa); 
iv.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and/or developer of the property where the land disturbing activity is proposed; 
v.  A description of, and specifications for, sediment and erosion control measures to minimize on-site erosion and prevent off-site sedimentation during the construction process, including provisions to preserve topsoil and limit disturbance. Minimum control measures must include the proper installation and maintenance of silt screen around the perimeter of the construction site. The applicant may propose the use of any sediment and erosion control measures in a plan provided such measures are proven to be as or more effective than the measures contained in this section and the current City of Sapulpa Engineering Design Criteria and Standard Specifications; 
vi.  A chronological schedule describing when the sediment and erosion control measures will be implemented during the construction process; 
vii.  A description of temporary and permanent stabilization measures. The plan shall ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable and that disturbed portions of site are stabilized. Stabilization practices may include but are not limited to the establishment of temporary vegetation, establishment of permanent vegetation, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation, and other appropriate measures. Use of impervious surfaces for stabilization should be avoided. Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased, but in no case more than fourteen (14) days after the construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased except: 
(a)  Where the initiation of stabilization measures by the 14th day after construction activity temporarily or permanently ceased is precluded by adverse climatological conditions (i.e., snow, ice, heavy rains, or drought) stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable; and 
(b)  Where construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily ceased, and earth disturbing activities will be resumed within twenty-one (21) days, temporary stabilization measures do not have to be initiated on that portion of the site; and 
viii.  The Environmental Administrator may require any additional information or data deemed appropriate and/or may impose such conditions thereto as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section or the preservation of public health and safety. 
b.  For construction sites greater than or equal to one (1) acre and for construction sites that are less than one (1) acre if the construction site is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one (1) acre or more, sediment and erosion control plans shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered professional engineer licensed by the State of Oklahoma. Any required sediment and erosion control plans shall comply with good engineering practices and shall be approved and stamped by a registered professional engineer licensed by the State of Oklahoma. In addition the following information shall be included in any plan: 
i.  A project narrative describing the nature of the construction activity; 
ii.  An attached vicinity map showing the location of the site in relationship to the surrounding area's watercourses, water bodies and other significant geographical features, roads and other significant structures, and showing suitable contours for the topography. An indication of the scale used (this map shall be at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet) and an arrow indicating north shall be included on the map; 
iii.  Legal description of the site and the address of the site (if a valid address has been assigned and/or accepted by the City of Sapulpa); 
iv.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and/or developer of the property where the land disturbing activity is proposed; 
v.  A chronological schedule and description of construction activities that disturb soils of the site (e.g., clearing, grubbing, excavation, grading, utilities, and infrastructure installation); 
vi.  A description of, and specifications for, sediment and erosion control measures to minimize on-site erosion and prevent off-site sedimentation during the construction process, including provisions to preserve topsoil and limit disturbance. Minimum control measures include the proper installation and maintenance of silt screen around the perimeter of the construction site; the proper installation and maintenance of straw bales around all storm sewer inlets; the proper installation and maintenance of straw bales to minimize erosion on all slopes greater than three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical (3:1) where land disturbing activity is planned; and stabilized gravel construction site entrances/exits to prevent tracking or flowing of sediment onto public right-of-ways. The applicant may propose the use of any sediment and erosion control measures in a plan provided such measures are proven to be as or more effective than the measures contained in this section and the current City of Sapulpa Engineering Design Criteria and Standard Specifications; 
vii.  A chronological schedule describing when the sediment and erosion control measures will be implemented during the construction process; 
viii.  A description of temporary and permanent stabilization measures. The plan shall ensure that existing vegetation is preserved where attainable and that disturbed portions of site are stabilized. Stabilization practices may include but are not limited to the establishment of temporary vegetation, establishment of permanent vegetation, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation, and other appropriate measures. Use of impervious surfaces for stabilization should be avoided. Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased, but in no case more than fourteen (14) days after the construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased except: 
(a)  Where the initiation of stabilization measures by the 14th day after construction activity temporarily or permanently ceased is precluded by adverse climatological conditions (i.e., snow, ice, heavy rains, or drought) stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable; and 
(b)  Where construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily ceased, and earth disturbing activities will be resumed within twenty-one (21) days, temporary stabilization measures do not have to be initiated on that portion of the site; 
ix.  A description of measures that will be installed during the construction process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed; 
x.  A copy of all required state and federal stormwater discharge permits (NPDES filed with EPA; OPDES filed with ODEQ) for the construction site shall be provided to the Environmental Administrator. If an OKR10 permit is required by ODEQ for stormwater discharges from a construction site, then the following documents shall be provided to the Environmental Administrator: a copy of the notice of intent submitted to ODEQ for the OKR10 permit, a copy of all stormwater pollution prevention plans developed for the construction site, and a copy of the authorization to discharge stormwater issued by ODEQ; and 
xi.  The Environmental Administrator may require any additional information or data deemed appropriate and/or may impose such conditions thereto as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section or the preservation of public health and safety. 
5.  Permit application review. The Environmental Administrator shall review each application for a sediment and erosion control permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this section. Within fifteen (15) business days after receiving a complete application, the Environmental Administrator shall: 
a.  Approve the permit application; 
b.  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this section, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
c.  Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for disapproval. 
6.  Permit disapproval. If the Environmental Administrator determines that the sediment and erosion control plan does not meet the requirements of this section, then a sediment and erosion control permit shall not be issued. The sediment and erosion control plan must be resubmitted and must be approved by the Environmental Administrator before the land disturbance activity begins. 
7.  Conditions of approval. In granting any sediment and erosion control permit pursuant to this section, the Environmental Administrator may impose such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a nuisance or unreasonable hazard to persons or to a public or private property. Such conditions shall include (even if not specifically written in the permit), but need not be limited to: 
a.  The granting (or securing from others) and the recording in county land records of easements for drainage facilities, including the acceptance of their discharge on the property of others, and for the maintenance of slopes or erosion control facilities; 
b.  Adequate control of dust by watering, or other control methods acceptable to the Environmental Administrator, and in conformance with applicable air pollution ordinances; 
c.  Improvements of any existing grading ground surface or drainage condition on the site (not to exceed the area as proposed for work or development in the application) to meet the standards required under this section and the current City of Sapulpa Engineering Design Criteria and Standard Specifications; and 
d.  Sediment traps and basins located within a densely populated area or in the proximity of an elementary school, playground, or other area where small children may congregate without adult supervision may be requested to install additional safety related devices. 
8.  Permit authorization. The issuance of a sediment and erosion control permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work described in the permit, or shown on the approved sediment and erosion control plan and specifications, all in strict compliance with the requirements of this section, unless each and every modification or waiver is specifically listed and given specific approval by the Environmental Administrator. 
9.  Permit duration. The permittee shall fully perform and complete all of the work required in the sequence shown on the plans within the time limit specified in the permit. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for the period during which the proposed land disturbing or filling activities and soil storage takes place or is scheduled to take place, whichever is shorter, but in no event shall such a permit be valid for more than one (1) year after cessation of construction activity. 
10.  Responsibility of permittee. The permittee shall maintain a copy of the sediment and erosion control permit, approved plans and reports required under the sediment and erosion control permit on the work site and available for public inspection during all working hours. The permittee shall, at all times, be in conformity with the approved sediment and erosion control plan and also conform to the following: 
a.  General. Notwithstanding other conditions or provisions of the sediment and erosion control permit, or the minimum standards set forth in this section, the permittee is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent property. No person shall grade on land in any manner, or so close to the property line as to endanger or damage any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or any other public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking, erosion, sedimentation or other damage or personal injury which might result; and 
b.  Public ways. The permittee shall be responsible for the prompt removal of, and the correction of damages resulting from any soil, miscellaneous debris or other materials washed, spilled, tracked, dumped or otherwise deposited on public streets, highways, sidewalks or other public thoroughfare, incident to the construction activity, or during transit to and from the construction site. 
11.  Liability. The permittee is responsible for safely and legally completing the project. Neither the issuance of a sediment and erosion control permit under the provisions of this section, nor the compliance with the provisions hereto or with any condition imposed by the City of Sapulpa, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the City of Sapulpa for damages to persons or property. 
12.  Action upon noncompliance. 
a.  In the event work does not conform to the sediment and erosion control permit or to the plans and specifications or to any conditions imposed by the City of Sapulpa, notice to comply shall be given to the permittee in writing. The notice shall set forth a notification and compliance period of at least fifteen (15) days for the permittee to comply with the requirements of the notice, except that when an imminent hazard exists the Environmental Administrator may require that corrective work begin immediately. The notification and compliance period will begin on the day the notice is mailed to the permittee or the day the notice is posted on the property that is not conforming to the permit requirements, except that when an imminent hazard exists the Environmental Administrator may order an immediate summary abatement action to abate the violation. At the time of mailing of notice, the City shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. Said notice shall further advise that, should the permittee fail to comply with the requirements of the notice by the established deadline, the work necessary to achieve compliance may be done by the City of Sapulpa or a designated contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the permittee. Issuance of a notice to comply shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other enforcement action. 
b.  If the City of Sapulpa finds any existing conditions not as stated in the application or approved plans, the Environmental Administrator may issue a stop-work order requiring that all construction activities halt when a construction site is in violation of this section. The stop-work order may apply to all construction activity on the subject property which may be directly or indirectly related to site drainage and which is being performed pursuant to any permits, licenses, franchises or contracts issued or approved by the City of Sapulpa. The stop-work order may order a work stoppage on all construction activity on buildings or structures and appurtenances thereto, including but not limited to building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, street work, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, and all utilities including but not limited to gas, electric, telephone, and cable television. The Environmental Administrator may also suspend or revoke any sediment and erosion control, site preparation, grading, erosion control, earth change, construction, or any other permit when any part of this section is violated. 
c.  The violation of any provision of this section, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or thirty (30) days in jail, or both, plus court costs as set by the City. Each day or any portion of a day during which any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
d.  Other actions described in the Penalties and Administrative Remedies section of this chapter may be taken by the City of Sapulpa, including but not limited to suspension of MS4 access, water supply severance, injunctive relief, abatement, remediation, and restoration of lands. The permittee shall be responsible for the costs incurred by the City of Sapulpa. Failure to pay will result in the City of Sapulpa seeking recovery of costs and damages pursuant to the conditions set forth in this chapter. 
13.  Changes to plans. All proposals to modify the approved sediment and erosion control plans must be submitted in writing to the Environmental Administrator. No grading or any type of work in connection with any proposed modification shall be initiated without prior written approval of the Environmental Administrator. 
14.  Inspection and supervision. The City of Sapulpa shall conduct construction site inspections upon receiving a complaint of violation of this section and as needed to evaluate compliance with this section. The permittee shall notify the Environmental Administrator when there are any departures from the approved sediment and erosion control plan and at the following stages: 
a.  Upon completion of installation of perimeter sediment and erosion controls; 
b.  At least twenty-four (24) hours but not more than seventy-two (72) hours (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) prior to commencing initial grading or land disturbing activities; 
c.  When construction and land disturbing activities are halted for a period of thirty (30) days or more; 
d.  At least twenty-four (24) hours but not more than seventy-two (72) hours (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) prior to when construction or land disturbing activities shall recommence after being halted for a period of thirty (30) days or more; 
e.  Upon submitting a notice of termination to ODEQ in compliance with any OKR10 permit requirements; and 
f.  Upon completion of final grading, permanent drainage and erosion control facilities including established ground covers and planting, and all other work of the permit. 
15.  Maintenance during and after construction. For any property on which grading or other work has been done pursuant to a sediment and erosion control permit granted under the provisions of this section, the permittee or owner or an agent of the owner shall inspect all sediment and erosion control measures and other protective measures identified in the sediment and erosion control plan at least once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of a storm event of five-tenths (0.5) inches or greater and shall maintain and repair all sediment and erosion control measures, graded surfaces and erosion control facilities, drainage structures or means and other protective devices, plantings, and ground cover installed while construction is active. After construction is complete, the owner or their agent shall continue to regularly inspect the vegetation until adequate turf establishment or other suitable vegetative cover is established.  
Sec. 14-411. - Request for variance. 
A.  The City Council shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The variance request must be received by the Environmental Administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Notice of Violation. 
C.  The Environmental Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving a request for variance and shall report variance decisions to ODEQ and EPA upon request. 
D.  Upon consideration of the factors involved and the intent of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter. 
E.  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.  
Sec. 14-412. - Monitoring of discharges. 
A.  The Environmental Administrator shall be permitted to enter facilities, premises, watercourses and waterways subject to regulation under this chapter for the purpose of observing, measuring, sampling, testing and inspecting as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
B.  Facility operators shall allow the Environmental Administrator ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES or OPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. Any permits, pollution prevention plans, or other documents regarding a facility's stormwater discharge shall be made available to the Environmental Administrator when requested. 
C.  The Environmental Administrator shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
D.  The Environmental Administrator has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
E.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Environmental Administrator and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
F.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Environmental Administrator access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter. 
G.  If the Environmental Administrator has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the City of Sapulpa is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the City of Sapulpa may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.  
Sec. 14-413. - Penalties and administrative enforcement remedies. 
The following enforcement provisions are intended to encourage compliance with this chapter: 
A.  Investigation. The Environmental Administrator or authorized representative may investigate any premises where there is to believe that there may be failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Notice of violations. Whenever the Environmental Administrator determines that a violation of this ordinance has occurred or is occurring, the Environmental Administrator may issue a notice of violation (NOV) to the person or industry. This NOV shall include the nature of the violation and provide a reasonable time for correction. The Environmental Administrator may require, within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of this NOV, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention, including specific required actions. The explanation and plan shall be submitted by the violator to the Environmental Administrator in writing. Submission of this plan shall in no way relieve the person or industry of liability for any violation(s) occurring before or after receipt of the NOV. Issuance of a NOV shall not preclude any other enforcement action. 
C.  Administrative orders. 
1.  Consent orders. The Environmental Administrator is empowered to enter consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing a consensus with any person or industry for noncompliance. Such an order shall include specific action to be taken by the violator to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified in the order. Consent orders shall be judicially enforceable. 
2.  Compliance orders. When the Environmental Administrator finds that a person or industry has violated or continues to violate this chapter or orders issued hereunder, the Environmental Administrator may issue an order to the violator directing that compliance be obtained within a specified time period. If compliance is not achieved within the time period, water service or sewer service, or both services may be discontinued, unless adequate BMPs or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements addressing noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring. A compliance order shall not extend the deadline for compliance established by a federal standard or requirement, nor shall a compliance order release the violator from liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not preclude any other enforcement action. 
3.  Cease and desist orders. When the Environmental Administrator finds that a person or industry is violating provisions of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that past violations are likely to recur, the Environmental Administrator may issue an order directing the violator to cease and desist all such violations or activities likely to cause a recurrence, and to: 
a.  Immediately comply with all requirements, and 
b.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive actions as may be necessary to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations or terminating the discharge. 
4.  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not preclude other action against the violator. 
5.  Administrative orders may be revised by the Environmental Administrator at any time in order to insure compliance with this chapter. 
D.  Administrative fines. 
1.  When the Environmental Administrator finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of the chapter, or order issued hereunder, the Environmental Administrator, upon good cause shown, may impose an administrative fine against such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines may be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. 
2.  Notice of an administrative fine shall be served personally on the user or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Payment of the fine shall be received by the Environmental Administrator within fifteen (15) days after such notice is served. 
3.  Failure to submit payment for an administrative fine within fifteen (15) days shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
4.  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not preclude any other action against the user. 
E.  Cost recovery of expenses incurred for violation of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Environmental Administrator may require any person and or industry found to have violated any provision of this chapter, or orders issued hereunder, to reimburse the City for any goods or services used to remove pollutants from the City's MS4, prevent further discharge of pollutants into the MS4, and shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damages experienced by the City as a result of a violation. The City may pursue its right of action to recover all such costs, by utilizing any and all reasonable methods, including installment payment administered by the Finance Department. The City may recover the costs incurred by adding them to the utility bill of the violator or filing a lien on the subject property. 
F.  Water supply severance. Whenever a person has violated, or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, or orders issued hereunder, water service may be severed. Service shall only recommence at the violator's expense, after the violator has satisfactorily demonstrated an ability to comply, and actual compliance. 
G.  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any NOV, administrative fine or order issued by the Environmental Administrator pursuant to this section may appeal the action as provided in this subsection. 
1.  The initiation of an appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Environmental Administrator no later than fifteen (15) days after service of notice of the action appealed from. The written notice of appeal shall specify the action appealed, detail why the action is in error, and specify provision of ordinances or statutes supporting the person's appeal. 
2.  Upon receipt of a notice of appeal by the Environmental Administrator, the Environmental Administrator shall conduct any necessary investigation into the basis of the appeal and hold a hearing within thirty (30) days of receipt. However, upon review of the notice of appeal, if the Environmental Administrator determines that the basis of the appeal is patently frivolous or filed only for purposes of delay, then the Environmental Administrator may deny the appeal without a hearing. Upon the Environmental Administrator's denial without a hearing, the appellant shall be notified in writing of the denial and the grounds for denial. 
3.  At the conclusion of a hearing on an appeal if the appeal is sustained in favor of the appellant, the Environmental Administrator may modify or withdraw the notice, fine or order. If the Environmental Administrator fails to act on the appeal within thirty (30) days of concluding the hearing, the appeal shall be deemed denied. Any ruling, requirements, decisions or actions of the Environmental Administrator on appeal shall be final and binding, unless appealed to the City Council. 
4.  Any person aggrieved by an appeal decision of the Environmental Administrator may perfect an appeal to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk and the Environmental Administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of the action by the Environmental Administrator. Such notice shall specify grounds for the appeal. A hearing on the appeal shall be commenced by the Council no later than thirty (30) days from the date the notice of appeal was filed with the City Clerk. The City Council shall have jurisdiction to affirm, modify, reverse, or remand the action of the Environmental Administrator upon good cause shown. Any rulings, requirements, or decision of the Council shall be final. 
H.  Injunctive relief. Whenever a person or industrial facility has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, or orders issued hereunder, the Environmental Administrator, with the advice and counsel of the City Attorney and the approval of the City Manager, may petition the District Court for the issuance of an injunction, which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the person or industry. A petition for injunctive relief shall not preclude any other action against a person or industrial facility. 
I.  Criminal prosecution. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter, or any order issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding costs, fees, and assessments, or by imprisonment in the City Jail for a period not exceeding ten (10) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day, or portion thereof, during which a violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be deemed a separate offense. 
J.  Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions of this section shall not be exclusive remedies. The City reserves the right to take any combination of actions against a violator of this chapter. These actions may be taken concurrently. The City may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.  
Sec. 14-414. - Stormwater utility fee. 
A.  To fund costs associated with implementing and maintaining a stormwater management program, a stormwater utility fee is established for use of the City's stormwater drainage system and hazard mitigation program and shall be paid by owners and/or occupants of real property located within municipal limits at rates set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
B.  All revenues collected from the stormwater utility fee shall be deposited to the stormwater management fund. 
C.  The stormwater management fund shall be used for the following purposes: 
1.  Costs of development, administration, and implementation of the stormwater management program including operation costs, capital expenses, salaries and consulting fees; 
2.  Public education and outreach; 
3.  Stormwater pollution prevention activities; 
4.  Illicit discharge detection and elimination; 
5.  Inspection, monitoring, surveillance, and enforcement activities; 
6.  Abatement, remediation, and restoration activities; 
7.  Field sampling and testing equipment, supplies, and services; 
8.  Laboratory testing equipment, supplies, and services; 
9.  Engineering and GIS equipment, supplies, and services; 
10.  Storm sewer system development, upgrades, and repairs; 
11.  Retrofitting developed areas for pollution control; 
12.  The acquisition by gift, purchase, or condemnation of real and personal property, and interests therein, necessary to construct, operate, and maintain the municipal storm sewer system; and 
13.  Other equipment, supplies, and activities which are reasonably required. 
D.  The stormwater utility fee shall be billed to each owner/occupant monthly, along with a bill for water or other utility services (as applicable) and such penalties as are now or may hereafter be established for water service bills, and shall carry the same due date as now or may hereafter be established for water service bills. In the event any person, firm or corporation shall tender as payment of water service, outside fire run program, sanitary sewer, nuisance abatement fees, sanitary sewer service, collection of solid waste service, and/or service charge for the use of the City's stormwater drainage system an amount insufficient to pay in full all of the charges so billed, credit shall be given first to the charges for deposit, second to the service charge for the stormwater utility fee, third to the charges for collections of solid waste, fourth to the charge for sanitary sewer service, fifth to any sanitary sewer nuisance abatement fees, sixth to outside fire run program, seventh to the charges for water service, and lastly to fees and penalties. The City shall have the right and privilege of discontinuing water service to any premises for insufficient payment. 
In the event any utility account shall become delinquent, water service may be terminated by the City until all delinquent charge shall be paid in full. The provisions for collection of charges provided herein shall be in addition to any rights or remedies which the City may have under the laws of the State of Oklahoma. 
In the case of owners/occupants of real estate who are not billed by the City for water, sanitary sewer, or collection of solid waste, the owner of the real estate or agent of the owner shall be billed monthly for the service charges herein established. 
The invalidity of any provision, clause, or portion of this section or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this section or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances.  
Sec. 14-415. - Post-construction stormwater impacts; minimization regulations and requirements; compliance procedures. 
The following post-construction stormwater impact provisions are intended to encourage compliance with this chapter: 
A.  The purpose of this section is to address the design, construction, operation, and maintenance requirements of stormwater drainage systems within the City of Sapulpa to reduce or eliminate post-development adverse stormwater quality and quantity impacts to the municipal separate stormwater system (MS4). 
B.  Development design, construction, and post-construction operations and maintenance of stormwater drainage systems shall be performed in such a manner so that adverse stormwater quality and quantity impacts to stormwater drainage systems and receiving streams both on the subject property and on offsite properties are avoided, reduced, or eliminated. Adverse stormwater quality and quantity effects for the purposes of this section includes increased flood elevations, increased velocity of floodwaters, erosion, siltation, sedimentation, reduced base flow, pollution, or degradation of water quality. 
C.  Stormwater drainage systems for the purposes of this section include any facility, structure, improvement, development, equipment, property or interest therein, including structural and nonstructural elements, which are made, constructed, used or acquired for the purpose of collecting, containing, storing, conveying, filtering, treating, infiltrating and controlling stormwater. This includes, but is not limited to detention facilities, retention facilities, sediment basins, ponds, lakes, engineered open channels, natural channels, floodplains, creeks, storm sewers, conduits, pipes, borrow ditches, swales, roadways, infiltration systems, rain gardens, and bio-retention filters. 
D.  Every development shall be provided with a stormwater drainage system designed by an engineer registered in the State of Oklahoma, adequate to serve the development, and otherwise shall meet approval requirements of the officials having jurisdiction. The design shall meet City of Sapulpa Engineering Design Criteria Manual and other City of Sapulpa criteria and codes where applicable. 
E.  The stormwater drainage system shall be designed so that property owners located downstream from and upstream from the development shall not be injuriously affected by the construction, operation, or maintenance of such system. 
F.  Proof of compliance. 
1.  If a proposed development will disturb an existing wetland, the developer shall provide to the City a written statement from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that the development plan fully complies with all applicable federal wetland regulations as established in the federal Clean Water Act. 
2.  If the Environmental Administrator obtains credible information regarding threatened or pending regulatory enforcement action related to an environmental condition of the property to be developed, or an environmental impact related to the development plan, then the Environmental Administrator may require the developer to provide to the City written statements from such governmental agencies as the Environmental Administrator may designate as having related jurisdiction based on the nature of the threatened enforcement action or environmental impact. Said statements shall verify that the development plan fully complies with environmental regulations within the jurisdiction of the writing agency. If the developer, after a diligent effort, is unable to obtain such written verifications from one (1) or more of the designated agencies, the developer shall at least provide to the City a written verification from said agency that the City's approval of the development plan will not interfere with a threatened or pending environmental enforcement action of said agency. All required written statements shall be provided to the Environmental Administrator prior to the scheduling of the hearing for the project development plan. 
G.  Construction of the development including stormwater drainage systems shall be performed in compliance with Section 14-410 requirements, City of Sapulpa Engineering Design Criteria requirements, and other City of Sapulpa construction criteria and code requirements where applicable. 
H.  Operations responsibility of the development stormwater drainage system shall be detailed in the covenants language on platted developments, on easement language for stormwater drainage systems in dedicated easements, or shall be borne by the property owner for stormwater drainage systems on private property. 
I.  Maintenance responsibility of the development stormwater drainage system shall be detailed in the covenants language on platted developments, on easement language for stormwater drainage systems in dedicated easements, or shall be borne by the property owner for stormwater drainage systems on private property. 
J.  In the event that the owner or responsible party fails to properly operate or maintain the stormwater drainage system such that negative stormwater quality or quantity impacts to stormwater drainage systems and or receiving streams either on the subject property or on offsite properties occurs or is imminent, the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, or its designated contractor may enter the property to perform required operations or maintenance, and the cost shall be paid by the owner or responsible party.  
Part 15 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES  
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 15-101. - Citation of chapter. 
This chapter and all amendments hereto may be cited or referred to as the "Traffic Code, City of Sapulpa" and may so appear upon all official documents, records or instruments. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-102. - Traffic code controlling. 
Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this chapter, the traffic code shall be controlling and apply to the use of City streets, alleys, thoroughfares, parks, parkways, public parking lots, school driveways, streets, parking lots, or any other public right-of-way or municipally-owned property or land, including streets and other ways that form the boundary line of the City, by pedestrians and by vehicles of every kind whether self-propelled or otherwise and whether moving or at rest. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-103. - Definitions. 
As used herein: 
Alley means any narrow highway ordinarily located in the interior portion of platted blocks and ordinarily used for service or delivery purposes at the rear of stores, dwellings, or buildings; 
Ambulance means a motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed, or arranged for the purpose of transporting ill, sick, or injured persons; 
Bicycle means a device having one (1), two (2), or three (3) tandem wheels propelled by human power upon which any person may ride; 
Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than eight (8) passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation; 
Business district means the territory contiguous to, and including a highway if there are buildings within six hundred (600) feet of the highway in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the highway; 
Center lane means any clearly marked center lane. If the center lane is not marked and no cars are parked on the roadway, then the center lane is equally distanced between the curbs or traveled portion of the roadway. In the event a vehicle or vehicles are parked on one side of the roadway only, then the center lane is equally distanced from the side of the parked vehicle or vehicles toward the street and curb on the opposite roadway. If vehicles be parked on each side of the roadway, then the center lane is equally distanced from the edges of the parked vehicles; 
Commercial vehicles means every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of property; 
Controlled access highway means every highway, street, or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway; 
Crosswalk means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs; or in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway. "Crosswalk" also means any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface; 
Double park means parking or stopping a vehicle on the roadway side of another vehicle already parked adjacent to the edge or curbing of the roadway; 
Driver or operator means a person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle; 
Emergency means an unforeseeable occurrence of temporary duration causing or resulting in an abnormal increase in traffic volume, cessation or stoppage of traffic movement, or creation of conditions hazardous to normal traffic movement, including fire, storm, accident, riot, or spontaneous assembly of large numbers of pedestrians in such a manner as to impede the flow of traffic; 
Emergency vehicle means vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles, and ambulances; 
Highway. See Street; 
Intersection means: 
A.  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadway of two (2) streets, which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets join at any other angle, may come in conflict; or 
B.  Where a street includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street, shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such streets shall be regarded as separate intersections; 
Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic; 
Limited access highway. See controlled access highway; 
Limit lines means boundaries of parking areas, loading zones and non-traffic areas and lines indicating the proper place for stopping where stops are required; 
Loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or material. A freight curb loading zone is a loading zone for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight; a passenger curb loading zone is a loading zone for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers; 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled; 
Motorcycle, motor scooter, and motor bicycle mean a motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or saddle for the use of the driver and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor; 
Official time means whenever certain hours are named herein they mean Central Standard Time, or Daylight Savings Time, as may be in current use in the City; 
Official traffic control device means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic; 
Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, providing such loading and unloading is in an authorized place; 
Pedestrian means any person afoot; 
Police officer means every officer of the Municipal Police Department, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for violation of traffic regulations; 
Private road or roadway means a way or place in private ownership or leading to property in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner; 
Public parking lot means a parking lot or right-of-way dedicated to public use or owned by the state or a political subdivision thereof; 
Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars other than streetcars operated upon stationary rails; 
Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars; 
Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district; 
Right-of-way means the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other; 
Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed, ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulders. In the event a street includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term roadway, as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway, separately, but not to all such roadways, collectively; 
Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times, while set apart as a safety zone; 
School zone means all streets or portions of streets immediately adjacent to a school, or school ground, where same is adjacent and for a distance of three hundred (300) feet in each direction; 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of the roadway, and adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians; 
Stand or standing means any stopping of a vehicle whether occupied or not; 
Stop , when required, means the complete cessation from movement; 
Stop or stopping , when prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal; 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel; 
Through street or highway means a street, or boulevard or highway or portion thereof at the entrances to which: 
A.  Vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to come to a full stop before entering or crossing; and 
B.  Stop signs are erected as provided in this part; 
Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singularly or together, while using any highway or street for purpose of travel; 
Traffic control devices or signals mean any device legally authorized and used for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic; 
Urban district means the territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred (100) feet for a distance of a quarter (¼) of a mile or more; 
U-turn means a turn by which a vehicle reverses its course of travel on the same street; and 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is, or may be transported, or drawn, upon a highway or street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Definitions, State Traffic Code, 47 O.S. § 1-101 et seq.  
Sec. 15-104. - Adoption of State Traffic Code. 
The provisions of the State Motor Vehicle Code, Section 1-101 et seq. of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and the Rules of the Road, Section 10-101 et seq. of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and all subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference to the City Traffic Code, and are enforceable by the City within the City limits and on City-owned land as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— State Rules of the Road, 47 O.S. § 10-101 et seq.; State Motor Vehicle Code, 47 O.S. § 1-101 et seq.  
Sec. 15-105. - Penalty. 
Any violation of the City's traffic code is punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
CHAPTER 2. - ENFORCEMENT AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 15-201. - Enforcement of traffic laws; establishment of Traffic Control Division. 
It is the duty of the officers of the Police Department or any officers that are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic laws of this City and all the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this City. Officers of the department shall make arrests for traffic violations, investigate accidents, and cooperate with other officers in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department by this part and any other traffic ordinances of this City. Officers may issue written notice to appear to any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident when, based on personal investigation, the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that the person has committed an offense under the provisions of the traffic code in connection with the accident. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-202. - Direction of traffic by hand or voice. 
A.  Officers of the Police Department or any officers designated by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws and ordinances. In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances. 
B.  Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, or other emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-203. - Direction of traffic by unauthorized persons. 
No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt to direct traffic, except in case of emergency where no officer is present. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-204. - Obedience to police and fire officials. 
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or Fire Department official. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-205. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
A.  The City Manager, subject to any directions which the City Council may give by motion or resolution, is empowered to adopt regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this City and to make temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days. 
B.  The City Manager may have traffic control devices tested under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-206. - Push carts, riding animals, or driving animal-drawn vehicles to comply with code. 
Every person propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this part applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this part which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions; 47 O.S. § 11-104.  
Sec. 15-207. - Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices restricted. 
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinances of this City. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-208. - Public officers and employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this part shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, any State, County, City, or governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. It is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this part, except as otherwise permitted in this part by state statute. This part shall not apply to the military forces of the United States and organizations of the National Guard when performing any military duty. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Municipal drivers to obey state Rules of the Road, 47 O.S. § 16-103.  
Sec. 15-209. - Persons working on streets, exceptions. 
Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this part, except those relating to reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance, or repair of public utilities. All street or highway and public utility operations shall be protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices, or flagpersons. The provisions of this part shall apply to any of the persons and vehicles exempted by this section when traveling to and from such work. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-210. - Maintenance and construction zones. 
A.  City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the streets of the City, and City personnel and utility companies, when installing, improving, or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the City Manager, to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance, or construction. In exercising this authority, the appropriate personnel, contractor or utility company shall erect or cause to be erected proper control devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been closed to traffic. 
B.  When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of subsection A of this section and traffic control devices or barricades have been erected, it is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through, under, over, or around such traffic control devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter the closed area. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons entering the closed area or zone for the protection of lives or property. Persons having their places of residence or places of business within the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at their own risk. 
C.  Whenever construction, repair, or maintenance of any street or utility line or facility is being performed under traffic, the City personnel, contractor, or utility company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected, traffic control devices to warn and guide the public. Every person using the street shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagpersons, or other traffic control devices which are placed to regulate, control, and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance area. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-211. - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
A.  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or ordinance or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions stated in this section. 
B.  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do any of the following when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or ordinance or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm: 
1.  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this part; 
2.  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
3.  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as life or property is not endangered; or 
4.  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specific directions. 
C.  The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals as required by law, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
D.  The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Emergency vehicle driving rules, 47 O.S. § 11-106.  
Sec. 15-212. - Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
A.  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
B.  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Authorized emergency vehicles and their equipment, 47 O.S. §§ 11-106, 11-405, and 12-218; approach of emergency vehicles, 47 O.S. § 11-405.  
Sec. 15-213. - Following emergency vehicles prohibited. 
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any police vehicle, ambulance, civil defense vehicle, fire apparatus, or other emergency vehicle traveling in response to an emergency call or request closer than five hundred (500) feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the emergency vehicle has stopped in answer to an emergency call. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1108(a).  
Sec. 15-214. - Crossing fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1109.  
Sec. 15-215. - Possession of valid driver's license required. 
A.  No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the highways without having in his possession at all times, when operating such motor vehicle, an unrevoked or unsuspended operator's or chauffeur's license as required by the laws of the state, unless such person is specifically exempted from such laws by the provisions thereof. No person charged with violating this section shall be convicted if he produces in court an operator's or chauffeur's license issued to him and valid at the time of his arrest. 
B.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of any restriction that may be imposed in a restricted license issued to him with respect to the type of, or special mechanical control devices required on a motor vehicle or any other restriction applicable to the licensee as the state may determine. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Driver's licenses, 47 O.S. § 6-101.  
Sec. 15-216. - Operation of vehicle on invalid license prohibited. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle when his privilege to do so is cancelled, suspended, revoked or denied. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. Each act of driving on the streets or highways as prohibited by this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-217. - Unlawful to operate vehicle without State vehicle license. 
It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the City without a state vehicle license as may be required by law or to fail to display the state vehicle license as may be required by law. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-218. - Permitting unauthorized person to drive prohibited. 
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any highway by any person who is not authorized under the provisions of the laws of the state to operate such vehicle. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-219. - Accidents, duty to stop, leaving scene of accident. 
A.  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle or property shall immediately stop his vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible, return to and remain at the scene of the accident until he has given his name, address and the registration of his vehicle and shall upon request exhibit his driver's license to the person injured or the driver or occupant of, or person attending, any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or making arrangement for the carrying of such persons to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical and surgical treatment if it is apparent that this treatment is necessary, or if such is requested by the injured person. Each such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or in which it is apparent that damage to one vehicle or to the property is in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall, as soon as practicable, report such accident to a police officer or to the Police Department. If a driver makes out a written report of the accident in the office of the Police Department as soon as practicable after the accident, which report is to be forwarded to the State Department of Public Safety in accordance with state law, the driver shall be deemed to be in compliance with this section. 
C.  Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-108.  
Sec. 15-220. - Issuance of citation tags. 
A.  Police officers are hereby authorized to give notice to persons violating provisions of this part by delivering citation tags to violators or, in cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped in violation of this chapter, by affixing such tags to the vehicles by means of which the violation occurred. Such citation tags, among other things, shall bear briefly the charge, shall bear the registration number of the vehicle, and shall direct the violator to present the tag at the police station or other designated place within the time as may be specified thereon. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power of a police officer to arrest any violator and take him into custody. 
C.  The City Manager may require that the police officers use citation tags furnished by the City Clerk and that such tags are serially numbered, and may regulate the use and handling of the citation tags. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-221. - Disposition and records of traffic citations and complaints. 
A.  Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged violator of any provision of this traffic ordinance, shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of the citation to an immediate superior officer who shall cause the original to be delivered to the municipal court of the City and the duplicate copy to the central records section of Police Department. The second duplicate copy of the citation shall be retained in the traffic citation book and shall be delivered by such superior officer to the City Clerk together with such book when all traffic citations therein have been issued. 
B.  Upon the filing of such original citation in the municipal court of this City the citation may be disposed of by the City Attorney, by trial in the court or by other official action by a judge of the court, including the settlement of bail or the payment of a fine, or may be dismissed by the judge, if in his opinion, the actions complained of do not constitute a violation of traffic ordinances. 
C.  The Chief of Police shall require the return to him of each traffic citation and all copies thereof except that copy required to be retained in the book as provided herein, which has been spoiled or upon which an entry has been made, and has not been issued to an alleged violator. 
D.  The Chief of Police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in connection with every traffic citation issued by a member of the Police Department, a record of the disposition of the charge by the municipal court of the City. 
E.  The Chief of Police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained a record of all warrants issued by the municipal court of the City, all the traffic fines which are delivered to the Police Department for service and of the final disposition of the warrant. 
F.  It is unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the Police Department or other officer of public employ to dispose of, alter, or deface any traffic citation or any copy thereof or the record of issuance of any traffic citation, complaint or warrant in any manner other than is required in this section. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-222. - When copies of citations shall be deemed a lawful complaint. 
In the event the form of citation provided herein includes information and is sworn to, then such citation, when filed with the municipal court, shall be deemed to be a lawful complaint for the purpose of prosecution under this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-223. - Failure to obey citation. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation regardless of the disposition of the charge for which citation was originally issued. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-224. - Failure to comply with traffic citations attached to parked vehicle. 
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of days as specified on the citation, the clerk of the municipal court may send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded for the specified period of days, a warrant of arrest may be issued. On any occasion where two (2) or more such traffic citations have been affixed on the same motor vehicle and the traffic citations have been disregarded, a warrant of arrest may be issued without sending the letter provided in this section. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-225. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
A.  In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. 
B.  The presumption in subsection A of this section shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed in this chapter has been followed. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-226. - Illegal cancellation of traffic citations. 
It is unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other than is provided by this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-227. - Court records; abstract to be sent to State Department of Public Safety. 
A.  The municipal judge shall keep a record of every traffic citation deposited with or presented to the court and shall keep a record of every official action by the court or its traffic violations bureau in reference thereto, including but not limited to a record of every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or forfeiture. 
B.  Within ten (10) days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a person upon a charge of violating any provision of this chapter or other law regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, the municipal judge or clerk of the court in which the conviction was had or bail was forfeited shall prepare and immediately forward to the State Department of Public Safety a certified abstract of the court's record of the case. An abstract need not be made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle. 
C.  The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the State Department of Public Safety and shall include the name and address of the party charged, the number of his operator's or chauffeur's license, the registration number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the date of hearing, the plea, the judgment, whether bail was forfeited, and the amount of the fine or forfeiture. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-228. - Insurance or certificate required. 
A.  The owner of a motor vehicle registered in this State and operating the vehicle within the City's boundaries, shall carry in such vehicle at all times a current owner's security verification form listing the vehicle, or an equivalent form which has been used by the State Department of Public Safety which shall be produced by any driver thereof upon request for inspection by any law enforcement officer and, in case of a collision, the form shall be shown upon request to any person affected by the collision. 
B.  The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or operator's security verification form or an equivalent form from the department during operation of the vehicle and shall not be required to surrender such form for vehicle registration purposes: 
1.  Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or any agency or political subdivision thereof; 
2.  Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business, corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the Compulsory Insurance Law according to records of the Department of Public Safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance, or fleet policy; 
3.  Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a permit number issued by the Interstate Commerce Commission, or the Oklahoma Corporation Commission; 
4.  Any licensed taxicab; and 
5.  Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer. 
C.  For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
1.  Owner's policy means an owner's policy of liability insurance which: 
a.  Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate reference all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted; 
b.  Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other person, except as provided in subsection C of this section, using an insured vehicle with the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from the liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, operation or use of such vehicle; 
c.  May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with existing laws; and 
d.  Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in accordance with Section 7-204 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes; 
2.  Operator's policy means an operator's policy of liability insurance which shall insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him by law for damages arising out of the operation or use by him of any motor vehicle not owned by him, subject to the same limits of liability required in an owner's policy; 
3.  Security means: 
a.  A policy or bond meeting the requirements of Section 7-204 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes; 
b.  A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits required under Section 7-204 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes as acceptable limits for a policy or bond; or 
c.  Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-503 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, having the equivalency of limits required under Section 7-204 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes as acceptable limits for a policy or bond; 
4.  Compulsory Insurance Law means the law requiring liability insurance in conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state as found in Article VI, Chapter 7, and Section 7-606 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes; and 
5.  Security verification form means a form, approved by the State Board for Property and Casualty Rates, verifying the existence of security required by the Compulsory Insurance Law of the State of Oklahoma. 
a.  Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in this state, shall while operating or using such vehicle within the City's boundaries, carry either an operator's or an owner's security verification form issued by a carrier, providing the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon; or an equivalent form issued by the State Department of Public Safety, reflecting liability coverage. 
b.  An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department upon request of any peace officer of the department shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
c.  A sentence imposed for any violation of this section may be suspended or deferred in whole or in part by the court. 
d.  Any person producing proof in court that a current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department reflecting this liability coverage for such person was in force at the time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge. 
e.  Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the court clerk shall forward an abstract to the State Department of Public Safety within ten (10) days reflecting the action taken by the court. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
CHAPTER 3. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 15-301. - Certain vehicles prohibited; vehicles injurious to streets. 
No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a street, shall be driven or moved on any street. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Required equipment of vehicles, 47 O.S. § 12-101 et seq.  
Sec. 15-302. - Obstructive and dangerous vehicles. 
No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed, or so loaded, as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the Chief of Police and in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-303. - Equipment. 
Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the City shall be equipped as required by law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle upon a street of the City which is not equipped as required by law. It is unlawful to fail to use such equipment in the manner required by law, or to use it in a manner prohibited by law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by law upon a street of the City. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— For state law relating to equipment, see 47 O.S. § 12-201 et seq.  
Sec. 15-304. - Mufflers, cut-outs, vehicles, and cycles. 
A.  No motor vehicles with an internal combustion engine shall be operated within the City unless the exhaust from such engine is muffled by a suitable and sufficient muffler. No muffler cut-out or exhaust or vacuum whistle shall be used on any motor vehicle while operating within the City, except that exhaust whistles may be used on authorized emergency vehicles. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorcycle or motor scooter which is not equipped with a muffler or other noise reduction control device. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-305. - Weight, height, length, and load. 
No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width, height, length, weight, or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law, except in accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the City as hereinafter provided. 
A.  No structure or object greater than fourteen (14) feet in overall width or fifteen and nine tenths (15.9) feet in overall height, including any vehicle or equipment utilized in moving same, or greater than ninety (90) feet in overall length as a single unit, shall be moved upon any street until a mover's permit has been issued by the City. No structure or object requiring a mover's permit shall be moved upon any street during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, nor at any time on holidays recognized by the City, nor at any time upon Dewey Avenue between Mission Street and Wickham Road, or upon Main Street between Line Avenue and Taft Avenue, unless granted specific written permission by the City Manager or Chief of Police, or their designees as part of a mover's permit. 
B.  Prior to moving any structure or object requiring a mover's permit, an application for same must be filed with the Urban Development Department of the City. Said application shall include a copy of the mover's current and valid liability insurance certificate in an amount adequate to cover damages to persons, public/private property and utilities that may be damaged as a result of such movement with minimum limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. Applications for a mover's permit can be made on a per load or annual basis as herein provided. 
C.  Per load permit. An application for a mover's permit on a per load basis shall provide an accurate description of the overall width, height and length of the structure or object to be moved, as well as the equipment utilized in transporting same and shall designate an approved route of transport and approximate time of movement. Within one (1) business day of receiving a completed application, the City shall, if appropriate, issue a mover's permit to the applicant upon receipt of a fee as provided by the Master Fee Schedule. 
The issued mover's permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous location on the vehicle or other conveyance performing the transport through the City. Prior to commencing movement through the City, the applicant shall notify the Chief of Police of the intention to commence transport at least one (1) hour prior to movement through the City. No movement granted by a mover's permit shall commence until clearance is granted to do so by the Chief of Police. 
D.  Annual permit. An application for a mover's permit on an annual basis shall provide a general description of the overall width, height and length of the structures or objects to be moved, as well as the equipment utilized in transporting same and shall designate an approved contemplated route of transport and approximate times of movement. Within seven (7) business days of receiving a completed application, the City shall, if appropriate, issue an annual mover's permit to the applicant upon receipt of a fee as provided by the Master Fee Schedule. The issued mover's permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous location on the vehicle or other conveyance performing the transport through the City. Prior to commencing movement through the City, the applicant shall notify the Chief of Police of the intention to commence transport at least one (1) hour prior to movement through the City. No movement granted by a mover's permit shall commence until clearance is granted to do so by the Chief of Police. 
E.  Any person, firm, business or corporation failing to comply with the requirements of this section shall be deemed guilty of committing an offense punishable as provided by Section 1-108 of this Code. 
Cross reference— See also § 15-539 on failure to secure loads, § 15-538 on truck routes and 15-720 on truck parking. 
State Law reference— For state law relating to size, weight, and load, see 47 O.S. § 14-101 et seq.  
Sec. 15-306. - Maintenance of vehicles. 
A.  No person shall drive or move on any road, street, or highway of this City any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers, semi-trailers, or pole trailers, which are licensed by the Oklahoma Tax Commission and operated on the streets or highways, of this City, or any combination thereof, unless the vehicle is in good working order and adjustment and is in such safe mechanical condition as not to endanger the driver or other occupants. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any house trailer, which requires a permit to be moved upon the highways of this state. 
B.  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-307. - Use of dynamic braking device prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway with a dynamic braking device engaged, except to avert imminent danger to the operator or pedestrians, bicycles, or other vehicle so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. A dynamic braking device, commonly referred to as a Jake or Jacob Brake, is one used primarily on trucks and buses to convert a motor from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of vehicle braking without the use of wheel brakes. Any use of a dynamic braking device must be effectively muffled to avoid loud, disturbing, or unnecessary noises in the operation thereof. The discharge in the open air of exhaust of a dynamic braking device except through a muffler or other device which effective prevents loud or excessive or annoying noises shall be considered a violation of this section. 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated § 15-306, the provisions have been redesignated as § 15-307 at the discretion of the editor.  
CHAPTER 4. - SPEED REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 15-401. - Speed limits generally; exceptions. 
A.  No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than twenty-five (25) miles per hour upon any street or highway within the City except: 
1.  Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this Code; 
2.  When a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted; or 
3.  When a different speed limit is established in this Code. 
B.  The City Manager, subject to such direction as the City Council may give by motion or resolution, may reduce or increase the speed limits provided in this Code, and when he does so, appropriate signs shall be placed on such streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or higher speed limit. 
C.  The City Council by motion or resolution, or the State Transportation Department as regards state and United States highways, may reduce or increase this speed limit. When so done, appropriate signs shall be placed on such streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or higher speed limit. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Basic and minimum speed rules, 47 O.S. §§ 11-801, 11-804.  
Sec. 15-402. - School zones. 
No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than that posted speed per hour between the hours posted on any street adjacent to any school in a designated school zone on days when school is in session, unless a different speed limit or time is otherwise designated and posted. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Local authority to set speed limits, 47 O.S. §§ 15-102, 11-803, 22.1.  
Sec. 15-403. - Speed never to exceed that which is reasonable or prudent for existing conditions; specific limits. 
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater or less than is reasonable or prudent under the conditions then existing, taking into consideration among other things, the conditions of the vehicle, the traffic, roadway surface or width, the amount of light or darkness, the presence of pedestrians in or near the roadways, and the obstruction of views. No person shall drive any vehicle at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-404. - Minimum speed requirements; exception. 
No vehicle shall be driven at such an unreasonably slow speed in relation to the effective maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere with the normal movement of other traffic except when the slow speed is unavoidable. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-405. - Obedience to maximum and minimum speed limits. 
Where official signs and markings give notice of both maximum and minimum speed limits in effect on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in excess of the maximum nor slower than the minimum except as required by an authorized officer or in obedience to posted official signs. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-406. - Penalty. 
Any violation of the City's traffic code is punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code.  
CHAPTER 5. - DRIVING, OVERTAKING, PASSING 
 
Sec. 15-501. - Changing lanes. 
A.  Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, in addition to all other rules consistent with this subsection, a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety and has signaled for a change of course. 
B.  Where streets or roadways do not have marked traffic lanes, vehicles shall nevertheless keep in line or follow a straight course as nearly as practical and shall not weave in and out or turn from side to side unnecessarily. Vehicles shall move to the right or left only as necessary in slowing or stopping adjacent to the curb, in passing slow moving vehicles or making a proper approach for a turn, and this only after the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made safely and has signaled for a change of course. 
C.  Upon a roadway which has been divided into three (3) and five (5) lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation. 
D.  Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway. Drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-502. - Driving on right side of roadway required; exceptions. 
A.  Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven to the right of the center of the roadway, except as follows: 
1.  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
2.  When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair; 
3.  Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; and 
4.  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic. 
B.  All vehicles shall keep to the right roadway on all streets or highways which are divided into two (2) roadways. 
C.  Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-301.  
Sec. 15-503. - When overtaking on the right is permitted. 
A.  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
1.  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; 
2.  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction; or 
3.  Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one (1) direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-504. - Overtaking a vehicle on the left. 
A.  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the street or roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
B.  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-505. - Limitations on overtaking on the left; exception. 
A.  No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the street or roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the completion of the overtaking and passing without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every instance the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within one hundred (100) feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
B.  No vehicle at any time shall be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
1.  When approaching the crest of a grade, or upon a curve in the street or highway where the driver's view along the street or highway is obstructed; or 
2.  When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel or when approaching within three hundred (300) feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-506. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. 
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right. Upon roadways having a width for not more than one (1) line of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (½) the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-507. - One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands. 
A.  The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the City Council by motion or resolution, may designate any road, street, alley, or highway, or any separate roadway under their jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall cause appropriate signs giving notice thereof, to be erected. 
B.  Whenever the City Manager designates any street or alley or part thereof as a one-way street or alley, the City Manager shall have placed and maintained signs giving notice thereof; and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
C.  Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys and parts of alleys so designated as one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
D.  Upon roadways designated and sign posted for one-way traffic a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. 
E.  A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-308.  
Sec. 15-508. - Following too closely. 
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-310.  
Sec. 15-509. - No passing zones. 
A.  The State Department of Transportation, as regards state and federal highways, and the City Manager as regards all other streets, are hereby authorized to determine those portions of any highway where overtaking and passing to the left would be especially hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones. When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver shall obey the directions thereof. 
B.  Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as set forth in subsection A of this section, no driver shall at any time drive to the left side of the roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout its length. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-510. - Driving through funeral or other procession prohibited; exceptions. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Local powers to regulate processions, 47 O.S. § 15-102.  
Sec. 15-511. - Drivers in a procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-512. - Funeral processions to be identified. 
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the lighting of headlights or such identifying insignia as may be determined and designated by the Police Department. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-513. - Overtaking and passing in school zones. 
A.  No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in motion and being driven in the same direction in any school zone between the hours posted on all days when schools are in session. 
B.  Wherever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which is divided into three (3) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where the right half of the roadway has been divided into two (2) or more lanes, or on one-way streets, vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving vehicles being driven in the same direction where passing does not involve a change of lane movement. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-514. - Overtaking and passing school bus. 
A.  The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is stopped to take on or discharge school children, and on which the red loading signals are in operation, shall stop his vehicle before it reaches the school bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then proceed past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for the safety of such school children and other occupants. 
B.  The driver of any vehicle when passing a school bus shall use due caution for the safety of school children and other occupants of the school bus. 
C.  Occupants of the school bus shall have the right-of-way when crossing the roadway immediately upon leaving the school bus. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-705.  
Sec. 15-515. - School bus requirements; lights; signs; painting. 
A.  The provisions of Section 15-514 of this Code shall be applicable only if the school bus is painted yellow and bears upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words "SCHOOL BUS" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height which can be removed or covered when the vehicle is not in use as a school bus. 
B.  The school bus shall be equipped with four (4) red alternately flashing warning signal lights, two (2) of which shall be located high on the front and two (2) high on the rear of the vehicle. The lights shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in diameter and shall be widely separated. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-307.  
Sec. 15-516. - Driving of vehicles on sidewalk prohibited; exception. 
No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-517. - Limitations on backing vehicle. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with any other traffic. No vehicle shall be backed into an intersection. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-518. - Limitation on use of motorcycles, bicycles and motor scooters. 
A.  No driver of a two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle or bicycle shall carry any other person upon or within such vehicle on any street or highway, except as provided in this section: 
1.  If any two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter of twelve (12) inches or greater or any bicycle shall have either a double seating device with double foot rests or a side car attachment providing a separate seat space within such sidecar attachment for each person riding therein so that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of the side car, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of sixteen (16) or older to carry a passenger; and 
2.  A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is permissible. 
B.  No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk of the City. 
C.  No rider of a motorcycle, bicycle, or motor scooter shall hold on to any moving vehicle for the purpose of being propelled. 
D.  A person operating a motor scooter, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or motor bicycle, shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
E.  No driver of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall pass other vehicles in between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction. Authorized emergency vehicles are excepted from the provisions of this subsection. 
F.  No person under the age of sixteen (16) shall operate any motorcycle, motor bicycle, or motor scooter within the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-519. - Required motorcycle equipment, headgear. 
A.  In addition to all other requirements motorcycles and motor scooters shall be equipped with the following: 
1.  Handle bars which do not exceed twelve (12) inches in height, measured from the crown or point of attachment; 
2.  Two (2) mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than three (3) inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet to the rear of his vehicle; 
3.  Brakes adequate to control the movement of the vehicle, to stop and hold the vehicle, including two (2) separate means of applying the brakes. One means for applying the brakes shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the front wheel, and one means shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the rear wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a stop lamp on the rear of the vehicle which shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be activated upon application of the service brake; 
4.  A properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least the maximum legal speed limit for that vehicle shall be provided; 
5.  A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided by the manufacturer; 
6.  One (1) lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at least three hundred (300) feet in the direction in which the vehicle is proceeding, and one tail lamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible from at least three hundred (300) feet to the rear. The lights required by this paragraph shall be burning whenever the vehicle is in motion during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½) hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet ahead; and 
7.  A windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect the operator from foreign objects. In lieu of the windshield, the operator shall wear goggles or face shield of material and design to protect him from foreign objects. 
B.  No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall operate or ride upon any vehicle covered under this section unless the person is equipped with and wearing on the head a crash helmet of the type and design manufactured for use by the operators of such vehicles. All crash helmets shall consist of lining, padding and chin straps and be of the type as not to distort the view of the driver. 
C.  No person may operate a motorcycle or motor scooter with the exhaust system modified so that motor noise is increased greater than that of the original muffler equipment provided by the manufacturers of the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-520. - Clinging to vehicles prohibited. 
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-521. - Entering and leaving controlled access highways. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway except at entrances and exits established by public authority. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-522. - Reckless driving. 
Any person who drives any vehicle in such a manner as to endanger a life, man, person, or property, is guilty of reckless driving, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-901.  
Sec. 15-523. - Careless driving or stopping. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive, use or operate any vehicle: 
A.  In a careless manner; 
B.  In a negligent manner; or 
C.  In such a manner or condition as to interfere with the lawful movement of traffic or use of the streets. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-524. - Full time and attention required. 
The operator of every vehicle while driving upon the streets and highways of the City shall devote full time and attention to such driving. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-525. - Requirement of any person driving a vehicle on a public way to operate same in a careful and prudent manner. 
Any person driving a vehicle on a public road or way shall drive the same in a careful and prudent manner and at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface, and width of the public way and any other conditions then existing. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-526. - Speed contest prohibited. 
A.  No person shall engage in, aid, or abet any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed on any street or highway. 
B.  No person shall for the purpose of facilitating or aiding or as an incident to any motor vehicle speed contest upon any street or highway, in any manner obstruct or place any barricade or obstruction upon any street or highway. 
C.  When three (3) or more persons assemble to witness or participate in an unlawful speed contest such assembly is unlawful assembly and any person who participates in such unlawful assembly is guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-527. - Permits required for parades and processions. 
No funeral, procession, or parade containing two hundred (200) or more persons or fifty (50) or more vehicles except the military forces of the United States and the military forces of this state, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Local powers to regulate processions, 47 O.S. § 15-102.  
Sec. 15-528. - Driving through safety zone. 
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone or island. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-529. - Starting parked vehicle. 
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-530. - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so; nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1105.  
Sec. 15-531. - Obstructions to driver's view or driving mechanism. 
A.  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
B.  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-532. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-533. - Unlawful riding. 
No person shall ride on any such vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-534. - Railroad trains not to block streets. 
It is unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. This section shall not apply in case of engine failure or train accidents within the City limits. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-535. - Service drives. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle through a service drive situated at a street intersection within the City unless the operator of such vehicle transacts business on the premises where such service drive is located.  
Sec. 15-536. - Truck driving and route restrictions. 
The City Manager, subject to such directions as the City Council may give, may prescribe routes through the City for the use of trucks in general, trucks of particular kinds or other vehicles which are not ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing through the City. Appropriate and adequate signs shall be placed along such routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes. When such signs are so erected and in place, the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route has been prescribed, as provided above, shall not use those streets or thoroughfares upon which such vehicles are prohibited or shall keep on such routes as are designated, and shall not deviate therefrom except in case of an emergency. However, such prohibited vehicles may use streets or thoroughfares when necessary when engaged in an intra-city activity or when necessary for the purpose of making pickups and deliveries in the vicinity of any such designated street. The City Manager may, pursuant to such directions as the City Council may give, issue permits in writing as exception to designated routes, and, upon payment of fees prescribed by the City Council, issue such permits. A copy of the designation of truck routes and restrictions shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the City Clerk and a copy at the Police Department. Failure to comply with or violate any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed an offense. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. 2146, 03/06/1995) 
Cross reference— See also Section 15-720 on truck parking.  
Sec. 15-537. - Loads on vehicles. 
A.  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway. 
B.  No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, or other loose material susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have the load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the load from the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-538. - Vehicle approaching or entering intersection. 
A.  When two (2) vehicles enter or approach an uncontrolled intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right as otherwise stated in this chapter; however, the driver of vehicle on a street which is not a state or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
B.  The right-of-way rule declared in subsection A of this section is modified as through highways as otherwise stated in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Right-of-way at intersections, 47 O.S. § 11-401.  
Sec. 15-539. - Vehicle turning left at intersection. 
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. After so yielding and having given signal when and as required by this Code, the driver may make the left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-402.  
Sec. 15-540. - Vehicle approaching a "yield right-of-way" sign. 
The driver of a vehicle approaching a "Yield Right-of-Way" sign shall slow to a reasonable speed for existing conditions of traffic and visibility, yielding the right-of-way to all vehicles on the intersecting street or highway which have entered the intersection or which are so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-403.  
Sec. 15-541. - Vehicle entering through highway. 
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this Code at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway, or which are approaching so closely on the through highway as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-542. - Vehicles facing stop, slow, warning or caution signal. 
If two (2) or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or signals at an intersection and are approaching as to enter the intersection at the same time, the following rules shall apply: If each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. If each vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. If each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. If one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution, the one required to take caution shall have the right-of-way. In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the intersection shall have the right-of-way over one which has not entered the intersection. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-543. - Through streets. 
A.  The City Manager, subject to such direction as the City Council may give, may designate any street or part of a street a through street. 
B.  Whenever the City Manager designates and describes a through street, the stop sign, or yield sign if deemed more appropriate, shall be placed and maintained on every street intersecting a through street, or intersecting that portion thereof, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals. 
C.  At the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be determined by the City Manager if deemed desirable. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-544. - Intersections where stop or yield required. 
The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the Council by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections upon other than through streets where particular hazards exist and to determine whether: 
A.  Vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any such stop intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place a stop is required; or 
B.  Vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street as provided in this part in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where yield is required. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-545. - Stop or yield sign construction and placement. 
Every stop or yield sign erected pursuant to this chapter shall bear the word "Stop" or "Yield" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height for a stop sign and not less than seven (7) inches in height for a yield sign. Every stop or yield sign shall at night be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop or yield sign shall be located as close as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if there is no crosswalk, then the sign shall be located at the nearest line of the intersecting roadway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-546. - Vehicle entering stop intersection. 
Except when directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection, indicated by a stop sign, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection. In the event there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection. If there is no marked stop line, then the driver shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting road where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on an intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. A driver after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or road, or which is approaching so close as to constitute immediate hazard; but the driver having so yielded may then proceed and the driver of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-547. - Vehicle entering yield intersection. 
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in observance to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing condition or shall stop if necessary and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another road so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. The driver having so yielded may then proceed and drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding. A driver who enters a yield intersection without stopping and has or causes a collision with a pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have yielded as required herein. The provisions of this section shall not release the drivers of other vehicles approaching the intersection at such a distance as not to constitute immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to avoid a collision. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection before entering the intersection; if there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, or if there is no stop line, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-548. - Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway. 
The driver of a vehicle about to enter, leave or cross a highway from or into a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the highway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-404.  
Sec. 15-549. - Vehicles entering traffic from parking. 
Any vehicle attempting to re-enter traffic while parked at the curb shall yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic in the street approaching from the rear. The parked vehicle shall proceed into the line of traffic only after the driver has given the appropriate signal which indicates his intention of turning from the curb and into the line of traffic. The vehicle shall in no event enter the line of traffic until the driver has ascertained that no hazard exists. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-550. - Emerging from the alley, drive way, or building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alley way or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-704.  
Sec. 15-551. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked cross walk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or cross walk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-552. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
A.  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
1.  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
2.  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; 
3.  A railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; or 
4.  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
B.  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-553. - Certain vehicles to stop at all railroad grade crossings. 
A.  The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and while so stopped, shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or tracks. 
B.  No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-554. - Seat belts and child passenger restraints required. 
A.  Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated in this City shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt system, required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208. For the purposes of this section, "passenger car" means "automobile" as defined in Section 12-417 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, except that "passenger car" shall not include trucks, pick-up trucks, truck-tractors, recreational vehicles, vans, motorcycles, or motorized bicycles. 
B.  Subsection A shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a passenger car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written verification from a physician licensed in this state that he is unable to wear a safety belt system for medical reasons. The issuance of such verification by a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall such physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in damages or otherwise, to any person injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt system. Subsection A shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is a route carrier of the U.S. Postal Service. 
C.  Every driver when transporting a child under four (4) years of age in a motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of this City shall provide for the protection of the child by properly using a child passenger restraint system or a properly secured seat belt in the rear seat of the motor vehicle. For purposes of this subsection, "child passenger restraint system" means an infant or child passenger restraint system that meets the federal standards for crash-tested restraint systems as set by the United States Department of Transportation. Children four (4) or five (5) years of age shall be protected by the use of a child passenger restraint system or a seat belt. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to: 
1.  A nonresident driver transporting a child in this state; 
2.  The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state or federal laws; 
3.  The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle; 
4.  A driver of a vehicle if all of the seat belts in the vehicle are in use; and 
5.  The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable to be placed in such devices. 
A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to stop a vehicle if it appears that the driver of the vehicle has violated the provision of this section and to give an oral warning to the driver. The warning shall advise the driver of the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to install or use a child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor vehicle. A person who violates the provision of this subsection shall not be subject to any criminal penalty. A violation of the provisions of this subsection shall not be admissible as evidence in any civil action or proceeding for damages. In any action brought by or on behalf of an infant for personal injuries or wrongful death sustained in a motor vehicle collision, the failure of any person to have the infant properly restrained in accordance with the provisions of this subsection shall not be used in aggravation or mitigation of damages. 
D.  No law enforcement officer shall make routine stops of motorists for the purpose of enforcing subsection A of this section. Any person convicted of violating subsection A of this section shall be punished by a maximum fine of ten dollars ($10.00) and court costs. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-555. - Texting while driving. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or highway while using a hand-held electronic communication device to manually compose, send or read an electronic text message while the motor vehicle is in motion. 
B.  Any person who violates the provisions of subsection A of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. 
C.  The Department of Public Safety shall not record or assess points for violations of this section on any license holder's traffic record maintained by the Department. 
D.  The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply if the person is using the cellular telephone or electronic communication device for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an imminent emergency situation: 
1.  An emergency response operator; 
2.  A hospital, physician's office, or health clinic; 
3.  A provider of ambulance services; 
4.  A provider of firefighting services; or 
5.  A law enforcement agency. 
E.  For the purpose of this section: 
1.  Cellular telephone means an analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by the Federal Communications Commission to operate in the frequency bandwidth reserved for cellular telephones; 
2.  Compose , send or read with respect to a text message means the manual entry, sending or retrieval of a text message to communicate with any person or device; 
3.  Electronic communication device means an electronic device that permits the user to manually transmit a communication of written text by means other than through an oral transfer or wire communication. This term does not include a device that is physically or electronically integrated into a motor vehicle or a voice-operated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a motor vehicle, or a hands-free device that allows the user to write, send, or read a text message without the use of either hand except to activate, deactivate, or initiate a feature or function; and 
4.  Text message includes a text-based message, instant message, electronic message, photo, video, or electronic mail. 
(Ord. 2735, 10/05/2015)  
CHAPTER 6. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
 
Sec. 15-601. - Authority to install traffic control devices. 
The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the City Council by motion or resolution, shall have placed and maintained traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this City to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may have placed and maintained such additional traffic control signs, signals, and devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this City or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
Cross reference— For state law relating to traffic control devices, see 47 O.S. § 11-201 et seq.  
Sec. 15-602. - Traffic control devices; uniform requirements. 
A.  All traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices approved by the State Department of Public Safety. 
B.  All signs, signals, and devices required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and relative location throughout the City. All traffic control devices erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-603. - Obedience to official traffic control devices. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this part. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Drivers to obey traffic devices, 47 O.S. § 11-201.  
Sec. 15-604. - When official traffic control devices required for enforcement purposes. 
No provision of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. If a particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-605. - Traffic control signal legend. 
The display of signal lights, arrows and words shall be deemed to have the following meanings and requires the appropriate response on the part of vehicular traffic and pedestrians: 
A.  Green alone, "Go": 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless an official sign at such place prohibits such turn, but any vehicle and any pedestrian lawfully within the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal displays green shall have the right-of-way over such vehicular traffic; and 
2.  Pedestrian traffic, facing a green signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless a "Walk" signal indicator is operating; 
B.  Steady yellow or amber alone, "Caution": 
1.  The showing of such signal color following green shall constitute a warning that the "Red" or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter; and 
2.  Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the near side crosswalk or at the limit line, if it is marked, unless the vehicle is so near the limit line when the "Caution" signal first flashes that a stop cannot be made in safety, in which event vehicles may proceed cautiously through the intersection and clear the same before the "Red" signal flashes; 
C.  Red alone, "Stop": 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone. Except where official signs are erected prohibiting such turns, vehicles in the right traffic lane, after making a full stop as required, may enter the intersection cautiously and make a right turn, but such vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians or other traffic in the intersection and the turn shall be made so as not to interfere in any way with traffic proceeding on a green signal indication on the cross street; and 
2.  Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or cross the roadway when such movement interferes with traffic proceeding on a green signal indication on the cross street, or when the movement cannot be made in safety. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "go" is shown alone unless authorized to do so, by a pedestrian "Walk" signal; 
D.  Steady red with green arrow: 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing such signal when in the proper traffic lane may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. If the movement indicated by the green arrow is a left turn, the left turn shall be made only on the red with green arrow signal; and 
2.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal; and 
E.  Green arrows alone. Whenever vehicular traffic movements are controlled by green arrows alone and not displayed with any other signal indication, vehicles facing such signals may make the movements indicated by the green arrows and the movements shall be made only when the green arrows are displayed. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-202.  
Sec. 15-606. - Pedestrians; signal indicators; regulations. 
Special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk," "Wait" or "Don't Walk" shall regulate pedestrian movement as follows: 
A.  "Walk." Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles; and 
B.  "Wait" or "Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Wait" signal is showing. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-607. - Flashing signals. 
A.  Whenever a flashing red or yellow signal is illuminated, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
1.  "Flashing Red." When a red light is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; and 
2.  "Flashing Yellow." When a yellow light is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection, or pass such signal only with caution. 
B.  This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-204.  
Sec. 15-608. - Pedestrian-activated school crossing signals. 
Whenever a pedestrian-activated school crossing signal is provided, it requires obedience by vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows: 
A.  "Flashing yellow": 
1.  When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or pass such signal only with caution; and 
2.  Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may activate the signal control switch, and shall wait until steady red alone is shown before entering the roadway or intersection controlled by the signal; 
B.  "Steady yellow alone": 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red of "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection or pass the signal when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited; and 
2.  No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which the signal controls vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown; 
C.  "Steady red": 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, and shall remain standing until flashing yellow is shown alone; 
2.  Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles; and 
D.  "Steady red and steady yellow combined": 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and that such vehicular traffic shall remain standing until the flashing yellow is shown alone; and 
2.  Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal is about to be shown, and shall not enter the signal-controlled roadway or intersection, or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular traffic; but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island, and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-203.  
Sec. 15-609. - Unauthorized traffic control devices prohibited. 
A.  No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign, or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
B.  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign, signal, or device bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
C.  This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information which are of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
D.  Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device may be removed without notice. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-206.  
Sec. 15-610. - Defacement of traffic control devices. 
A.  No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, destroy, deface, molest, interfere, tamper, injure, knock down, remove or have in his possession any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or an inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof. 
B.  This chapter shall not apply to any of the following persons when acting within the scope and duty of their employment: 
1.  Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or trustee of any governmental agency; or 
2.  Any officer, agent independent contractor, employee, servant or trustee of any contractor, public utility, or railroad company. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-611. - Play streets, authority to establish. 
The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the City Council shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to have placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-612. - Play streets, restriction on use. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area; and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-613. - Designation of crosswalks and safety zones. 
The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the City Council may: 
A.  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary; and 
B.  Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-614. - Traffic lanes. 
A.  The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the City Council may be authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway of any street where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
B.  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or otherwise authorized by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-309.  
Sec. 15-615. - Corner cutting prohibited to avoid devices. 
No driver shall drive through a service station driveway or other driveway or private property so as to avoid the use of a street or traffic control device. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
CHAPTER 7. - STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 15-701. - Illegal parking declared public nuisance. 
Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this chapter governing, limiting or prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any street or public thoroughfare is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, and each separate traffic citation issued as authorized herein for such violation shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or operator of such vehicle. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-702. - Application of standing or parking regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable when it is necessary for a vehicle to stop to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-703. - Parking time limits may be established, signs. 
The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the City Council by motion or resolution, may establish parking time limits or prohibit parking on designated streets or parts of streets and have appropriate signs placed on the streets. When the signs are in place, it is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in violation of the sign. No such time limits shall be effective unless a sign is erected and in place at the time of the alleged violation. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-704. - Parking more than seventy-two hours. 
No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than seventy-two (72) hours. The parking of a vehicle for more than seventy-two (72) hours shall constitute prima facie evidence of abandonment of the vehicle. This section applies to any vehicle, including but not limited to any junk, nonoperating, or partially dismantled vehicle. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 17-137)  
Sec. 15-705. - Brakes; motor not to be left running. 
Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-706. - Signs or markings indicating angle parking. 
The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the City Council by motion or resolution, shall determine upon what streets and parts of streets angle parking shall be permitted, and shall have such streets marked or signed. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1004(c).  
Sec. 15-707. - Obedience to angle-parking signs or markings. 
On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-708. - Parking in spaces marked off. 
In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus marked off, and not on or over a line delimiting a space. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-709. - Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb. 
A.  The City Manager is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. The City Manager may revoke such permits at any time. 
B.  It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-710. - Hazardous or congested places; stopping, standing, parking. 
A.  The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine and regulate by proper signs the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles when such stopping, standing or parking would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
B.  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as authorized in subsection A of this section, no person shall violate such signs. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-711. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
A.  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except in emergencies or when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places: 
1.  On a sidewalk, sidewalk area, or between the sidewalk and the street; 
2.  In front of a public or private driveway; 
3.  Within an intersection; 
4.  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant except in a parking space officially marked; 
5.  On a crosswalk; 
6.  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
7.  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
8.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length has been indicated by signs or markings; 
9.  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
10.  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on the side of street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance when properly signposted; 
11.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
12.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
13.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; or 
14.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking. 
B.  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited area or an unlawful distance away from a curb. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1003.  
Sec. 15-712. - Blocking of intersection or crosswalk prohibited. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-713. - Standing or parking on one-way roadway. 
A.  If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. 
B.  The City Council may determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-714. - Standing or parking on left side of one-way streets. 
The City Manager may have signs erected upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. When the signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of any such signs. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-715. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
A.  The City Manager may have signs erected indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any such signs. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-716. - Parked vehicles not to extend too far into street. 
No vehicle shall be parked at an angle on a street so that it or its load will extend more than fifteen (15) feet from the curb or edge of the roadway towards the center of the roadway. No vehicle shall be parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway so that it or its load shall extend more than nine (9) feet from the curb or edge toward the center of the roadway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-717. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
A.  The City Manager is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
B.  When such signs are so erected and in place, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-718. - Parking in alleys, blocking driveways. 
No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than twenty (20) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within a street or alley in such position as to block a driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-719. - Entry on private property; trespass; evidence; burden of proof. 
A.  No person shall make an entry with any vehicle upon real property owned or legally occupied by another without the owner's or occupant's consent except where such private property is provided as public parking and the general use of the property is not restricted by signs or proper markings. 
B.  Where entry is made upon real property owned or legally occupied by another without the owner's or occupant's consent, except on unrestricted public parking, and is complained of by the owner or legal occupant of the premises, the burden is put upon the person making the entry to show that permission for such entry was given. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-720. - Truck parking prohibited in certain areas. 
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm, or corporation to park any truck of over one (1) ton capacity on any public street in a residential district except for the time necessary to load or unload materials or equipment which, because of the size or weight of the load, requires a truck of this capacity. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
Cross reference— See also § 15-538 truck routes and § 15-305 on weight restrictions.  
Sec. 15-721. - Parking prohibited for trucks transporting hazardous materials. 
It is unlawful to park, store or otherwise let stand a truck or other vehicle which is used for the purpose of transporting or delivering flammable and combustible liquids as defined by the City's fire prevention code and trucks or other vehicles which are used for the transportation and delivery of liquefied petroleum gases in any area within the City. However, the trucks and vehicles restricted in this section may be temporarily parked at locations otherwise zoned for the purpose of loading and unloading flammable and combustible liquids and liquefied petroleum gases for a period not to exceed one and one-half (1½) hours during any twenty-four (24) hour period. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-722. - Double parking. 
A.  No driver shall double park or double stop a vehicle under the following conditions: 
1.  Within fifty (50) feet of an intersection except alley intersections, or within ten (10) feet of an alley intersection; 
2.  Opposite a double parked or double stopped vehicle across the street; 
3.  When such double parking or double stopping would or does block or interfere materially with the normal movement of traffic; 
4.  When parking space adjacent to the curb is available; 
5.  When directed by a police officer to move on; or 
6.  In any position other than parallel to the curb and within two (2) feet of the adjacent vehicle parked next to the curb. 
B.  A driver may double park or double stop a vehicle only as authorized in this section. There must be a licensed driver in any vehicle while it is double parked or double stopped. 
C.  A driver may double stop for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, subject, however, to all the general conditions hereinabove set out. 
D.  A driver may double park for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of merchandise, subject, however, to all the general conditions herein above set out. No such vehicle shall be double parked longer than ten (10) minutes. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-723. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of: 
A.  Displaying the vehicle for sale; 
B.  Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for sale or selling merchandise or other things; or 
C.  Washing, cleaning, or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-724. - Method of parking, standing or parking close to curb. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs, shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb. Any vehicle stopped or parked upon the left-hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or stopped with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Parking rules, 47 O.S. § 11-1004.  
Sec. 15-725. - Negligent parking. 
No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop, or leave unattended any vehicle as follows: 
A.  In a careless manner; 
B.  In such a manner as to endanger a life, limb, person, or property; or 
C.  In such a manner as to endanger or interfere in the lawful traffic or use of the street. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-726. - Right-of-way to parallel parking space. 
A.  The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking space where backing movement is necessary and which is being vacated by another vehicle shall stop his vehicle to the rear of the parking space until the vacating vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic. He then shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space over any other vehicle attempting to park therein. 
B.  The first of two (2) or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of an unoccupied parallel parking space, where a backing movement is necessary to occupy, shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-727. - Handicapped parking, enforcement on public or private property. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any parking space on private property accessible to the public and where the public is invited or public property that is designated and posted as a reserved area for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person unless such person has a physical disability insignia as under the provisions of Section 15-112 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and such insignias are displayed as provided in Section 15-112 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
B.  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Handicapped insignia, application and display on vehicles, 47 O.S. § 15-112.  
Sec. 15-728. - Recreational vehicle parking and outside parking, storage of vehicles. 
A.  Recreational vehicle for the purpose of this section means, but is not limited to, motorized homes, camping trailers, pickup campers, travel trailers, boats, and boat trailers. 
Vehicle means automobile, trailer, truck, tractor, bus, or commercial vehicle. 
B.  The parking of a recreational vehicle on a public street is regulated as follows: 
1.  A recreational vehicle shall not be parked on any public street in a manner that would constitute a traffic hazard or would block the driveway entrance to any abutting property; 
2.  A recreational vehicle may be temporarily parked on a public street in a manner not in violation of the above paragraph for the purpose of loading and unloading and in order to accommodate the cleaning and upkeep of the property upon which they are normally stored. Any such temporary parking event may not exceed twenty-four (24) hours in length and may not occur more frequently than once per week. 
C.  In order to protect the public welfare and safety of the general public, the City may effect immediate removal of any recreational vehicle found in violation of this section. Any costs attended to removal of same shall be borne by the owner or occupier of the grounds fronted thereon, or at the expense of the person placing the encroachment thereupon. Each day such illegal parking remains shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
D.  The outside parking or storage, or storage in the open, in residential districts as defined in the City's zoning regulations of vehicles, materials, merchandise, supplies or equipment not usually or customarily used or needed in connection with the occupancy of residential property for residential purposes for a period of longer than ninety-six (96) hours is prohibited. 
E.  Allowing a vehicle to remain in the open on public right-of-way or private property in a fixed position for thirty (30) days or more, and thereby creating a condition constituting a fire, health, or safety hazard, is prohibited. At least ten (10) days' notice shall be given to the person having custody and control over the vehicle prior to issuance of a citation for violation of this subsection. 
(Prior Code, § 17-135 et seq.; Ord. 2063, 06/03/1991)  
Sec. 15-729. - Penalty for illegal parking. 
A.  Illegal parking is declared a public nuisance. Any vehicle in violation of any regulation pertaining to parking within the City, or to standing or parking on a street or public thoroughfare, is hereby declared and constituted a public nuisance. Each separate traffic citation issued as authorized herein for such violation shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or operator of such vehicle. 
B.  Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of the parking violations shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. However, for violations of time limitations only, established as provided herein, the penalty shall be as set by the City Council by motion or resolution. The fine shall be paid in accordance with the violation notice. 
C.  The parking violation shall be placed on the windshield of the vehicle improperly parked, placed, standing or stopped. 
D.  It is unlawful to remove or alter the chalk or other mark used by parking enforcement personnel to identify vehicles which have parked in marked spaces beyond the prescribed period. 
E.  Any vehicle with outstanding fines against it may be impounded by the City and may be retained by the City pending payment of all fines, towing and storage charges. The City shall have a possessor lien against any vehicle which is found to have outstanding fines against it until such fines are paid. The lien may be foreclosed pursuant to the procedures provided for in Title 42, Sections 91 through 96 of the Oklahoma Statutes. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-730. - Two hour free parking. 
A.  The following two (2) hour parking limitations apply: 
1.  The parking time for motor or other vehicles in certain designated parking spaces in and upon the public streets, highways and thoroughfares located and situated between the west side of Elm Street on the east, west side of Main Street on the west, south side of Hobson Street on the north, and the north side of Lee Street on the south (hereinafter referred to as "the designated area"), all within the corporate limits of the City, or in any combination of such designated parking spaces on either side of any two (2) consecutive or adjacent blocks of the public streets, highways or thoroughfares, is limited to one hundred twenty (120) minutes; 
2.  Notwithstanding subsection A, paragraph 1 above, the City Council shall retain the prerogative of providing by resolution for metered parking in designated parking spaces upon the public streets, highways, and thoroughfares located and situated within the corporate limits of the City; and 
3.  Any vehicle in violation at the metered parking as above provided shall be subject to the same penalties and provisions as are provided in the remaining subsections of Section 15-730. 
B.  As used herein, vehicle shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon any public street, highway or thoroughfare, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
C.  In order to facilitate the orderly and safe flow and movement of traffic in and upon the public streets, highways, and thoroughfares and to protect the persons and property of those using the same from unusual or undue danger and hazard. The City Manager of the City or his designee is hereby authorized and empowered to establish, designate and mark off, or cause the establishment, designation and marking off, of such individual parking spaces in and upon the public streets, highways and thoroughfares in the designated area for the parking of motor and other vehicles, the parking spaces to be laid out and designated with lines painted or durably marked on the surfaces of the public streets, highways, and thoroughfares, and to erect and maintain on the public streets, highways, and thoroughfares appropriate signs clearly reflecting the words "Free 2 hour parking", the lettering on such signs to be in conformity with applicable requirements of law. No prohibition or limitation of time designated or established pursuant to the provisions of the section shall be effective until such signs have been posted in accordance with the provisions hereof at the time of any alleged violation. The signs shall be posted at least once in each block in the designated area and on each side of the street. 
D.  It is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful and an offense of the driver, operator or owner, or for the owner to suffer or permit the driver or operator, of a vehicle to stop, stand, or park such vehicle in any such designated parking space in and upon any of the public streets, highways, or thoroughfares, or in any such combination of the designated parking spaces on either side of any two (2) consecutive or adjacent blocks of any public streets, highways or thoroughfares in the designated area, from the hour of 8:00 a.m. to the hour of 5:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and legal holidays, for a longer period than one hundred twenty (120) minutes, when such signs are erected and in place. Such legal holidays shall be New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Memorial Day (fourth Monday in May), Independence Day, Labor Day (first Monday in September), Columbus Day (second Monday in October), Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day, day after Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, and Christmas Day. 
E.  Whenever any vehicle is found in the same position within any such designated parking space, or whenever any vehicle is found to be stopped, standing or parked on either side of any two (2) consecutive or adjacent blocks of any public streets, highways or thoroughfares within the designated area, for a period of time longer than one hundred twenty (120) minutes, such fact shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle has been so stopped, standing and parked beyond such period of one hundred twenty (120) minutes, and that the person who so stopped, stood or parked such vehicles was the person in whose name such vehicle was then and there registered. 
F.  It shall be the duty of the personnel of the City, as shall be designated by the City Manager, to enforce the provisions of this section. 
G.  The designated City personnel, upon finding a vehicle in violation hereof may place upon the vehicle an overparking citation. 
H.  Each one hundred twenty (120) minutes of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense for which an overparking citation may be issued. A violation of commercial loading zone shall be deemed to occur, and an offense committed, immediately upon the presence of a vehicle stopping, standing, or parking in a designated commercial loading zone except for the loading or unloading of freight. 
I.  From and after the effective date of this chapter, each and every offense under the terms of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of five dollars ($5.00). 
J.  Payment for the overparking violations may be made on the day the overparking citation(s) is issued by depositing the appropriate amount of the citation in the designated depositories as provided by the City or at the municipal court clerk's office. Any person failing to pay for such overparking violation within five (5) days of the date of issuance shall be punished under the general penalty provisions established by Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. 2121, 03/07/1994)  
Sec. 15-731. - Immobilization authorized, procedures. 
A.  The personnel designated by the City Manager of the City to enforce Chapter 7, Section 15-731 of the City Code shall be directed to immobilize those vehicles, as defined in Chapter 7, Section 15-731, of the City Code, which shall have an outstanding total of three (3) or more overparking citations or three (3) or more reserved parking citations or a combination of three (3) or more such citations. After a vehicle has three (3) or more parking citations credited to its license plate number, the owner or operator of the vehicle shall be notified that the vehicle may be immobilized by attaching a notice of the immobilization to the windshield of the automobile or by mailing a copy of the notice of the immobilization to the last known address of the owner of the automobile. The notice of the immobilization may be made a part of the overparking citation by including language on the face of the citation in a conspicuous place which shall read as follows: "You are hereby notified that upon receipt of a total of three (3) parking violations this vehicle shall be subject to immediate immobilization or removal as authorized by the codes of the City of Sapulpa"; 
B.  Immobilization shall be accomplished by installing on or attaching to such vehicle a device designed to restrict the normal movement of such vehicle or by any other means whatsoever. The device shall not be installed or attached on such vehicle unless it is parked upon any public right-of-way or property and a minimum of five (5) calendar days has elapsed since the mailing or windshield-affixed notification referred to in the previous paragraph; 
C.  After a vehicle has received a total of three (3) citations and it has been determined that the vehicle has not been removed from its present location for a period of more than six (6) hours, the vehicle may be either immobilized immediately or removed from its present location; 
D.  The fee for release from such immobilization shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Such fee shall be in addition to any fines due and owing for overparking citations. Release of such vehicle shall be accomplished within one (1) hour after having been contacted by the owner, driver, or person in charge of the vehicle, and after receipt of payment for fines and fees; and 
E.  If the owner, driver, or person in charge of the vehicle can furnish title or other satisfactory proof that the vehicle so immobilized was registered to an owner other than the present owner at the time the overparking citations were incurred, the vehicle shall be released within one (1) hour after proof is satisfactorily provided and without receipt of payment for fines and fees. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. 2121, 03/07/1994)  
CHAPTER 8. - LOADING 
 
Sec. 15-801. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
Commercial vehicle means: 
A.  A truck designated for delivery purposes with the name of the owner or his business painted on both sides of the vehicle, regularly used during normal business hours for the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight and which bears a regular state commercial license tag; 
B.  A passenger vehicle used regularly and actually engaged during normal business hours in the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight, and which bears a special numbered license plate issued by the City at the rear of the vehicle attached to the state license plate together with an identically numbered decal, issued vehicle; 
Freight loading zones means all curb loading zones authorized and regularly used exclusively for the loading and unloading of merchandise for storage, trade, shipment or re-sale; and 
Passenger loading zones means all loading zones authorized and used regularly and exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers except bus stops, taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-802. - Curb loading zones, designation. 
A.  The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the City Council by motion or resolution, may determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall have placed and maintained appropriate signs indicating the zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
B.  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of signs erected in accordance with this section. 
C.  If any loading zone is established on request of any person, the signs shall not be placed until the applicant pays to the City an amount of money estimated by the City Council to be adequate to reimburse the City for all costs of establishing and signing the same. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-803. - Loading zones to be used only for designated purpose. 
No curb loading zone authorized and established as a passenger loading zone shall be used as a freight loading zone, and no freight loading zone shall be used as a passenger loading zone except as may be specifically provided by law. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-804. - Stopping, standing, or parking in passenger curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a passenger curb loading zone for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, during the hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-805. - Stopping, standing, or parking in commercial curb loading zone. 
A.  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a commercial curb loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. Vehicles using any commercial loading zone shall be subject to the licensing requirements and regulations provided by this chapter. 
B.  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any commercial vehicle which is waiting to enter the zone. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-806. - Designation of public carrier stops and stands. 
The City Manager may establish loading zones for common carriers, including but not limited to bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles, on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such loading zone shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-807. - Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and the appropriate signs are in place. The driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus, or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-808. - Stopping, standing, and parking of buses and taxis. 
A.  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein. 
B.  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage except in a bus stop, stand or loading zone designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency. 
C.  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18) inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
D.  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand except in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
CHAPTER 9. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 15-901. - Turning markers or indicators. 
A.  The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the City Council by motion or resolution, is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. The course to be traveled, as so indicated, may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. 
B.  When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-902. - Designation of restricted turns. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine those street intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns, and shall have proper signs placed at the intersections. The making of the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours. Where turns are restricted during certain hours pursuant to this section, the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when turns are permitted. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-903. - Obedience to no-turn signs. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, the driver of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-904. - U-turns. 
A.  The driver of a vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the City at the following locations: 
1.  At intersections controlled by traffic control devices or signals unless such turns are specifically authorized; 
2.  Where a police officer is directing traffic except at the latter's direction; or 
3.  At any other location where an official "No-U-Turn" has been placed and is maintained. 
B.  Manner of making U-Turns. A U-turn may be made only when it can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. No person shall make a U-Turn except in the following manner: 
1.  By approaching the intersection as closely as practical to the right curb or edge of the roadway, the driver giving and continuing to give a signal for a left turn until the turn is completed, proceeding to make the turn across the intersection; 
2.  In one continuous movement without stopping or backing the vehicle; 
3.  By yielding the right-of-way at all times to all vehicles until such turn in completed; and 
4.  Without constituting a hazard to or interfering with any other vehicle. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-905. - Position and method of turning. 
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as follows: 
A.  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and the execution of a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway; 
B.  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, the approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the street nearest the center thereof by passing to the right of the center line where it enters the intersection. After entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection; or 
C.  Left turns, on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of the roadways the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle. After entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearby as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon roadway being entered. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-601.  
Sec. 15-906. - Turning movements and required signals. 
A.  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in Section 15-905 of this Code, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided. 
B.  A signal of intention to turn right or left, slow or stop when required, shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning or stopping. 
C.  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give the signal. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-604.  
Sec. 15-907. - Means of giving turn signals. 
A.  Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means of hand or arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps, or mechanical device of a type approved by the Oklahoma Department of Public Safety, except as provided in subsection B of this section. 
B.  A vehicle shall be equipped with, and the required signal given by, signal lamps or devices when: 
1.  The body or cab of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects twenty-four (24) inches or more to the left of the center of the steering wheel; 
2.  Under any condition where a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of the vehicle; or 
3.  The rear limit of the body of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects fourteen (14) feet or more beyond the center top of the steering post. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-908. - Method of giving hand and arm signals. 
All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
A.  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally; 
B.  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward; and 
C.  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward with palm to the rear. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-909. - Turns into or from alleys. 
A.  No vehicles shall turn left when proceeding into or proceeding out of an alley except when necessary to enter a one-way street, and no vehicle shall cross any street or highway when proceeding into or proceeding out of any alley except as provided in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Left turns may be made when proceeding out of an alley if a traffic survey conducted by the traffic engineer shows that such turn may be made safely and official signs are erected authorizing such turns. 
C.  The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to bus terminals used by licensed and authorized bus lines. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
CHAPTER 10. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 15-1001. - Pedestrians subject to traffic control signals. 
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as provided for in this Code of ordinances, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Pedestrian rights and duties, 47 O.S. §§ 11-501 to 11-507.  
Sec. 15-1002. - Pedestrian's right-of-way at crosswalks. 
A.  When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way slowing down or stopping, if need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when: 
1.  The pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling; or 
2.  The pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite edge of the roadway as to be in danger. 
The provisions of this subsection are not applicable under conditions where pedestrians are required to yield pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety or walk or run into the path of the vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
C.  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk, or any unmarked crosswalk, or at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake to pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1003. - Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk. 
Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a crosswalk, shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1004. - Crossing at right angles. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1005. - When pedestrians shall yield. 
A.  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked or unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
B.  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
C.  The provisions of this section are not applicable where pedestrian crossings are prohibited. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1006. - Pedestrians walking along roadways. 
A.  Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
B.  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the roadway, or its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction, and shall yield to approaching vehicles. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1007. - Pedestrians prohibited from soliciting rides, business, or donations from vehicle occupants. 
A.  No person shall stand in a roadway for purpose of soliciting a ride, donations, employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
B.  No person shall: 
1.  Stand in any street, roadway or park and stop or attempt to stop and engage any person in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting contributions or the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street; 
2.  Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle; 
3.  Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular, advertisement, handbill, or any political campaign literature, or any sample, souvenir, or gift; or 
4.  In any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway, attempt to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other similar purpose. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1008. - Drivers to exercise due care. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person on the roadway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1009. - Crossing prohibited. 
Between adjacent intersections, at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. Pedestrians shall not cross any divided highway having a median in the center thereof, except in a crosswalk. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1010. - Obedience of pedestrians to railroad signals. 
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
CHAPTER 11. - BICYCLES 
 
Sec. 15-1101. - Application of bicycle regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public way; or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1201 et seq.  
Sec. 15-1102. - Application of traffic laws to bicycles. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state and the traffic provisions of this Code applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature are inapplicable to such persons. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1103. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
A.  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
B.  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the directions of such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to the pedestrians. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1104. - Riding on bicycles. 
A.  No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
B.  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1105. - Riding on roadways and bicycle paths. 
A.  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction. 
B.  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
C.  If usable paths for bicycles are provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such paths and shall not use the roadway. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1106. - Speed of bicycle. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1107. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley or driveway shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the alley or driveway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area. Upon entering the roadway, the bicycle operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadways. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1108. - Carrying articles. 
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one (1) hand on the handle bars. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1109. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against the building or at the curb in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1110. - Riding on sidewalks. 
A.  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
B.  The City Council by motion or resolution, is authorized to have erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person; and when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same. 
C.  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1111. - Lamps and equipment on bicycles. 
A.  Bicycles in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from five hundred (500) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
B.  No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet. 
C.  A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use, any siren or whistle. 
D.  Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
CHAPTER 13. - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 15-1301. - Purpose and effect of impoundment provisions. 
The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations, protection of the public rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares from obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for safeguarding and protecting recovered stolen vehicles. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17) 
State Law reference— Grounds for removal of vehicles on highways by state, 47 O.S. § 955; removal of abandoned vehicles on private property, 47 O.S. § 954A.  
Sec. 15-1302. - Place of impoundment. 
Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be removed to the nearest garage or place of safekeeping designated by the City and to no other place. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1303. - Duration of impoundment. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded under the authority of this chapter shall be stored and held safely until an order for its release is received from an officer of the traffic violations bureau or other proper police officer. 
B.  The order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be conditioned upon the payment by the person to whom the release is issued of all impoundment costs and accrued storage charges assessed against the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1304. - Police granted authority to impound vehicles. 
Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized within the limits set forth in this chapter to impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order of an authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures required in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1305. - Disabled vehicles. 
A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be impounded under the following circumstances: 
A.  If left unattended and improperly parked on street or highway and constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; or 
B.  If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated to such extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal and the vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or a hazard. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1306. - Vehicles on bridge. 
An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any tube or tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hazard, may be impounded. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1307. - Arrest and detention of driver of vehicle. 
Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which leaves or will leave a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle may be impounded. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1308. - Vehicle constitutes traffic hazard. 
A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley or thoroughfare and so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic shall be impounded. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1309. - Illegal trespass by vehicle. 
A.  An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of this Code may be impounded when the required complaint has been properly made and filed as provided in this section. 
B.  If a violation of the provisions of this Code occurs, the owner or legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint against the person parking the vehicle on the owner's or legal occupant's property, or if the identity of the person parking the vehicle is unknown, then the complaint may be filed against the registered owner of the vehicle. The complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the complaining party is the owner or legal occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is parked or standing. 
C.  Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant, and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the provisions of this Code have been violated, the Police Department shall cause the vehicle to be impounded from the property and placed in storage. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1310. - Vehicles parked overtime. 
Any unattended vehicle which has been parked for more than one (1) hour in excess of the time allowed for parking in any place shall be impounded, and any vehicle parked in violation of this Code, regarding more than forty-eight (48) hours, shall be impounded. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1311. - Vehicles blocking fire exits or hydrants. 
Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape ladder, device or exit or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant shall be impounded. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1312. - Vehicles parked in intersection. 
Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection shall be impounded. A disabled vehicle in an intersection with the person in charge of the vehicle being present, shall be moved out of the intersection and to the nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1313. - Stolen vehicles; recovery by police. 
A.  Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered owner cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding one (1) hour, or cannot be determined from the registration papers or other identifying media in the vehicle or from records or information available from reports of stolen cars, the vehicle shall be removed to the nearest authorized place of impoundment and the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the location of the place of impoundment as soon as possible by the Police Department. 
B.  If the registered owner is identified, located and notified of the recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make his own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the period of one (1) hour from the time he is actually notified of its recovery, and if the owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time specified the vehicle shall be impounded. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1314. - Vehicles with outstanding traffic citations. 
Any vehicle for which citations have been issued, for violation of an ordinance, and have not been presented as required, may be impounded if parked in violation of any provision of this part. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
CHAPTER 14. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 15-1401. - Obedience to traffic code. 
A.  It is an offense against the City for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this part. 
B.  It is an offense against the City for the parent of any child or for the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this part. 
C.  It is an offense for any person to authorize or knowingly to permit any vehicle registered in his or her name to be driven or to stand or to be parked in violation of any of the provisions of this part. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Sec. 15-1402. - Penalties, specific and general. 
Except as otherwise provided in this part, any person violating any of the provisions of this part containing the traffic laws of the City, or who performs any unlawful act as defined in this part, or who fails to perform any act required by this part, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Chapter 17)  
Part 17 - UTILITIES  
CHAPTER 1. - WATER AND SEWER GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-101. - Water and sewer as public utilities. 
The water and sewer services of the City are operated as public utilities and are subject to such rules, regulations, and rates as are adopted from time to time.  
Sec. 17-102. - Excreta disposal facilities required. 
A.  Every residence and building equipped with toilet facilities in which humans reside, or are employed or congregate, shall be required to have a sanitary method for the disposal of human excreta, namely, one (1) or more sanitary water closets, or sanitary pit privies. The toilets required by this section shall be the sanitary water closet type when located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a sanitary sewer, and accessible thereto, and the sanitary pit privy type when not so located. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property within the City to permit the disposal of human excreta on any property owned or occupied by such person except in a sanitary water closet or a sanitary pit privy of sufficient capacity to accommodate the occupants thereof at all times, and which shall be kept and maintained under the supervision of the designated City official. 
C.  The term "sanitary pit privy," as used in this section shall be construed to mean a privy which is built, rebuilt or constructed so as to conform to the specifications approved by the State Health Department, as per Bulletin D-1, as amended. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-2; Ord. 659)  
Sec. 17-103. - Sewer connections for specified dwellings or structures, required. 
Each dwelling or structure in the City used for human habitation or occupancy shall have plumbing installed therein for disposal of human waste and if within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a sanitary sewer line of the City, measured from its lot lines, shall be connected to such sanitary sewer system; provided, that persons owning or occupying such dwellings or structures within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the sewer extensions constructed.  
Sec. 17-104. - Permits required; fees; inspection; approval; development districts created; expansion and development fees assessed. 
A.  Permits and connection fees to City sewer system. A permit is hereby required for each sewer tap or connection to the sewerage system of the City. The fee therefore is as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule, the same to be paid at the time a building permit is issued by the designated official of the City. Each sewer tap shall conform to the regulations of the City and prior to its use must be inspected and approved by the designated official of the City. 
B.  Creation of sewer expansion development districts; districts defined. To address future growth and development, four (4) sewer expansion development districts are hereby created to provide a mechanism for the City to fund a program to allow extension of sanitary sewer service to those districts in relation to the growth experienced by each district. The four (4) sewer expansion development districts are: (1) the North District; (2) the Northeast District; (3) the Southwest District; and (4) the Southeast District. The geographical boundaries and area location of each such district is as designated on the map entitled "Wastewater System Improvements Program — Basin Boundaries" and those attached to the Ordinance No. 2333, made a part hereof and marked Exhibit "A" and incorporated by reference herein. For purposes of calculating the sewer extension fee and sewer development fee provided for herein, a property owner shall be deemed to be located within the basin to whose sanitary sewers the property is connected, or to which it would be connected if gravity flow systems that follow the course of the natural drainage were constructed, whichever results in the greater fee. 
C.  Establishment of a sewer system extension fee. In order to compensate the City for the capital costs associated with extending sanitary sewer service, there is hereby imposed a sewer extension fee on new development occurring in the four (4) sewer development expansion districts in the amount detailed in Subsection E. The sewer extension fee shall be paid by the owner or developer of the land under new construction as provided in subsection F. For purposes of this section, "new development" means: 
1.  The construction of any commercial or industrial structure or business; or 
2.  The construction of any residential structure or subdivision. 
D.  Establishment of a sewer system development fee. In order to compensate the City for the capital costs associated with existing sewer treatment capacity which will be required by new sewer service users and to raise the funds necessary to expand existing sewer treatment capacity, there is hereby imposed a sewer system development fee on new development occurring in the four (4) sewer development expansion districts in the amount detailed in subsection E. The sewer system development fee shall be paid by the owner or developer of the land under new construction as provided in subsection F. For purposes of this section, "new development" means: 
1.  The construction of any commercial or industrial structure or business; or 
2.  The construction of any residential structure or subdivision. 
E.  Calculation of sewer system extension fee and sewer system development fee. 
1.  The owner, developer or builder of a new development in a sewer expansion district shall pay a sewer system extension fee and a sewer system development fee on a per acre basis or per equivalent living unit ("Eq. L. U.") basis, whichever is greater as reflected in the Master Fee Schedule: 
"Equivalent living unit" shall be defined to mean: 
Use 	Eq. L. U. 
Single-family residence, whether site built or manufactured, having no more than one kitchen 	1.0 per unit 
Efficiency or studio apartments 	0.6 per unit 
Apartments of two or more bedrooms 	1.0 per unit 
Mobile home or travel courts 	1.0 per space 
Transient rental units (hotels, motels, etc.) managers quarters 	1.0 per unit 
 Plus rental units without cooking facilities 	0.3 per unit 
 Plus rental units with cooking facilities 	0.4 per unit 
Bars, restaurants, and other food service establishments, capacity 0 to 20 persons 	1.5 per group 
 Plus for each additional 20 persons capacity fraction 	1.0 per group 
Drive-ins 	0.25 per car stall 
Service stations 	1.0 
 Plus for each wash rack 	1.0 
Laundromats 	0.5 per washing machine 
Churches and non-profit fellowship halls 	1.0 
 Plus residence or regular dining facilities, each 	1.0 
School, capacity 0—50 	1.0 
 Plus each additional 40 students or fraction 	1.0 
 Plus shower facilities 	Aggregate capacity rate 
 Plus cafeteria 	Aggregate capacity rate 
 
Commercial office or industrial uses (not listed elsewhere): 
Water meter size 	
¾" 	1.0 
1" 	1.9 
1½" 	4.4 
2" 	8.1 
3" 	19 
4" 	35 
6" 	84 
8" 	154 
10" 	250 
12" 	368 
 
Where uses involve sprinkler systems, fire suppression systems, or any other special application which requires water use which is not roughly proportional to sewer use, the City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the owner for a lower Eq. L. U., so long as the fee so established is based upon the water meter size which would be necessary in the absence of the special application. For meter sizes not specified, the next larger size shall be used. 
2.  If the City extends service to an area within an expansion district with an existing or internal sewer system, each individual existing connection is considered a new sewer connection for purposes of calculating the appropriate connection fees imposed by subsection A. 
3.  Residential structures which have been within the corporate limits of the City for a period time as set below, as of November 1, 2000, but which have not been using the City sanitary sewer system shall receive a credit toward the connection fee established under subsection A, at the time the owner of the residence applies for a sewer tap, as follows: 
a.  Single family houses of ten (10) years or more; forty (40) percent credit of the applicable fee; 
b.  Single family houses of more than nine (9) years but less than ten (10) years; credit of thirty (30) percent of the applicable fee; 
c.  Single family houses of more than eight (8) years but less than nine (9) years; credit of twenty (20) percent of the applicable fee; 
d.  Single family houses of more than seven (7) years but less than eight (8) years; credit of ten (10) percent of the applicable fee; 
e.  Any house which seven (7) years is old or less as of November 1, 2000; no credit. 
4.  All other nonresidential structures which have been within the corporate limits of the City for a period of time as set below, as of November 1, 2000, but which have not been using the City sanitary sewer service system, shall receive a credit toward the connection fee established by subsection A, at the time the owner of the structure applies for a sewer tap, as follows: 
a.  Structures for eight (8) years or more; thirty (30) percent credit of the applicable fee; 
b.  Structures for more than seven (7) years but less than eight (8) years; credit of twenty (20) percent of the applicable system extension fee; 
c.  Structures for more than six (6) years but less than seven (7) years; credit of fifteen (15) percent of the applicable system extension fee; 
d.  Structures for more than five (5) years but less than six (6) years; credit of ten (10) percent of the applicable system extension fee; 
e.  Any structure of five (5) years or less as of November 1, 2000; no credit. 
Provided that the credits described above must be utilized within three (3) years of the time sewer is available to the area in which the residence or structure is located; failure to utilize the credit within three (3) years of sewer becoming available shall result in the absolute loss of the credit. For purposes of this section, sewer shall be deemed available to an area in which a residence is located whenever such public sewer is located within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior perimeter of any portion of the subdivision in which the residence is located; in addition, sewer shall be deemed available to an area in which a structure is located whenever such public sewer is located within five hundred (500) feet of the exterior perimeter of any property line enclosing the area upon which the structure is located. 
F.  Procedure for installation and connection to extended City sewer system; deposits and payments by owner or developer. 
1.  Whenever it is the desire of the owner of property to install a sewerage system and to connect such system to the City's sanitary sewerage system, the owner shall first apply to the City, through its City Manager, for a commitment to extend the City sewer system to the property to be sewered. If the request for an extension of the City sewer system to the property is approved by the City Manager, or if the City sewer system is already extended to the area to be sewered, the applicant shall enter into a written contract with the City upon terms as may be required by the City Manager concerning the extension, construction, operation, and maintenance of the system. 
2.  The owner or developer receiving permission for the installation of a sewerage system under this article shall deposit with the City a sum equal to the City's engineering cost, inspection fee, and other amounts which may be due the City, including estimated right-of-way acquisition costs. 
3.  The City shall require any developer, owner or builder to pay into an enterprise fund of the City the charges set forth in Subsection F(2) and the charges set forth in Subsection E as the system extension fee, which charges are in compensation for the proportionate costs of the construction of any sewer extension, whether constructed or to be constructed as related areas develop. The City will hold the funds so received in escrow and the interest earnings will be added to the fund. This fund may then be used by the City to pay all or any portion of the capital construction costs, including right-of-way acquisition and engineering fees for future extension of the sewerage system or expansion of the sewage treatment capacity of the system within any area inside the fence line of the City. The fund may also be used to meet the debt service requirements of any bond issue generating capital for extension of the City sewer system or expansion of the sewage treatment capacity of the City sewer system. The City will deposit all funds received from the system development fee into a separate escrow account which may be used only for replacement of essential components of the existing wastewater treatment plant pump stations and other ancillary facilities and/or for capital improvements relating to any regulatory consent order issued to the City or Trust Authority or for expansion of the sewage treatment capacity of the sewer system of the City including paying any debt service related to same. The payment of system extension fee and system development fee shall be made in the manner as required by the City Manager and approved by the City as part of the contract referenced in Subparagraph 1 of Subsection E. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-3.2; Ord. 2333, 11/06/2000; Ord. 2692, 02/03/2014; Ord. 2720, 03/02/2015)  
Sec. 17-105. - Compliance with City plumbing code by persons outside City connected with City water of sewer systems; required. 
Before persons whose property or premises are located outside of the City are permitted to connect such property with the water system of the City or the sanitary sewer system of the City, the premises to be served shall be so equipped and constructed as to comply with the plumbing code and the building code, so far as applicable, of the City. The plumbing rules and regulations of the City shall apply with full force and effect to such premises and the same shall be maintained and operated in such a manner as to meet the requirements thereof. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-3; Ord. 915)  
Sec. 17-106. - Contract. 
Prior to connection with either the water system or sewer system of the City, the owner of any premises mentioned in the preceding section shall enter into a water and sanitary sewer connection contract with the City upon a form designated and approved by the City as the "water and sanitary sewer connection contract." The water superintendent of the City is authorized to execute such contracts on behalf of the City with persons desiring to obtain water or sewer connections with the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-4; Ord. 915)  
Sec. 17-107. - Effect of noncompliance; right of entry of Plumbing Inspector. 
Upon violation of any of the rules and regulations of the City as prescribed by the plumbing code of the City or other provisions of this Code or other ordinances applicable to the construction and maintenance of buildings and improvements with regard to plumbing, where located outside of the City, the proper officers of the City are hereby authorized and directed to discontinue the water service or the connection with the sanitary sewer system serving such premises and shall not reopen such connections until full compliance with such provisions of this Code and other ordinances and regulations is performed. The Plumbing Inspector or Building Inspector of the City shall have the right and authority to enter upon such premises for the purpose of inspection thereof. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-5; Ord. 915)  
Sec. 17-108. - Restrictions on use of water during emergencies; authority of Mayor. 
Whenever an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water, limited distribution facilities or of any other circumstances which make it necessary to conserve water, the Mayor of the City is hereby authorized to restrict or prohibit the use of water from the water supply of the City for watering, sprinkling or irrigation of plants, shrubs, trees, grass, and things of like nature, for washing automobiles and for any other use not strictly necessary to maintain and protect the public health and safety. Such restrictions upon the use of water may prohibit it entirely for such purposes or may restrict it during certain periods of the day or week for so long as necessary. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-6; Ord. 833)  
Sec. 17-109. - Proclamation; generally. 
The restrictions mentioned in the preceding section shall be put into effect by the issuance of a proclamation by the Mayor which shall set forth such restrictions. Such proclamation shall be published in one issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the City and shall be effective from and after publication. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-7; Ord. 833)  
Sec. 17-110. - Violations. 
Violation of the restrictions upon the use of water as set forth in the proclamation provided for by Section 17-109 shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-8; Ord. 833)  
Sec. 17-111. - Unauthorized connections and raising, lowering, of water or sewer pipe lines. 
A.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person except a duly authorized officer or employee of the City to make any break, tap, or connection with any water pipe line or sewer pipe line belonging to the City unless permission be granted him to do so by the proper officials of the City. 
B.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to raise, lower or alter the position of any water pipe line or sewer pipe line belong to the City unless permission be granted him to do so by the proper officials of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-9)  
Sec. 17-112. - Tampering with water meters; unauthorized use of water. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person other than an employee of the City Water Department to remove, tamper with or in any way disturb any water meter or water connection belonging to the City. In the event of an emergency, which presents a possibility of physical damage to real or personal property, in that event the property owner or a licensed plumber may disconnect water service to the property so affected. The property owner or licensed plumber shall inform the City Water Department of the emergency action taken within twenty-four (24) hours of the event. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on or cause to be turned on or used or permit to be used water from any connection belonging to the City where such person has not complied with the applicable provisions of this chapter and other ordinances, or water rules and regulations of the City where the water has been turned off by the City. In addition to any other penalty, any person violating this section shall be subject to an administrative fee as reflected by the Master Fee Schedule to be imposed upon the appropriate water account which must be satisfied before service shall be re-instated by the City.  
Sec. 17-113. - Fire protection service. 
A.  Any individual or business entity desiring water service for the purpose of providing residential and/or commercial fire protection shall make application for such service to the City Water Utility Department by completing and signing a standard application form as for other water service connections. Installation of such service shall be accomplished by a qualified contractor on behalf of the applicant and the City. 
B.  Services to be used for fire protection shall not be connected to any fixtures that will be used for other purposes and in no case shall any connection be made upon any service line, tank or other fixture installed for fire protection for any purpose except the fire service or through any pipes, tank, or other fixtures reserved for fire protection be permitted for any purpose except the fighting of fires. 
C.  To protect against water being drawn from a fire service for any purpose other than the fighting of fires, the City Water Utility Department shall approve any connection for such service prior to connection. In addition, the City shall not approve any such connection unless and until the individual or business entity has installed a back-flow preventer and flow meter and paid the costs associated with such installation as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule as provided in Section 17-206 thereof. 
D.  All valves and hydrants required to be installed and/or sealed under the provisions of this section shall be subject to frequent inspection by the City Water Utility Department, whose agents are hereby given the right of access as necessary to inspect such services and hydrants. 
E.  Upon discovery of any unauthorized connection, the City Water Utility Department shall notify the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises being served; said owner, lessee, or occupant shall be responsible for all water used and/or lost through such improper connection and shall pay the appropriate charges for such use as determined by the City Utility Department. Failure to pay said charges when due shall result in disconnection of water service by the City to the fire lines and/or hydrants until satisfaction of all such fees. Upon discovery that any seal, valve, or hydrant has been broken, displaced, or removed for any cause, either inadvertently or for firefighting purposes, it shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, and/or occupant to immediately notify the City Utility Department. 
F.  Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this section for fire protection service, or for other metered service, including water furnished to any fire hydrant or other equipment used, or which may be used for fire connection service, it is understood that the City cannot guarantee any minimum quantities of water or pressure of water to be furnished to any of such hydrants or outlets, and the City shall not be liable in any manner for any loss or claim by reason of the quantity of water, or pressure of the same to be furnished to such hydrant or outlet. 
(Ord. 2378, 05/06/2002; Ord. 2389, 10/21/2002)  
CHAPTER 2. - RATES AND CHARGES  
ARTICLE A. - WATER 
 
Sec. 17-201. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Combined residential and commercial users mean users of water in a residence or apartment in which is also conducted a business or commercial enterprise; 
Commercial users mean persons, businesses or industries whose principal consumption of water is for business, commercial, or industrial purposes; 
Minimum charge means a charge for water service through a meter which is not cut off and any amount of water less than one thousand (1,000) gallons is used; 
Multiple dwelling means a place of residence designed or constructed to contain two (2) or more separate family living units under one roof; and 
Residential users mean water consumers who use water for human needs and consumption. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-20.1; Ord. 2717, 02/16/2015; Ord. 2726, 06/01/2015)  
Sec. 17-202. - Rates within City. 
There shall be a schedule of rates and charges as provided in the Master Fee Schedule to users of water located within the corporate limits of the City, receiving water through the mains of the City, and the Water Department of the City is directed to make such charges, the same to be computed upon a monthly basis upon water measured by meters for this purpose.  
Sec. 17-203. - Rates outside City. 
There shall be a schedule of rates and charges as provided in the Master Fee Schedule to users of water located outside the corporate limits of the City, receiving water through the mains of the City, and the Water Department of the City is directed to make such charges, the same to be computed upon a monthly basis upon water measured by meters for such purpose. 
State Law reference— For state law as to authority of City with regard to sale, etc., of water outside corporate limits, see 11 O.S. § 37-120 et seq.  
Sec. 17-204. - Schedules of minimum charges. 
The minimum charge fixed in the two (2) preceding sections is based upon the use of water through a five-eights ( 5/8 ) inch water connection. Such minimum rate for the first one thousand (1,000) gallons shall increase, both inside and outside the corporate limits of the City according to a schedule as set by the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 17-205. - Multiple use buildings. 
Where water is metered through one (1) meter to any premises occupied and used as a duplex, apartment house or other multiple-family dwelling unit, or where such premises are used for combined domestic and commercial use, or where water is metered through one (1) meter to serve one (1) or more trailers in a mobile home park, the minimum charge shall be set by the City per dwelling unit if such premises are located within the corporate limits of the City and per dwelling unit if such premises are located outside the corporate limits of the City, with the remainder of the charges to be as fixed in the applicable rate schedule. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-20.5; Ord. 1365, 04/20/1970; Ord. 1538, 10/06/1975)  
Sec. 17-206. - Connection charges. 
For connecting a consumer to the water system of the City, the certain connection charges are fixed as provided in the Master Fee Schedule. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-20.6; Ord. 1365, 04/20/1970; Ord. 1534, 09/02/1975; Ord. 1641, 09/05/1978; Ord. 1709, 07/21/1980; Ord. 1710, 07/21/1980; Ord. 1870, 06/18/1984; Ord. 2795, 05/08/2018)  
Sec. 17-207. - Turn-on and turn-off charges. 
Any water consumer who desires the water service on any premise to be turned on or off shall be charged for such service within the incorporated limits of the City and for such service outside of the incorporated limits of the City. Such charges are set by the Master Fee Schedule to the Code. The rates shall be applicable only to services provided during regular business hours, specifically: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding holidays; the rates for the services at all other times shall be double those set out above, and shall be provided during the nonbusiness hours solely in the discretion of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-20.7; Ord. 1365; Ord. 1534; Ord. 1870, 06/18/1984)  
Sec. 17-208. - Deposits. 
Any person who desires to use water from the water supply system of the City shall make application and sign a contract for such service and shall be required to make a reasonable deposit to guarantee payment for such service, the amount to be fixed by the Master Fee Schedule, and such water shall not be installed unless such deposit is made. The City Manager may waive such deposit requirement based upon specific criteria approved by the City Council. The deposit so required shall be refunded either whenever service is discontinued, and all applicable water bills are paid in full or upon a continuous record of prompt payment of bills for a period of five (5) years. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-21; Ord. 674; Ord. 1465; Ord. 2496, 06/19/2006)  
Sec. 17-209. - Payment of bills; penalty for delinquency. 
In the event of the failure of any person to make payment of all charges for water service and/or sewer service and/or garbage service assessed against him, as shown by a bill mailed, on or before the due date stated on such bill, such charges shall then become delinquent and a penalty of ten (10) percent of the total amount due shall be added thereto, and such consumer shall be required to pay the amount of the bill together with such penalty; provided further, however, that such ten (10) percent penalty shall not be applied to any person who qualifies for a fixed income exemption under the rules established by the City Utility Department and as approved by the City Manager. In addition, a charge as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule will be assessed for the shutting off and turning on the water after service has been discontinued, as may be done by the City as provided by state law, and no water will be turned on after being shut off until the bill, penalty and other charges have been paid in full. The failure of any consumer to receive a statement of the amount of the charge due from him shall not constitute an excuse for the neglect, failure, or refusal to pay the charge assessed against him when the same is due. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-22; Ord. 2339, 04/02/2001; Ord. 2385, 08/19/2002)  
Sec. 17-210. - Monthly bookkeeping charge. 
A monthly bookkeeping charge as indicated by the Master Fee Schedule is hereby levied against the City water utility deposit accounts where a customer has discontinued water utility service and has not closed his account. If the event the account is less than the minimum charge, the bookkeeping charge shall be reduced to the amount remaining in the account. No charge shall be levied until after twelve (12) months from the date service is discontinued, but such charge shall be mandatory each month thereafter. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-22.1; Ord. 1436, 06/19/1972)  
Sec. 17-211. - Re-reads. 
When a customer feels that a bill is not correct, the customer may request a reread of the meter to check the accuracy of the last reading. If the reread shows an error in the reading the cost of the reread will be borne to the City. If the reread does not reflect a reading error, the customer shall pay a fee as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule.  
Secs. 17-212—17-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B. - SEWER 
 
Sec. 17-221. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Commercial use means any use other than for a dwelling, and such term includes multiple family dwellings to which the water service is not separately metered and rooming houses of more than two (2) rooms for rent; 
Dwelling means a housing unit occupied by a single-family to which the water service is separately metered, or occupied by a single-family with not more than two (2) separate rooms for rent; 
Public buildings mean buildings of the State, the City, and the County, and public school buildings; and 
Sewage means any substance or material placed in the sanitary sewers of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-23; Ord. 815, 04/06/1953)  
Sec. 17-222. - Schedule. 
For the purpose of providing funds for the maintenance of the sanitary sewer system of the City and other purposes in connection with the municipal functions of the City, the following conditions and schedule of monthly fees and charges for the disposal of sewage through the sanitary sewer system of the City are hereby fixed: 
A.  There are two (2) classes of sewer services established, namely: 
1.  Service to customers with premises occupied or intended to be occupied by persons for dwelling and living purposes, which service shall be classified as residential sewer service; and 
2.  Service to all other customers, which service shall be classified as commercial sewer service. Hospitals and nursing homes are classified as commercial customers; 
B.  Each apartment building or other structure having separate living units, with separate kitchen and bathroom facilities for each living unit, which structure is not separately metered as to water supplied to each living unit, shall pay the minimum residential charge for each apartment or separate living unit in the structure and shall pay the residential gallonage charge for each one thousand (1,000) gallons of water furnished through the master meter to the apartment building or structure; 
C.  Each residential sewer customer within the City limits shall pay a minimum charge per month, as provided by the Master Fee Schedule, plus a charge for each one thousand (1,000) gallons of water furnished to such customer, as shown by the water meter serving such customer; 
D.  Each residential sewer customer outside the City limits shall pay a minimum charge per month, as provided by the Master Fee Schedule, plus a charge for each one thousand (1,000) gallons of water furnished to such customer, as shown by the water meter serving such customer; 
E.  Each commercial sewer customer within the City limits shall pay a minimum charge per month, as provided by the Master Fee Schedule, plus a charge for each one thousand (1,000) gallons of water furnished to such customer, as shown by the water meter serving such customer; 
F.  Each commercial sewer outside the City limits shall pay a minimum charge per month, as provided by the Master Fee Schedule, plus a charge for each one thousand (1,000) gallons of water up to five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons and a charge for each one thousand (1,000) gallons of water over five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons of water furnished to such customer, as shown by the water meter serving such customer. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-24; Ord. 815; Ord. 934; Ord. 1154; Ord. 1368; Ord. 1824; Ord. 1951; Ord. 1979; Ord. 2006, 02/06/1989; Ord. 2034, 02/05/1990)  
Sec. 17-223. - Manner of determining charges. 
For the purpose of determining the amount of sewage for the purpose of fixing the charges specified by this article, the amount of water metered to commercial users, less the amount of water which the user may show is consumed and not deposited into the sewer system, shall be the basis upon which the sewer service charge is made. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-25; Ord. 815)  
Sec. 17-224. - Collection. 
The charges for the use of the sanitary sewers shall be billed to each user monthly upon the statement for water and other services, and the City Water Department is authorized and directed not to accept payment for water or the service unless such payment is accompanied by the sewer service fee. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-26; Ord. 815)  
CHAPTER 3. - SEWER REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE A. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 17-301. - General provisions. 
A.  Purpose and policy. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the City of Sapulpa and enables the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are to: 
1.  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of the POTW. 
2.  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW inadequately treated, into the receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. 
3.  Ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge quality is maintained at a level which allows reuse and/or disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations. 
4.  Protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public. 
5.  Enable the City of Sapulpa to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other Federal or State laws to which the POTW is subject. 
6.  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW. 
This chapter shall apply to all industrial users of the POTW. The article authorizes the issuance of industrial wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
Any user discharging into the Publicly Owned Treatment Works for the City of Tulsa ("Tulsa-POTW") shall be required to comply with the current Tulsa Sewer Use Ordinance as set forth in Title 11-C, Chapter 12, of the City of Tulsa Code of Revised Ordinances and/or other applicable regulations governing the Tulsa-POTW, and in addition, such users shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection E below. 
B.  Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the City Manager shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the City Manager may be delegated by the City Manager to other City personnel. 
C.  Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
1.  Act or The Act . The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
2.  Approval authority. The administrator of The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region VI, Dallas, TX or its authorized designee and/or agent. 
3.  Authorized representative of the industrial user. If the industrial user is authorized representative a corporation, shall mean: 
a.  A principal executive officer, president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions. 
b.  A manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or the manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
c.  If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
d.  If the industrial user is a Federal, State, or local government facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his designee. 
e.  The individuals described in this section may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and written authorization is submitted to the City of Sapulpa. 
4.  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/1)). 
5.  Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471. 
6.  Color. The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred (100) percent transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density. 
7.  Composite sample. The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
8.  Control authority. The POTW if the POTW's submission for its pretreatment program has been approved by the approval authority. 
9.  Daily average discharge limit. The maximum allowable concentration of a pollutant in a composite sample obtained from an industry during an operational day. 
10.  Domestic sewage or domestic wastewater. Shall mean water-carried wastes normally discharging into the sanitary sewers of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free from storm, surface water, process and industrial wastes. 
11.  Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
12.  Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
13.  Garbage. Solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
14.  Grab sample. A sample collected in less than fifteen (15) minutes on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream. 
15.  Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of (non-domestic) pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
16.  Industrial user or user . A source of indirect discharge or a permitted discharger. 
17.  Interference. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the City of Sapulpa's treatment process or operations which contributes to violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES Permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the City of Sapulpa in accordance with Section 405 of Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource and Recovery Act (RCRA); the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act; the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, or more stringent State of Oklahoma criteria (including those contained in any State of Oklahoma Sludge Management Plan prepared pursuant to Title VI of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the City of Sapulpa. 
18.  City Manager. The person designated by the City of Sapulpa to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article or his duly authorized representative or agent. 
19.  Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, sharps, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological waste, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical waste, potentially contaminated laboratory waste, and dialysis waste. 
20.  Milligram per liter (mg/l). An expression of concentration relating the weight of a pollutant per volume of sample. One (1) milligram per liter is equivalent to 8.34 pounds per million gallons. 
21.  Monitoring. The performance of wastewater flow measurements, wastewater sampling, sample analysis, and like procedures necessary to determine wastewater discharge compliance and/or to verify the flow or strength of wastewater. 
22.  New source. 
a.  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
i.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site which no other source is located; or 
ii.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
iii.  The production or wastewater generating process of the building, structure, facility or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
b.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility installation meeting the criteria of subsection (i), (ii) or (iii) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
c.  Construction of a new source as defined under the paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
i.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
ii.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
iii.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of a new source facilities or equipment; or 
iv.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
23.  Non-contact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
24.  Normal domestic sewage. Sewage of the City of Sapulpa in which the average concentration of suspended materials and five-day BOD is established at one hundred eighty milligrams per liter (180 mg/l). 
25.  Operational day. The period of time during a twenty-four (24) hour period during which the facility is operating and consequently discharging wastewater. 
26.  Pass through. A discharge which exits the treatment plant into waters of the United States in quantities or concentration which, either from one (1) user or in conjunction with several users of the sewer system, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the treatment plant's NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation. 
27.  Person. An individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assignees. This definition includes all Federal, State, or local governmental entities. 
28.  PH . A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance expressed in standard units. 
29.  Pollutant . Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical waste, industrial waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial waste, and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), toxicity, odor). 
30.  Pretreatment . The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited herein. 
31.  Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
32.  Pretreatment standards or standards. Prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
33.  Prohibited Discharge Standards or Prohibited Discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 17-302.A of this chapter. 
34.  Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A "treatment works" as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned by the City of Sapulpa. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial waste and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
35.  Sanitary sewer. A sewer that conveys sewage or wastewater, and into which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
36.  Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
37.  Sewer service charge. The charge made on all users of the sanitary sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established in this chapter. 
38.  Sewer system. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewaters and shall include wastewater treatment facilities. 
39.  Significant industrial user. The term significant industrial user shall apply to: 
a.  Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; 
b.  Any other industrial user that; 
i.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of industrial process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
ii.  Contributes an industrial process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or 
iii.  Is designated as a significant industrial user by the City of Sapulpa on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f) (6)). 
40.  Slug load. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 17-302.A of this chapter or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
41.  Standard Industrial Classification Code (SIC). Classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 
42.  Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting there from, including snow melt. 
43.  Surcharge . The charge in addition to the sewer service charge, which is made on those industrial users whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established as representative of normal domestic sewage. 
44.  Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on surface of or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
45.  Toxic pollutant. One of the one hundred twenty-six (126) pollutants, or combination of those pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act. This also includes any additional pollutants promulgated by EPA subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. 
46.  Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
47.  Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste. 
48.  Shall. The action described as "shall…" means the action is mandatory. 
49.  May. The action described as "may…" means the action is permissible. 
The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. 
D.  Abbreviations/acronyms. Abbreviations and acronyms shall be interpreted to have the meanings and usage prevalent in the in the industrial pretreatment program. If industry usage will conflict, the industry term shall be fully spelled out to avoid confusion. 
Use of upper or lower case shall not change the meaning as described here. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings/usage: 
1.  BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand; 
2.  CFR. Code of Federal Regulations; 
3.  COD. Chemical oxygen demand; 
4.  EPA. U. S. Environmental Protection Agency; 
5.  GPD. Gallons per day; 
6.  L. Liter; 
7.  mg. Milligrams; 
8.  mg/l. Milligrams/liter; 
9.  NPDES/OPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/Oklahoma Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; 
10.  O&M. Operation and maintenance; 
11.  POTW. Publicly owned treatment works; 
12.  RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; 
13.  SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.); 
14.  TSS. Total suspended solids; 
15.  USC. United States Code; 
16.  s.u. Standard Units, the measurement used to identify the strength of an acidic or basic solution. 
E.  Agreement over discharges into Tulsa-POTW. The written agreement adopted between the City of Sapulpa and the City of Tulsa dated May 28, 2008 for significant industrial users, setting forth implementation and enforcement of a pre-treatment program to control discharges from non-domestic contributors to the Tulsa-POTW, is hereby specifically adopted and incorporated herein by reference and is applicable in the City as fully as if set out at length herein. A copy of the May 28, 2008 Agreement is on file in the office of the City Clerk. The City of Tulsa is authorized and designated as the Enforcement Authority for users discharging to the Tulsa-POTW. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007; Ord. 2566, 12/08/2008)  
Sec. 17-302. - General sewer use requirements. 
A.  Prohibited discharge standards. No industrial user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all industrial users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Furthermore, no industrial user may discharge the following substances to the POTW: 
1.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the municipal wastewater collection and POTW, including, but not limited to, waste-streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees centigrade) using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
2.  Any industrial wastewater having a pH of less than 6.0 s.u. or, greater than 10.5 s.u., if in the opinion of the City Manager it can be deleterious or damaging to the treatment processes or otherwise causing corrosive or structural damage to the POTW or equipment, or endangering City personnel. The City Manager may establish stricter pH limits for those industries which have a potential to be in violation of this discharge standard. 
3.  Solids or viscous substances in quantities capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sanitary sewers or otherwise interfering with the proper operation of the sewerage works, such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, whole blood, paunch, manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, lime slurry, lime residue, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, fiberglass, or bulk solids. 
4.  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD), etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW, or any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
5.  Any wastewater or vapor having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees centigrade), or will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees centigrade). 
6.  Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average of 100 hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) of either free of emulsified oil and grease or both or a combination of same, if, in the opinion of the City Manager, it appears probable that such wastes: 
a.  Can deposit grease or oil in the sanitary sewer lines in such manner as to clog the sanitary sewers. 
b.  Can overload the industrial user's skimming and grease handling equipment. 
c.  Are not amenable to biological oxidation and will therefore pass through to the receiving waters without being affected by normal wastewater treatment processes. 
d.  Can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to the excessive quantities. 
7.  Any pollutant which results in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute) worker health and safety problems. 
8.  Any trucked in waste, except as provided in Section 17-303.D. 
9.  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to; create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
10.  Any substance which either singly or by interaction with other waste, are capable of: 
a.  Forming solids in concentrations exceeding limits established herein. 
b.  Creating a condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes. 
c.  Requiring unusual facilities, attention, or expense to handle. 
11.  Any wastewater containing radioactive materials exceeding the standard of the Oklahoma State Department of Health, unless they comply with the Atomic Energy Commission Act of 1954 (68 O.D. 919) as amended and Part 20, Subpart D — Waste Disposal, Section 20.303, of the Regulations issued by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (formerly the Atomic Energy Commission), or amendments thereto. 
12.  Any sludge, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
13.  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity testing. 
14.  Any waste containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
15.  Any water or wastes which contain wax, grease, oil, plastic, or other substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit (zero (0) degrees centigrade) to 150 degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees centigrade). 
16.  Any wastewater or wastes which contain materials which exert or cause; 
a.  Unusual concentrations of solids or composition, such as total suspended solids or inert nature (such as Fuller's Earth) and/or total dissolved solids (such as sodium chloride, calcium chloride, or sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration. 
c.  Unusual biochemical oxygen demand or an immediate oxygen demand. 
d.  High hydrogen sulfide content. 
e.  Unusual flow and/or concentration. 
17.  Any wastewater containing toxic substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters, unless they are pretreated to a concentration acceptable to the City of Sapulpa. 
18.  Any wasted considered hazardous waste pursuant to 40 CFR 261. Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
B.  Specific local discharge limitations. In addition to the prohibitions of Section 17-302.A, no user shall discharge any waste water containing toxic or other pollutants that exceed specific local limitations, to the extent that the local limitations are more stringent than state or federal requirements or limitations. Specific local limitations shall be developed for all SIUs and other users, as appropriate, by the control authority by allocating between users the total allowable industrial pollutant loads as determined by plant headworks calculations. As a minimum, specific local limitations shall be developed for arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury, nickel, silver, zinc, cyanide, selenium, BOD, TSS, and ammonia. City Manager may add additional pollutants to the list based on federal, state or POTW performance requirements. Local limits shall be developed specific to each SIU and other users, as appropriate, for the pollutants with local discharge limitations. The control authority shall prepare a local limits document that presents a detailed description of the headworks calculation and the pollutant load allocation. The local limits document shall be reviewed at a frequency required by 40 CFR 122.21(j)(4). Local discharge limitations for a new user(s) shall be developed by the control authority by allocating to the new user(s) a portion of the unallocated total allowable industrial pollutant loads. 
C.  City's right of revision. The City of Sapulpa reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in Section 17-301(A) and the general specific prohibitions in Section 17-302(A) of this chapter. 
D.  Federal categorical pretreatment standards. The federal categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
Upon promulgation of a Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard for a particular industrial subcategory, if the discharge limitations defined in those regulations are more stringent than imposed under this chapter, the categorical standards shall govern and apply. It is incumbent upon the User to assure compliance, proper categorization, and notification of intent and to make timely application for permit to discharge. 
E.  Dilution. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The City Manager may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
F.  Stormwater. Stormwater, surface water, ground water, and roof runoff shall not be discharged to the POTW, unless specifically authorized by the City Manager. 
G.  Additional discharge requirements. 
1.  The City Manager may require review and acceptance prior to the discharge into the public sanitary sewers of any wastes or waters having; 
a.  A five (5) day, twenty (20) degree centigrade biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than one hundred eighty milligrams per liter (180 mg/l). 
b.  Suspended solids containing greater than two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l). 
c.  The potential to be a prohibited discharge. 
2.  Industrial users discharging wastes which exhibit none of the characteristics of wastes prohibited in this chapter, other than excessive BOD or suspended solids, but have an average concentration during a twenty-four (24) hour period of BOD or suspended solids content in excess of "normal domestic sewage" may be required to pretreat the industrial wastes to meet the requirements of "normal domestic sewage"; however, such wastes may be accepted for treatment if all the following requirements are met: 
a.  The wastes will not cause damage to the sanitary sewer collection system. 
b.  The wastes will not impair the wastewater treatment process. 
c.  The discharger of the wastes pays surcharge fee over and above the published sewer rates if deemed appropriate by the City Manager. 
3.  All industrial users shall promptly notify the City Manager in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
Sec. 17-303. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
A.  Pretreatment facilities. 
1.  Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in Section 17-302 within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the State, or the City Manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pre-treat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City of Sapulpa shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the POTW for review, and shall be acceptable to the City of Sapulpa before construction of the facility. The review and acceptance of such plans and operating procedures in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of complying with the discharge requirements. 
2.  Grease, oil, and sand traps or interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing pollutants in excessive amounts, sand, or other harmful pollutants; except that such interceptors shall not be required for domestic quarters or dwellings. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City Manager and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials, capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. All installed grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained in continuously efficient operation by the owner at the owner's expense. The use of hot water, enzymes, chemicals, other agents or devices for the purpose of causing the oil, grease, or sand to pass through the interceptor and/or the facility provided is prohibited. Materials removed from these facilities shall be either utilized by the industrial user or disposed of at designated approved locations. 
B.  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. The City Manager may require any industrial user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once during the effective period of the significant industrial user permit, the City Manager shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan. Any industrial user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges. 
2.  Description of stored chemicals. 
3.  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in Section 17-302 of this chapter. 
4.  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures may include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
C.  Tenant responsibility. Where an owner of a property leases premises to any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Hauled wastewater. 
1.  Septic tank waste may be accepted into the POTW at a designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at such times as are established by the City Manager, provided such wastes do not violate Section 17-302 of this chapter or any other requirement established or adopted by the City of Sapulpa. 
2.  Fees for discharging septic waste may be established as part of the industrial user fee system as authorized in the chapter. 
E.  Vandalism. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance, or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any persons found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in Sections 173-310 and 17-312 below. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
Sec. 17-304. - Wastewater discharge permit eligibility. 
A.  Wastewater survey. 
1.  When requested by the City Manager all industrial users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey. The City Manager is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
2.  The City Manager or his representatives shall have the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and whether the industrial user is complying with all the requirements thereof. The industrial user shall allow the City Manager or his representative's ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
B.  Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge wastewater into the POTW without a valid wastewater discharge permit issued by the City Manager. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Sections 173-310 and 17-312. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State and local law. 
2.  The City Manager may require certain other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of the chapter. 
C.  Wastewater discharge permitting—Existing connections. Any significant industrial user which began discharging industrial waste into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, not currently permitted, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall within one hundred twenty (120) days after said date, apply to the City of Sapulpa for a wastewater discharge permit and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the City Manager. 
D.  Wastewater discharge permitting—New connections. Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial waste into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. The industrial wastewater permit must be applied for in accordance with Section 17-304.E below. The City Manager may require the application for the wastewater discharge permit to be filed at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to discharging. 
E.  Wastewater discharge permit application contents. In order to be considered for an industrial wastewater discharge permit the information required by Section 17-306.A of this chapter must be submitted. The City Manager shall approve a form to be used as a permit application. In addition, the following information shall be submitted if requested by the City Manager: 
1.  Description of the activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility. 
2.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation. 
3.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production. 
4.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
5.  The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge. 
6.  Time, type and duration of discharge(s). 
7.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the City Manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge permits application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned for revision. 
F.  Applications signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permits applications and industrial user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, nor those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
Sec. 17-305. - Wastewater discharge permit issuance process. 
A.  Wastewater discharge permit—Duration. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the City Manager. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
B.  Wastewater discharge permit—Contents. Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the City Manager to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
1.  Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years. 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the City Manager. 
c.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State and local law. 
d.  Statements of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements. 
e.  Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards in Federal, State, and local law. 
2.  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
b.  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties. 
c.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works. 
d.  Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges. 
e.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW. 
f.  The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW. 
g.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
h.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State and local pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit. 
i.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City Manager to ensure compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
C.  Wastewater discharge permit appeals. Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the City of Sapulpa to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of its issuance. 
1.  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
2.  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provision(s) objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
D.  Wastewater discharge permit modification. The City Manager may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
2.  To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the wastewater discharge permit issuance. 
3.  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. 
4.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, City Personnel, or the receiving waters. 
5.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit. 
6.  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or any required reporting. 
7.  To reflect revised headworks loadings established by the POTW. 
8.  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
9.  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay or hold in abeyance any wastewater discharge permit condition, schedule, or penalty. 
E.  Wastewater discharge permit—Transfer. A wastewater discharge permit may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner/operator only if the permittee gives at least sixty (60) days advance notice to the City Manager and the City Manager approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the City Manager must include a written certification by the owner and/or operator which: 
1.  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes. 
2.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur. 
3.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the wastewater discharge permit. 
4.  Identifies the contact person assuming responsibility for compliance to wastewater discharge permit requirements. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void on the date of facility transfer. 
F.  Wastewater discharge permit—Revocation. Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons: 
1.  Failure to notify the City of Sapulpa of significant changes to the wastewater prior to a change in discharge. 
2.  Failure to provide prior notification to the City of Sapulpa of changed condition pursuant to Section 17-306.E. 
3.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application. 
4.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports. 
5.  Tampering with monitoring equipment. 
6.  Refusing to allow representatives of the City of Sapulpa access to the facility premises and records. 
7.  Failure to meet effluent limitations. 
8.  Failure to pay fines. 
9.  Failure to pay sewer charges and/or industrial pretreatment fees. 
10.  Failure to meet compliance schedules. 
11.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the industrial pre-treatment permit application. 
12.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility. 
13.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be void upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. 
G.  Wastewater discharge permit re-issuance. Industrial users shall apply for wastewater discharge permit re-issuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit application in accordance with Section 17-304.E a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the expiration date of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
Sec. 17-306. - Reporting requirements. 
A.  Baseline monitoring reports. 
1.  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR Part 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit to the City of Sapulpa a report which contains the information listed in Section 17-306.A.2, below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the City of Sapulpa a report which contains the information listed in Section 17-306.A.2.a through f below. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity or pollutants to be discharged. 
2.  The industrial user shall submit the information required by this section including: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the name of the operators and owners. 
b.  Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications (SIC codes) of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Existing source: Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from the regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR part 403.6(e). The City Manager may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where considerations justified by cost or feasibility. 
New Source (for baseline monitoring report only): Supply estimates of the anticipated flow(s) to the POTW from the regulated waste stream(s). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
i.  Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
ii.  Existing source: Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and daily average concentration values shall be reported. The samples shall be representative of a typical operating day and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 17-306.J, New Source (for baseline monitoring only): Submit estimates of the concentrations of the regulated pollutants the operator anticipates to be in the regulated waste stream(s) discharged to the POTW. 
iii.  All sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 17-306.K. 
f.  Attestation statement. All baseline monitoring reports must include a signed statement in accordance with Section 17-304.F of this chapter. 
g.  Certification. A statement signed by the industrial user's authorized representative, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis—and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
h.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance (O&M) will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such pretreatment and/or O&M. 
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section 17-306.B of this chapter. 
B.  Compliance schedule progress report. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by Section 17-306.A.2.h. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of the dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events as hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting routine operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months. The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the City Manager no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, (if appropriate) the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the City Manager. 
C.  Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard—Ninety (90) day report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the City of Sapulpa a report containing the information described in Section 17-306.A.2.d through h. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR Part 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users' subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the industrial user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 17-304.F. 
D.  Periodic compliance reports. 
1.  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency to be determined by the City Manager, but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any Federal, State, or local discharge standard, and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. This report shall include sampling location, sampling technique and chain of custody for all samples taken pursuant to this requirement. The City Manager may require significant industrial users to submit additional information regarding either the operation of the facility or other pollutants with the report. 
2.  All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring facilities (sampling locations), shall be kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sampling results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
3.  If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements in and of this section monitors any regulated pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW, using the procedures prescribed in Section 17-306.K of this article the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
E.  Report of changed conditions. Each industrial user is required to notify the City Manager of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. 
1.  The City Manager may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section 17-304.E. 
2.  The City Manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 17-304 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 17-305.D. 
3.  No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until and unless approved by the City Manager. 
4.  For the purposes of this requirement flow increases of ten (10) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed significant. 
F.  Reports of potential problems. 
1.  In the case of any discharge, but not limited to accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load which may cause potential problem to the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 17-302.A of this chapter), it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the City of Sapulpa of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user. 
2.  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability pursuant to this chapter. 
3.  Failure to notify the City of Sapulpa of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter. 
G.  Reports from non-significant industrial users. All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the City of Sapulpa as the City Manager may require. 
H.  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting . 
1.  If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation: 
a.  The user shall notify the control authority within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation, and 
b.  The user shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation, and 
c.  The user shall continue to resample as long as results indicate the effluent is in violation of discharge limits or the discharge of industrial waste water is terminated. 
d.  When the control authority has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the control authority must perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat analysis. 
2.  The industrial user is not required to resample if: 
a.  The control authority performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month, or, 
b.  The control authority performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the control authority receives the results of this sampling. 
I.  Notification of hazardous waste. Any industrial user who commences the processing or use of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities in writing. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261 and the EPA hazardous waste number (continuous, batch, or other). 
J.  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA and the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
K.  Sample collection. 
1.  Except as specified in Section 17-306.K.2, below, the industrial user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional-composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the City Manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling through a minimum of four (4) grab samples or other suitable techniques where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
2.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab sampling techniques. 
L.  Determination of noncompliance—Grab samples. The City Manager may use a grab sample(s) to determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards. 
M.  Receipt of reports. Required reports and permit applications will be deemed to be submitted on the date postmarked. For documents not mailed, or illegibly postmarked, the date of receipt of the document will govern. 
N.  Record retention. Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained under this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this chapter, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the City Manager. 
O.  Fraud and false statements. Reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained by this chapter, or any permit or order issued hereunder, shall be subject to the provisions of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001 regarding fraud or false statements and the provisions of 309c(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements, representations, or certification. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
Sec. 17-307. - Compliance monitoring. 
A.  Sampling locations. All significant industrial users shall provide and maintain, at the industrial user's expense, location(s) adequate to obtain representative samples for the purpose of monitoring compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, permit or orders issued hereunder. The City Manager may require non-significant industrial users to provide sampling locations adequate to monitor for compliance with this chapter or any permit or orders issued hereunder. All sampling locations shall be accessible to personnel of the City of Sapulpa during the user's entire operational day. 
B.  Sample chambers. The City Manager may require an industrial user to construct, and maintain, at the industrial user's expense, a sample chamber(s) at a location(s) to be used for the purpose of obtaining compliance monitoring samples by the industrial user and representatives of the City of Sapulpa. Sample chambers shall be accessible to personnel of the City of Sapulpa during the user's entire operational day. The City Manager may require sample chambers to be of such construction as to accommodate sampling equipment, to protect samples from freezing, and to provide adequate security for the POTW's sampling equipment. The industrial user shall submit plans and drawings of any proposed sample chamber to the City Manager for his/her approval prior to installation. If an existing sample chamber is incapable of meeting the requirements of this section, the industrial user shall, at its expense, replace, modify, or relocate said sample chamber as required by the City Manager. 
C.  Inspection and sampling. Representatives of the City of Sapulpa shall have the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the industrial user is complying with all requirements thereof. Industrial users shall allow the City Manager or his representative's ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
1.  Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City of Sapulpa, the State and the EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
2.  The City of Sapulpa, the State, and the EPA shall have the right to install on the industrial users property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
3.  The City of Sapulpa may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at its own expense. 
4.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the City Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial user. 
5.  Unreasonable delays in allowing City personnel access to the industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
D.  Search warrants . If the City Manager or his agent has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof, and if the City Manager has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the City of Sapulpa designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then upon application by the City Attorney, the Municipal Court of the City of Sapulpa shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject of the search. The warrant shall specify what, if anything may be searched and/or seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the City Manager in the company of a uniformed police officer of the City of Sapulpa. In the event of an emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections may be made without the issuance of a warrant. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
Sec. 17-308. - Confidential information. 
Information and data provided to the City of Sapulpa with respect to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public without restriction. All other information which is submitted to the POTW shall be available to the public at least to the extent provided by 40 CFR Part 2.302. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
Sec. 17-309. - Publication of significantly violating industrial users. 
The City of Sapulpa shall publish annually, in the largest daily local newspaper, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
A.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l). 
B.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
C.  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the City Manager has determined has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interferences or pass through (including the endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public). 
D.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) and Section 17-310.G of this chapter. 
E.  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
F.  Failure to provide, within forty-five (45) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic compliance reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
G.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
H.  Any other violation or group of violations which the City of Sapulpa determines will adversely affect the operation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
Sec. 17-310. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
A.  Notification of violation. When the City Manager finds that any industrial user has violated or is in violation of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the City Manager or his agent may serve upon the industrial user a written notice of violation. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the industrial user to the City Manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City of Sapulpa to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
B.  Consent orders. The City Manager is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any industrial user responsible for noncompliance. Such order will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections D and E of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. 
C.  Show cause hearing. The City Manager may order any industrial user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the City Manager and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered mail (return receipt requested) at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the industrial user. 
D.  Administrative orders. When the City Manager finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time period. If the user does not come into compliance within this time period, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Administrative orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW. A administrative order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a Federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does an administrative order release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a administrative order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. 
E.  Cease and desist orders. When the City Manager finds that a user is violating this chapter, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other-pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur the City Manager may issue an order to the industrial user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
1.  Immediately comply with all requirements. 
2.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive actions as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking other action against the user. 
F.  Administrative fines. 
1.  Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user that is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, its wastewater discharge permit, orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be fined an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. 
2.  Such fines must be paid within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice. 
3.  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall constitute a lien against the individual user's property. 
4.  Any user desiring to dispute such fines must follow the procedures set out in Section 17-310.I. 
5.  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
G.  Emergency suspensions. The City Manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge permit whenever suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge permit which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The City Manager may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. 
1.  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City Manager shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to the public and/or environment. The City Manager shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in Section 17-310.H are initiated against the user. 
2.  Any user responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the City Manager, prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearings. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing, to any emergency suspension under this section. 
H.  Termination of discharge. In addition to those provisions in Section 17-305.F of this chapter, any user that violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination. 
1.  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions. 
2.  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge. 
3.  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge. 
4.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling. 
5.  Violation of the pretreatment standards. 
Such user shall be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 17-310.C of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. 
I.  Appeals. 
1.  City Manager. Any person affected or aggrieved by any administrative notice or order which has been entered in connection with the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall be granted a hearing before the City Manager. Such a person shall file, with the office of the City Manager, a request, stating the grounds for the hearing, within fifteen (15) days after the notice or order was served upon the person. Upon receipt of the request, the City Manager shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show why the City Manager's notice or order should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the request is filed in the City Managers offices unless the petitioner requests and shows good cause for postponement. The City Manager shall be the sole judge of whether good cause is shown. After the hearing, the City Manager may sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice or order. The decision of the City Manager shall be final unless a written notice for appeal to the City Council of the City of Sapulpa is filed with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of said decision. 
2.  City council. Appeals from any final order of the City Manager may be made to the City Council of the City of Sapulpa. A notice of appeal, specifying the grounds for such appeal, must be filed with the City Clerk's office within fifteen (15) days after service on the petitioner of the City Manager's decision. All such appeals shall be perfected when the notice of appeal is filed. Hearing on the appeal shall be de novo before the City Council at its second regular meeting following the filing of the notice of appeal. 
The proceedings of any hearing held pursuant to this section, including the findings and decisions of the City Manager and City Council, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
Sec. 17-311. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
A.  Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the City Manager may petition the Court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction (or both as may be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the industrial user. The City Manager shall have such remedies to collect fees as are available to collect other sewer service charges. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user. 
B.  Civil penalties. 
1.  Any user which has violated or continues to violate this chapter, any order or wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City of Sapulpa for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day. 
2.  The City of Sapulpa may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City of Sapulpa. 
3.  In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances. 
C.  Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions in Sections 17-309 and 17-310 are not exclusive remedies. The City of Sapulpa reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Further, the City of Sapulpa is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
Sec. 17-312. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
A.  Performance bonds. The City Manager may decline to issue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, any order, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the user first files a satisfactory bond payable to the City of Sapulpa, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the City Manager to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
B.  Liability insurance. The City Manager may decline to issue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, any order, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
C.  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
Sec. 17-313. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
A.  Upset. 
1.  Definition. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
2.  Effect of an upset. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of Section 17-313.A.3 are met. 
3.  Conditions necessary for a demonstration of upset. An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset. 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures. 
c.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally. A written submission must be provided within five (5) days): 
i.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance. 
ii.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue. 
iii.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
d.  Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of a upset shall have the burden of proof. 
e.  Judicial review. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with a pretreatment standard. 
f.  User responsibility in case of upset. The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
B.  General/specific prohibitions. An industrial user shall have an affirmation defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in Section 17-302.A of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, along or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
1.  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the industrial user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference. 
2.  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the POTW was regularly in compliance with its OPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
C.  Bypass. 
1.  Definitions. 
a.  Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
b.  Severe property damage means substantial damage to the property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
2.  Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 of this section. 
3.  Notice. 
a.  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, if possible, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass. 
b.  An industrial user shall submit oral notice of unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
4.  Prohibition of bypass. 
a.  Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless: 
i.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. 
ii.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during the normal periods of downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance. 
iii.  The industrial user submitted notices as required under paragraph 3 of this section. 
b.  The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph 4.a of this section. 
(Ord. 2518, 06/18/2007)  
ARTICLE B. - SANITARY SEWER REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 17-315. - Permits and fees. 
There is hereby imposed a required industrial pretreatment permit and fee upon designated users of the City wastewater system as reflected by the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 17-316. - State permit exemptions. 
A.  Definitions. The following terms shall have the ascribed meaning as used in this section: 
1.  DEQ means the Oklahoma State Department of Environmental Quality, its successors, designees, and assigns. 
2.  Municipal systems means sanitary sewage collection systems constructed, operated, or maintained by a municipality or trust for the benefit of such a municipality. 
3.  "Sewage collection systems" includes gravity sewage collection lines not exceeding five hundred (500) feet in length nor larger than twelve (12) inches in diameter and except systems constructed in whole or in part with funds from EPA and/or administered by DEQ. 
B.  Municipal systems. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to qualify for exemptions from the Department of Environmental Quality construction permit requirement for wastewater collection systems, pursuant to Chapter 656 of the Oklahoma Administrative Code, entitled "Water Pollution Control Construction Standards", adopted by the Board of Environmental Quality on September 28, 1999. Gravity sewage construction lines not exceeding five hundred (500) feet in length nor larger than twelve (12) inches in diameter is the only system eligible for the exemption from the requirements of issuance of state construction permits, provided all systems constructed in whole or in part with funds from the United States EPA and/or with funds administered by the DEQ shall not be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a state construction permit. 
2.  System and connection requirements. All municipal systems and connections thereto must be constructed in compliance with the applicable regulations, rules and requirements of the DEQ or the regulations, rules and requirements regulations of the City, whichever standard is more stringent. 
3.  Approval required. All sewer line extensions to sewage treatment plants, lift stations, and interceptor lines must be approved by the designated City representative prior to actual construction. 
4.  Approval withheld. Approval shall be withheld if the sewage treatment plant, lift station or interceptor line to which the sewer line extension is to attach has reached or, with the addition of the proposed sewer line extension, would reach treatment or hydraulic capacities. Further, approval shall also be withheld if the sewer line extension does not meet or exceed the standards of the DEQ and the City, or may be withheld for any other reason. 
5.  Review and approval of plans and specifications for sewage collection systems. Prior to construction, plans and specifications for sewage collection systems must be reviewed, approved and signed by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Oklahoma and designated by the designated City representative as being in responsible charge of connections to the sewage collection systems for the municipality. All approved plans and specifications must be signed by said designated professional engineer indicating approval to proceed with construction in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. No sewage collection system construction shall proceed until plans and specifications have been reviewed and approved in this manner. 
6.  Listing of projects. The designated City representative must supply DEQ with one (1) copy of all such approved plans and specifications together with a listing of all approved projects quarterly. The listing shall include the name, location and date of approval of each such project. 
7.  Inspection. The City's engineer shall inspect each approved project and shall prohibit commencement of any sewage collection systems construction or connection prior to approval of plans and specifications in accordance with this division. 
8.  System operation. The City shall operate its wastewater system in compliance with the applicable rules of DEQ. 
9.  System capacity exception. Should any proposed City sewer line extension bring a connected lift station, interceptor line or sewage treatment plant to its design capacity, the construction or connection of the proposed sewer line extension may still be allowed, to the extent approved by DEQ, under the following circumstances: 
a.  The City must apply, in writing, to the DEQ for a variance allowing the specified construction to proceed within the area. 
b.  The application must detail what the City will do to ensure that the construction or connection will not worsen problems or treatment capacity, flow or bypassing of sewage. 
c.  The application must include timetables for correcting any stated problems, prior to the connection of any additional loadings or flows, as a result of the construction for which approval is sought. 
d.  The application, if approved, will become a condition of any permit issued for such construction by the DEQ. 
e.  Approval of construction in an area at design capacity, which has not received such a variance from the DEQ, will result in revocation of the City's overall sewer line permit exemption status, as provided by the rules and regulations of DEQ. 
(Ord. 2335, 02/05/2001)  
Sec. 17-317. - Sanitary sewer/responsibility of property owners. 
To minimize groundwater infiltration and inflow to the public sewer system that may overload and inhibit wastewater treatment, the City hereby requires that all property owners utilizing the sewage system of the City of Sapulpa be responsible for the maintenance of all connections, lines, and fixtures in a manner sufficiently watertight so as not to allow, and cause such to be, leakage out of or seepage into said connections, lines, and fixtures from the place of discharge to the place of connection to the public sewage system main. At the discretion of the City of Sapulpa, such connections, lines, and fixtures shall be subject to inspection and testing by the City of Sapulpa, or its designated agent. 
(Ord. 2173, 04/15/1996; Ord. 2351, 05/21/2001)  
Sec. 17-318. - Sanitary sewer/prohibited connections. 
No person shall henceforth make connection of roof down-spout or leaders, interior or exterior foundation drains, clean-outs, sump pumps, cellar, yard, and area drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs or swampy areas, or other sources of surface, storm or ground water to a structure sewer or structure drain which is connected, either directly or indirectly, to the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 2173, 04/15/1996; Ord. 2351, 05/21/2001)  
Sec. 17-319. - Sanitary sewer/disconnect order. 
The Director of the Department of Public Works or his designated agent may issue a disconnect order directing the owner of the real estate or structure to disconnect private infiltration or inflow waters from the sanitary sewer system. The order shall be effective not less than thirty (30) days from its date of issuance. The order may state a deadline for compliance, but such deadline shall, in no event, be more than three (3) months after issuance of the order. 
(Ord. 2173, 04/15/1996; Ord. 2351, 05/21/2001)  
Sec. 17-320. - Sanitary sewer/termination of service. 
The City of Sapulpa, Department of Public Works, may order the termination of sanitary sewer service and/or water service to any real estate or structure if the owner has refused to allow access and entry or has failed or refused to comply with the disconnect order requiring that the private infiltration or inflow waters be prevented from entering the sanitary sewer system. The termination shall be effective thirty (30) days after the service upon the owner. Service of the order shall be in person or by restricted delivery mail. 
(Ord. 2173, 04/15/1996; Ord. 2351, 05/21/2001)  
Sec. 17-321. - Sanitary sewer/re-connection of service. 
Sanitary sewer service disconnected under the provisions of this chapter shall not be reconnected until sources of infiltration or inflow have been disconnected. The cost of disconnection and re-connection shall be the burden and responsibility of the owner or lessee. 
(Ord. 2173, 04/15/1996; Ord. 2351, 05/21/2001)  
Sec. 17-322. - Sanitary sewer/abatement of nuisance. 
In addition to or in lieu of termination of service and/or prosecution in Municipal Court, the Department of Public Works may maintain a civil action by injunction, in the name of the City Council of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, to abate and temporarily or permanently enjoin the continuation of the private infiltration/inflow and/or as a nuisance, in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 2173, 04/15/1996; Ord. 2351, 05/21/2001)  
Sec. 17-323. - Sanitary sewer/access and entry. 
A.  Access. Representatives of the Department of Public Works shall have the right to make an inspection of any parcel of real estate and/or structure for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter. Inspections shall be done at a reasonable hour of the day. 
B.  Notice. If the structure or real estate to be inspected is occupied, the representative shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If the structure or real estate is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the structure or real estate and request entry. 
C.  Search warrants. If, after proper request, entry or access is refused, the Department of Public Works may compel such access by application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant in compliance with the provisions of Section 15 of the Oklahoma Bill of Rights and the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. 
(Ord. 2173, 04/15/1996; Ord. 2351, 05/21/2001)  
Sec. 17-324. - Sanitary sewer/optional penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter may be fined as provided by Section 1-108 of the Code for each offense and a separate offense may be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 2173, 04/15/1996; Ord. 2351, 05/21/2001)  
Sec. 17-325. - Sanitary sewer/optional abatement procedure. 
If property owner is unable or refuses to comply with Section 17-305 (repair or disconnection of infiltration and inflow source), the City may, at its discretion, contract with a plumbing contractor of the City's choice to make the required repair/replacement/disconnection to remove the infiltration and inflow source. The cost of the abatement may include but not be limited to: Repair of the defect; repair of streets, alleys, curbs, and parking. The cost of such action will be filed as a lien on the property. 
If the affected utility account is in the name of the property owner, a charge of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month shall be added to the utility bill of the property owner for that address until the lien amount is paid in full. If the account is closed or transferred to a different owner, the amount of the outstanding balance on the lien shall become due in full immediately. 
If the utility account is not in the name of the owner of the property, the full amount of the costs of repair shall become due and owing upon filing of the lien and shall be collected as a debt due the City by any and all legal means, including foreclosure of the lien. 
Upon receipt by the City of the total cost of repairs, a lien release shall be issued and filed. 
(Ord. 2173, 04/15/1996; Ord. 2351, 05/21/2001; Ord 2460, 01/18/2005)  
Sec. 17-326. - Sanitary sewage back-flow prevention/pop-off devices. 
A.  Back-flow prevention devices required. All private service lines connected to the City of Sapulpa public sewer system shall include a pop-off device, or other City-approved backflow prevention device, connected to the sanitary sewer clean out, to protect against backflow. Said device shall be of sufficient size and quality to prevent backflow to individual residences or businesses. All installed pop-off devices shall be registered with the City of Sapulpa and properly maintained and secured by said property owner. 
B.  Access and entry. Representatives of the Department Public Works shall have the right to make inspection of any parcel of real estate and/or structure for the purpose of determining compliance with this section. 
C.  Implementation. As a means to implement this section, the City shall provide and install pop-off valves on clean outs connected to the City sewer system upon written authorization from the property owner and/or utility customer in writing on forms approved by the City. The pop-off devices and installation services shall be provided at no additional expense for owners and customers who elect participation on or before June 30, 2014. On and after July 1, 2014, the pop-off devices and installation services shall be provided upon written authorization from the property owner and/or utility customer in writing on forms approved by the City at a cost set forth and assessed in the Master Fee Schedule. 
D.  Limitation of liability. The failure of any property owner or utility customer to meet the conditions of this section shall effectively exempt the City of Sapulpa from all liability in the event of a sanitary sewer back-up. 
(Ord. 2687, 08/05/2013)  
CHAPTER 4. - SEPTIC TANKS 
 
Sec. 17-401. - License required; fee; term. 
Before any person shall engage in the business of installing or repairing septic tank systems within the City, a license shall be obtained by a such person from the City Clerk. The fee for the issuance of such license shall be the sum as set by the Master Fee Schedule, which shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in such business for a period of one (1) year from the date of such license. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-37; Ord. 1079)  
Sec. 17-402. - Examination, certificate and bond required of applicants; exception as to licensed plumbers. 
In order to obtain a license for the purposes set forth in this chapter, a person shall first take and pass an examination given by the City-County sanitarian upon a form prescribed by the Director of the City-County Health Department, and shall present to the City Clerk a certificate issued by such department showing he is qualified to perform such work, and shall also obtain and file with the City Clerk a bond in the penal sum as set by the City executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state conditioned for the payment of damages and injury resulting from negligent or improper construction or repair of septic tanks by the licensee; provided, that a plumber licensed to do business in the City may perform the work of installing or repairing septic tanks within the City without the license provided for in this chapter and without furnishing the bond required by this section. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-38; Ord. 1079)  
Sec. 17-403. - Permit for installation required; fee. 
A.  Before a septic tank system is connected to a residence or other structure for human use and occupation connected with the water system of the City, either within or without the City, a permit for such installation shall be obtained from the Director of the City-County Health Department, or his authorized representative. The failure to obtain such permit shall be grounds for the discontinuance of water service to the occupied residence or structure. 
B.  The fee for the permit for installation of such septic tanks is hereby fixed at the sum as set by the Master Fee Schedule, and the same shall be paid to the City Clerk prior to the issuance thereof. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-39; Ord. 1079; Ord. 1091)  
Sec. 17-404. - Inspection and approval of system; discontinuance or refusal of water service to premises with defective system. 
After the issuance of the permit for the installation of the septic tank system mentioned in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the Director of the City-County Health Department and City Building Inspector to inspect the plans of the proposed construction, the location and other conditions existing, and upon completion of the work, such director shall approve the septic tank system prior to any use being made thereof. Where any defective or dangerous condition exists by reason of such construction, the City is authorized to discontinue or refuse water service to the building or structure served by such septic tank system. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-40; Ord. 1079)  
Sec. 17-405. - Minimum construction, requirements for private sewage systems. 
A.  No private sewage disposal system shall hereafter be constructed in the City unless the same shall comply with the minimum requirements of the bureau of sanitary engineering of the state board of health. 
B.  The method of sewage disposal for new construction within the City shall not include pit privies, but may include septic tanks, open sand filters or other methods approved by the State Health Department. The failure or inability to make provisions for such approved methods of sewage disposal shall justify the refusal of a building permit for such new construction. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-41; Ord. 1079)  
Sec. 17-406. - Haulers; disposal requirements; fees. 
A.  The City of Sapulpa Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant shall accept domestic septic wastewater from haulers, providing, the service is being provided to a residence or commercial customer located within Creek County or the Sapulpa Municipal Authority service area. No industrial waste will be accepted. 
B.  Every operator of a motor vehicle licensed to a collect waste shall maintain a septic wastewater manifest, which shall be competed as appropriate, be a true, current and legible record of the domestic waste collected, removed, transported and disposed of at the Sapulpa Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant. 
C.  Each septic waste water manifest required by this section shall be maintained on the form provided by the City of Sapulpa. The City Manager may approve alternative forms if in his/her opinion the relevant information is contained upon such alternate forms. 
D.  Each septic waste hauler shall retain a copy of the manifest for a period of no less than three (3) years from the date of the competition of the manifest. Manifests shall be maintained in records retrievable by vehicle, and in chronological order. Records shall be surrendered to the City Manager or the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator upon written request. 
E.  Each septic waste hauler shall establish and maintain an account with the City of Sapulpa Utility Collections Department to which all charges will be made for disposal of waste at the facility. No payment will be received at the treatment facility. 
F.  If in the opinion of the Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment the septic waste hauler, or their employee, is not complying with treatment plant requirements for the disposal of septic wastewater the septic waste haulers access to the facility will be denied.  
Sec. 17-407. - Stormwater haulers; disposal requirements; fees. 
A.  The City Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant shall accept for disposal from haulers commercial non-hazardous stormwater. The disposal of wastes from this source is restricted to stormwater collection basins and leach field collection systems. Wastes from commercial sources must be certified by the owner of the system as to "Not contain industrial process wastes." All such haulers are deemed Significant Industries ("SIU") and are required to pay to the City an annual permit fee and monthly service fee as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule prior to disposing of said stormwater. 
B.  Each such hauler shall sign for a copy of and agree to be bound by the "Conditions for Dumping Non-Hazardous Stormwater" to be provided by the Superintendent of the wastewater treatment plant, or his designated representative. Failure to comply with said conditions shall result in the revocation of said hauler's dumping privileges. 
C.  Each hauler desiring to dump such stormwater shall open and maintain an account with the City Utility Collections Department and pay a deposit fee as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule. In addition, there shall be a fee as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule for each load of stormwater dumped pursuant to this section. 
D.  Each hauler shall be required to maintain a manifest on a form as supplied by the City. 
(Ord. 2345, 04/02/2001)  
CHAPTER 5. - REFUSE COLLECTION  
ARTICLE A. - COLLECTION, REMOVAL, AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE 
 
Sec. 17-501. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
Garbage means every accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, or both, likely to decay or usually discarded as waste matter from kitchens, dining rooms, hotels, restaurants, boardinghouses and dwelling houses of every kind, and such term shall include such waste animal or vegetable matter from public institutions, businesses, stores, markets, or other establishments; and 
Trash means any accumulation of broken or discarded boxes, paper, straw, sawdust, ashes, iron or other metal, clothing and other similar waste matter, other than garbage as defined above, usually discarded by business establishments or occupants of dwellings and living quarters; provided, that waste building materials accumulated from the remodeling or repairing of buildings or dwellings shall not be considered trash for the purpose of collection.  
Sec. 17-502. - Reservation of rights by City. 
The City hereby reserves unto itself the exclusive right and privilege of the collection, removal and disposition of all garbage and trash within the City, either by contracting with a suitable person for the collection and removal thereof or by the collection and removal thereof by employees of the City, either method to be at the discretion of the City Council.  
Sec. 17-503. - Containers required; placement. 
A.  It is hereby made the duty of every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee occupying a business establishment, dwelling house or apartment, and every person in charge of a hotel or other living quarters in the City, to place all household generated garbage and trash securely within in collection carts/containers provided by the City. 
B.  Collection carts/containers and any yard waste shall only be placed at curbside on designated neighborhood collection days and thereafter shall be set back and remain at least twenty-five (25) feet from curbside. No residential collection cart/container shall be placed at curbside any earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day before collection and shall be removed from curbside the same day of collection. Curbside means that portion of the right-of-way adjacent to a paved or traveled road or street. On collection days, collection carts/containers shall be placed no more than three (3) feet from curbside and as close as practical without interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles and/or pedestrians and otherwise placed within the sanitation collector's view. The City or it's agent may refuse to collect any non-conforming container or any container that is improperly placed at curbside or that does not meet any of the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Any permanent structure placed in the City's right-of-way or easement shall be immediately removed. Any permanent structure outside the City's right-of-way or easement existing as of July 20, 1999 and which completely conceals the presence of the collection carts/containers within said structure shall be allowed to remain where located. Any other existing permanent structure and all permanent structures built after July 20, 1999 shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from curbside. Permanent structure means any structure with a minimum of two (2) inch concrete, brick, or similar hard surfaced base material affixed to the ground and with brick, wood, or similar rigid materials for wall enclosures. 
D.  The owner, person having control, or occupant of any premises in the City who fails, neglects or refuses to use or deposit garbage or trash into the collection carts/containers provided for by this chapter, or who fails or refuses or neglects to pay without just cause any uncontested bills for service rendered under this chapter for a period of ten (10) days after notice of such failure, neglect or refusal, or who violates any of the provisions of this article is guilty of an offense punishable under Section 1-108 of the Code. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-6; Ord. 2288)  
Sec. 17-504. - Depositing garbage or trash not in containers for collection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit upon the streets, alleys, parking or on private property any garbage or trash for collection unless the same is placed in a container as required by this chapter, except that yard waste consisting of leaves, grass clippings etc. may be placed at curbside in plastic bags, appropriately secured, or two (2) foot by four (4) foot secured bundles, the collective weight of which is fifty (50) pounds or less. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-7; Ord. 2288)  
Sec. 17-505. - Unauthorized collection, removal or transportation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except as duly authorized under the terms of this article, to collect or remove any garbage or trash as defined herein and to transport, haul or carry the same over the streets and alleys of this City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-8; Ord. 739)  
Sec. 17-506. - Unlawful accumulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or other person to charge of any lot, tract of ground or other premises in the City to allow garbage or trash to accumulate thereon and to permit water or other putrid substances whether animal or vegetable, to so accumulate, so as to cause an offensive odor to be emitted therefrom or to cause a condition dangerous to the health of any person. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-9; Ord. 739)  
Sec. 17-507. - Tampering with containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not duly authorized as provided in this article, to tamper with, overturn, remove, or destroy any garbage or trash container of a residence, business or other establishment in this City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-10; Ord. No. 739)  
Sec. 17-508. - Contracts for collection and removal. 
The City Council of the City may contract with some suitable person for the collection and removal of garbage and trash upon such terms and conditions as may under the terms of this article be deemed for the best interests of this City; provided, that any party so contracting with the City shall furnish to the City Clerk a bond in a sum set by the City, conditioned upon the faithful performance of such contract, and shall further furnish and deposit with the City Clerk a policy of contractor's liability insurance in an amount set by the City, and policies of public liability and property damage insurance covering the vehicles to be used by him in an amount set by the City, such policies of insurance to be in companies accepted to the City Clerk; and, provided further, that unless such a contract is duly entered into, the City shall have the right to provide for the collection and removal of garbage and trash by its own employees. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-11; Ord. 739)  
Sec. 17-509. - Vehicles; place of disposal. 
A.  All vehicles used in the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and trash shall be so constructed as to prevent such waste matter from spilling, blowing or falling off while being transported, and all garbage and trash shall be removed to and dumped at the place designated therefor by the City Manager. 
B.  The vehicles mentioned in this section shall at all times by subject to inspection by any person duly authorized to enforce the provisions of this article and if found to be defective or unfit for such service shall not be used therefor until such defect is remedied and the use of the vehicle approved by such official. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-12; Ord. 739)  
Sec. 17-510. - Frequency of collections. 
Collections of garbage and trash shall be made not less than once a week from all residences in the City and not less than twice a week from all business establishments; provided, that collection of garbage and trash either from residences or business establishments shall be made at shorter intervals where necessary for sanitary purposes and when required by the City Manager. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-13; Ord. 739, Sec. 10; Ord. 742)  
Sec. 17-511. - Rates and charges; billing. 
Rates and charges for the refuse collection services shall be as set by the Master Fee Schedule.  
Sec. 17-512. - Enforcement. 
The City Manager shall be charged with the enforcement of the terms of this article, and for such purpose he is authorized to designate such other employees of the City as shall be necessary to assist in the enforcement hereof; provided, that nothing in this section shall in any way abrogate the duty of other officers of the City to enforce this article.  
Secs. 17-513—17-520. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE B. - COLLECTION AND CONTROL OF SOLID WASTE 
 
Sec. 17-521. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, and any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Collectable residential solid waste means solid waste, except non-collectable solid waste, generated from any unit used as a place of habitation with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating; 
Commercial solid waste means all solid waste emanating from all units having zoning classification other than low or medium intensity residential uses; 
Commercial waste collector means any person who collects, removes, or transports commercial solid waste as defined herein; 
Construction and demolition waste collector means any person who collects, removes, transports, or disposes of waste or large bulky items, such as brush, tree cuttings, lumber, concrete, bricks, plumbing fixtures, plastics, and other waste generated by construction and demolition activities; 
Garbage means such accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, or both, that is the refuse matter from any place where such putrescible wastes are prepared for food for immediate consumption and shall include all waste containing organic matter that was intended to be used as food or has resulted from the preparation of food; 
Hazardous waste means any portion of solid waste which is defined as hazardous under Title 42 U.S.C., Chapter 82 et seq., as amended and Section 1-2001 et seq., of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes as amended, including any material that is harmful, toxic, or dangerous to handle by collectors or transport for disposal; 
Hazardous waste collector means any person who collects, removes, or transports wastes which are flammable, explosive, corrosive, toxic, infectious, or are otherwise classified as hazardous or controlled industrial waste under federal, state or municipal laws, ordinances, rules or regulations; 
Non-collectable solid waste means and includes hazardous wastes, large bulky objects (such as automobile frames, large trees or limbs and materials that may cause damage to collection equipment or personal injury to collectors), dirt, rocks, or debris resulting from construction projects, body waste, animal excretion or any article or substance soiled by human or animal excretion that has not been wrapped and tightly sealed in containers prior to placement for collection; 
Person means every natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation; 
Residential waste collector means any person who collects, removes, or transports residential solid waste; 
Solid waste means all putrescible and non-putrescible refuse in solid or semi-solid form; 
Trash and rubbish means the normal accumulation of non-putrescible solid wastes by families or commercial establishments of matter other than garbage that is a threat to public health or offensive to sight or smell; and 
Vehicle means any truck, trailer, semi-trailer or other equipment used to collect, remove, transport or dispose of solid waste, and over any public way, street, avenue, road, alley, or highway. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-36; Ord. 2035, 02/05/1990)  
Sec. 17-522. - Waste collector's license. 
A.  No person, except as otherwise provided in this article, shall engage in the business, trade, avocation, operation, or occupation of collection, removal, or transportation of solid waste, including hazardous waste, within the jurisdiction and control of the City, unless such person possesses a valid waste collector's license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
B.  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any commercial waste collector, construction and demolition waste collector, hazardous waste collector, or residential waste collector to be engaged in the business, trade, avocation, operation, or occupation of collection, removal, or transportation of solid waste or hazardous waste within the City, without first being in possession of a valid and effective waste collector's license, issued by the City Clerk of the City. 
C.  Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-37; Ord. 2035, 02/05/1990)  
Sec. 17-523. - License application, requirements, issuance, denial. 
A.  The waste collector's license, as referenced above, shall be issued by the office of the City Clerk of the City. Prior to the issuance of the waste collector's license, application for a waste collection compliance permit shall be made to and approved by the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority which may charge a fee in an amount not to exceed the sum set by the City Council by motion or resolution for the processing thereof. Applications for such permit shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and home address of the applicant; 
2.  Business name and address; 
3.  Business and home telephone number; 
4.  Make, model and year of each truck; 
5.  Color of cab and packer or truck bed; 
6.  Packer or truck bed capacity; 
7.  Current state safety inspection number; 
8.  An attached schedule of all waste collection services, indicating type of solid waste collected, site, or area if residential, of collection; 
9.  Landfills used; 
10.  Name of liability insurance company and policy number; 
11.  Information regarding rates, frequency of pickups and other limitations on service; and 
12.  Any other information deemed necessary by the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority or the City. 
B.  At the time of the application, the applicant shall secure and present to the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority a Certificate of Insurance upon a form provided by the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority and then issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, providing liability insurance coverage for each vehicle in an amount not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for bodily injury to or death of one person in any one occurrence, respectively, and property damage insurance in the amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) arising out of damage to or destruction of property of others in any one occurrence. The policy must run concurrently with the waste collector's license. All certificates of insurance shall contain statements that at least ten (10) days' written notice of cancellation shall be given by the insurer to the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority. If any waste collector licensee shall fail within the ten (10) days to provide another policy of like kind, then the license provided for herein shall terminate and shall be of no further effect. 
C.  Upon presentment of the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority waste collection compliance permit, and payment of the fee set forth below, waste collector's license shall be issued, but for a period not to exceed one (1) year, and will expire at the end of such fiscal year for which such license is issued. The fee may be pro-rated on a monthly basis where less than twelve (12) months remain in the fiscal year at the time of the application. For collectors under contract with the City, multi-year licenses whose period of effect are co-terminus with the contracts, may be permitted. For such contract the fee shall be the sum set by the City per year times the number of years covered by the term of the license. 
D.  Otherwise, the annual fee for the waste collector's license shall be in the amount set by the City and shall be payable to the City Clerk of the City, in advance of issuance of the waste collector's license. Should the City Clerk determine to deny a license, or revoke same under authority of this article, notice thereof shall be provided to the applicant/licensee containing such proposed denial or revocation and the reasons therefore. Revocation of any license issued under this article shall not be effective until the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of serving notice upon licensee of such revocation, absent an emergency situation. Any applicant denied a license, or licensee whose license is revoked, may appeal such denial or revocation to the City Council of the City. Appeal from denial of application for license or revocation of same shall occur upon written notice requesting same addressed to the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the denial of the application for license or, as pertains to the revocation of such license, within the ten (10) days preceding the effective date of such revocation as above provided. In the event a licensee shall request an appeal before the City Council regarding revocation of such license, the effective date of the revocation shall be stayed pending determination by the City Council of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-38; Ord. 2035, 02/05/1990)  
Sec. 17-524. - Waste management restrictions. 
A.  Waste collectors who in the course of their business provide containers for the collection of solid waste shall display information on each container, such as a business name, trade name or license number, which shall sufficiently identify the licensee providing waste collection services to the establishment using the waste container. Characters, letters and numbers displaying the foregoing information shall be at least two (2) inches tall, one-half (½) inch wide and applied in such a way so as to become permanent. Characters shall be no lower than twelve (12) inches from the bottom of the container and shall be in a contrasting color to the container so as to be clearly visible. Containers shall be constructed in such a way as to prevent leakage, spillage or blowing debris from escaping in order to secure the public health and safety. 
B.  No person shall collect any solid waste inside the corporate limits of the City within six hundred (600) feet of any residential building unless it is after 6:00 a.m. and before 10:00 p.m. 
C.  Any vehicle used in the collection, removal, transportation, or disposal of solid waste shall: 
1.  Be maintained in such a manner as will prevent any solid waste from spilling, falling or blowing out of the vehicle onto any public way, street, avenue, alley, highway, road, or any other public or private place, except when being loaded or unloaded; 
2.  Bear a numbered windshield decal annually issued by the City Clerk, designed to have a distinct color which shall change annually, decals shall be affixed to the upper left hand corner of the windshield, all expired or otherwise invalid decals shall be immediately removed; 
3.  Be parked at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential building, if parked over six (6) consecutive hours while containing a partial load of solid waste; 
4.  Be required to be reasonably clean and sanitized if the vehicle is declared to be a health hazard by the Creek County Health Department; and 
5.  Comply with all other requirements and restrictions imposed pursuant to the rules and regulations of solid waste management adopted by the City Council of the City. 
D.  Every licensed waste collector shall maintain a full, true, current and legible list of all residential and non-residential customers and clients that are provided waste collection services, which shall include an itemization of the customer's names, service address, waste container size or sizes, the frequency of service measured in days per week, and an indication of the type of customer, i.e., residential, commercial, office, or industrial. Upon written notice from the director of the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority or the City Manager of the City, waste collectors shall permit authorized designees of the City and agents of the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Authority reasonable access to customer lists at the offices of the waste collector. It is the purpose of such examination to verify the accuracy of reports provided to the trust by the haulers. Such lists are not to be reproduced or removed from the premises. 
E.  Any vehicle used in the collection, removal, transportation, or disposal of solid waste within the jurisdiction and control of the City shall be subject to reasonable inspections initiated to insure compliance with this section and conducted by duly authorized inspectors of the City, Creek County Health Department or the City Police Department. 
F.  No person shall collect, remove, or transport solid waste, including hazardous waste, in a manner so as to scatter or spill such waste, either at the point of collection or while transporting the same of disposal unless such waste is immediately retrieved and removed in its entirety. Immediately after collection, containers which have been used to store solid waste shall be closed, with each lid or cover being reasonably secured. In the event of spillage of hazardous waste as defined herein, the person responsible for transport of such hazardous waste shall immediately notify the hazardous materials section of the City Fire Department. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-39; Ord. 2035, 02/05/1990)  
Sec. 17-525. - Solid waste manifest, required. 
A.  Every operator of a motor vehicle licensed to a waste collector shall maintain a daily solid waste manifest, which shall be full, true, current, and legible record of all residential waste collected, removed, transported, or disposed of during each day such vehicle is operated. 
B.  Each solid waste manifest required by this section shall be maintained on a form provided by the City Clerk and the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority; the forms to be utilized for residential and non-residential shall be those attached to Ordinance No. 2035, made a part hereof and marked Exhibits "A" and "B", respectively. The City Clerk may approve alternative forms if in his or her opinion the relevant information is contained upon such alternative forms. 
C.  Every operator of a motor vehicle licensed to a waste collector shall have an accurate and current daily solid waste manifest in his immediate possession at all times and shall display same on demand of any officer of the City or the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority who shall show written evidence of authority to examine same. 
D.  Each waste collector shall, on a monthly basis, forward to the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority, postage prepaid, a report on the forms provide by the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority. 
E.  Each waste collector shall retain each operator's daily solid waste manifest for a period no less than five (5) years from the date the manifest was completed. Manifests shall be retained separately for each vehicle, in chronological order and shall be surrendered to the City Manager or the director of Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority upon written notice. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-40; Ord. 2035, 02/05/1990)  
Sec. 17-526. - Falsification of solid waste manifest, failure to provide, penalty. 
A.  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to willfully and knowingly prepare or execute a false solid waste manifest; or to induce or coerce any other person to prepare or execute a false solid waste manifest, or for any waste collector to fail or refuse to provide the solid waste manifest or access thereto as called for in this article. 
B.  Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this Code. 
C.  In addition to the penalty provided for in subsection B above, any violation of this section shall be deemed just cause for the cancellation, suspension, or revocation of the person's waste collector's license. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-41; Ord. 2035, 02/05/1990)  
Sec. 17-527. - Disposal. 
Waste collectors shall, upon ninety (90) days written notice to the waste collector, provide for disposal of all collectable residential solid waste and commercial solid waste at disposal sites authorized, created and operated, in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Act, as amended, Section 2251 et seq. of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, by the Northeast Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Authority. Waste haulers shall maintain written evidence of such disposal. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-42; Ord. 2035, 02/05/1990)  
Sec. 17-528. - Impoundment of vehicles. 
A.  It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person, owner or operator to park, drive or permit to be parked or permit to be driven on any public way, street, avenue, alley, road, or other public property while engaging in the business, trade, avocation, operation, or occupation of collection, removal, transportation, or disposal of solid waste without first having been issued a waste collector's license or while such a waste collector's license is under a period of suspension or revocation. Any vehicle used in violation of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and after notice set forth herein may be impounded or caused to be impounded by any police officer or other duly authorized person. 
B.  Before impoundment of a vehicle as provided herein, written notice shall fist be given to the owner of such vehicle that impoundment is contemplated, the grounds therefore and the place to which the vehicle will be removed. The owner of the vehicle shall be given five (5) working days to show cause in writing, filed with the City Clerk as to why his vehicle should not be impounded. Within five (5) working days the City Clerk shall notify the owner in writing, by mail as to whether impoundment has or has not been ordered and stating or restating the grounds therefore. 
C.  The charge for towing or removal of any vehicle under this section, including storage charges, shall be based upon the actual expenses incurred in such towing and storage. 
D.  Any vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released upon the owner obtaining the license provided for herein or the execution of a written assurance that the vehicle will not be used in violation of this chapter and the payment of all towing and storage charges. 
E.  Any vehicle impounded and stored under the terms of this article and which is not claimed and removed by the owner thereof upon the expiration of sixty (60) day period of time may be sold in accordance with surplus property provisions of the City and Section 91 of Title 42 of the Oklahoma Statutes. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-43; Ord. 2035, 02/05/1990)  
Sec. 17-529. - Special orders of City Manager. 
A.  The City Manager of the City is hereby authorized and directed to develop and promulgate rules and regulations governing the collection of solid waste within the City. Application for an acceptance of a license shall be deemed to constitute the licensee's acceptance of the provisions of this article as well as any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto. Failure to adhere to the provisions of this article, or any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto, shall constitute grounds for denial or revocation of the license. 
B.  The rules and regulations shall, subsequent to development and promulgation, be adopted, amended, or repealed by the City Council of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 22-44; Ord. 2035, 02/05/1990)  
ARTICLE C. - SAPULPA CONVENIENCE STATION USE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 17-530. - Definitions. 
Commercial waste collector means any party or person being compensated for their service, including but not limited to private collection services or any trash business operating for profit while engaged in the act of collection of solid waste and/or hauling/transporting such waste. 
Construction/demolition waste means the waste building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from personal construction, remodeling, and repair at residences, that does not include pavements, bricks, stones, blocks, concrete and waste building materials from commercial buildings and other large structures. Non-inert wastes and asbestos wastes are not considered to be demolition waste. 
Convenience station means the area, which acts as a temporary holding place for bulk items too large to be picked up by the contracted waste hauler for the City. It is a facility for the temporary deposit of items, prior to being transported to a processing facility or final disposal site by the contracted waste hauler for the City. 
Disposal means the storage, treatment, utilization, processing of, final disposition of solid waste, specifically including discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so that such solid waste or hazardous waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwater. 
Environmentally unsound means any persistent or continuous condition resulting from the methods of operation or design that impairs the quality of the environment when compared to the surrounding background environment or violates any Federal, State, County or Municipal standard. 
Hazardous waste means any refuse, sludge or other material or combination of refuse, sludge, or other waste materials in solid, semi-solid, liquid or gaseous form, which because of its quantity, concentrations, or chemical, physical or infectious characteristics, may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of; or otherwise managed. Categories of hazardous waste materials include, but are not limited to, explosives, flammables, oxidizers and reactive wastes, poisons, irritants, and corrosives. 
Heavy brush means solid waste consisting of trees, shrubs, limbs and trimmings which are greater than three (3) inches in diameter, tree trunks, root balls and other large plant matter. 
Household waste means any solid waste, bulky waste, delivered from households, single and multiple residences, which because of their size or weight require special handling, other than through the normal contracted waste hauler. 
Non-inert wastes and asbestos wastes means any material that contains more than one (1) percent asbestos by weight and that can be crumbled, pulverized or reduced to powder when dry, by hand pressure or otherwise could become airborne. 
Scavenge or scavenging means removal of items from the transfer station after such items have been placed for delivery to a hauler. 
Yard waste means solid waste solely consisting of vegetative matter generated in the maintenance of gardens, yards, lawns, or landscaped residential areas such as: Leaves, weeds, dead flowers, pruning, brush, branches, grass clippings, stumps, wood shavings, and Christmas trees. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-531. - Sapulpa convenience station fees. 
The City of Sapulpa Public Works Department operates a "Convenience Station" located at 816 West Dewey, where residents can dispose of items too large for the bulk trash pickup service, contracted by the City; there is hereby assessed and imposed certain fees, as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule for services rendered by the Public Works Department, to residents of the City of Sapulpa during the normal course of business. 
There shall be charged, assessed and collected from all users of the City's "Convenience Station," a fee for refuse disposal services. Said fees shall be payable in cash at the convenience station; since scales are not available to determine precise tonnage of each load, estimated fees will be assessed based on the amount of material brought for disposal and the size of the vehicle used for transporting. There will be a minimum fee for all loads, the only exception for payment of a fee, will be with the presentation of an appropriate "Pride Day" coupon for a specified cleanup day, sponsored by the City of Sapulpa and the Chamber of Commerce. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-532. - Requirements for vehicles used for hauling. 
Pursuant to City of Sapulpa Code, Section 17-509.A., all vehicles used in the collection, removal, hauling, and disposal of refuse to the convenience station, or through the City, must be covered or carried in vehicles so constructed as to prevent such waste matter from spilling, blowing, falling or littering while being transported. All loads must be secured to prevent littering; violation of this regulation shall be a violation of the City of Sapulpa's adopted codes. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-533. - Acceptable waste and material. 
A.  All solid waste delivered to the convenience station must be in secured plastic bags, boxed or bundled. Bulky solid waste white goods, generally weighing more than fifty (50) pounds including, but not limited to the following: Washers, dryers, dish washers, etc., must be unloaded by the resident, as directed by the Le Dump attendant. Recycling regulations require separation of materials into designated dumpsters and holding areas. Persons not obeying the directions of such signs and attendant; may be prohibited from subsequent entry and use of the convenience station. 
B.  The following items are considered to be acceptable solid waste: Yard and garden waste, household furniture, appliances such as washer, dryer, dishwasher, refrigerators previously stripped of their compressors. Microwaves, water heaters, stoves, trash compactors, tree trimmings, limited construction/demolition debris such as plywood and wallboard, television sets, computers, bicycles, lawnmowers, weed eaters, crockery, household utensils. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-534. - Unacceptable waste/banned waste. 
A.  Any person delivering unacceptable waste, including waste generated outside the City limits, or waste found in a load of other acceptable waste, shall be the grounds for the attendant to designate the entire load as unacceptable waste. Independent commercial waste haulers, receiving a profit from their hauling service are not allowed to use the City of Sapulpa's convenience site for disposal of collected trash. 
B.  The following items are considered to be unacceptable solid waste, that cannot be deposited: All putrescible waste, including food waste, any type of tire, electric motors, dead animals, air conditioners, batteries, gas tanks, refrigerators, freezers, roof shingles from a contractor or resident, household garbage, explosives, smoldering ashes, herbicides, pesticides, pressurized tanks, gas or propane tanks, automobile or boat parts, small engines, appliances with a motor, petroleum products or empty containers of same, paints, oils, fluids, chemicals, or empty containers of same, food waste, and containers of same. Concrete, bricks, rocks, sand, etc. are not accepted. No auto scraps or auto metals that held fluids such as but not limited to auto batteries, air conditioners, differentials, gas tanks, oil filters, oil pans, radiators, shocks and struts, or torque converters. 
C.  It shall be prohibited and forbidden to deposit any commercial waste. Independent trash haulers picking up trash from outside the waste management pickup area, cannot deposit trash. 
D.  It shall be prohibited and forbidden to deposit any hazardous waste, medical waste, sludge, septic tank waste, asbestos material, or agricultural waste. 
E.  The list of unacceptable waste/banned waste is not considered to be all and inclusive, the City of Sapulpa reserves the right to leave the final decision to the discretion of the attendant. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-535. - Proof of residency. 
Drivers of vehicles or passengers must be a resident or property owner in the City of Sapulpa. Proof such as identification providing residence, or ownership of property or business within the City of Sapulpa. Driver's license, utility bill (with garbage charge indicated), vehicle registration, property tax bill, or other acceptable documentation must be presented to the attendant prior to using the convenience station. Anyone refusing to provide the requested information will be denied use of the facility. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-536. - Refuse from outside of the City of Sapulpa. 
No person shall place, deposit, or dump, or cause to be placed, deposited or dumped, in or upon the City-owned convenience station, any solid waste originating from outside the City of Sapulpa. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-537. - Recycling. 
Newspaper, mixed waste paper (junk mail, magazines, catalogs) plastic, cardboard, green glass, clear glass, brown glass, plastic containers, laundry detergent bottles, bleach bottles and fabric softener bottles, cans and aluminum or tin containers, milk and water bottles or jugs, phone books and shredded office paper are encouraged to be deposited at The Met Recycling Center, 21 East Taft, Sapulpa, at no charge. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-538. - Littering, unlawful dumping. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to place, dump, throw away, drop, discard, cast or deposit, or in any manner leave or abandon any solid waste/trash outside of the entrance gate to Le Dump, during and/or after posted working hours. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to place, dump, throw away, drop, discard, cast or deposit, or in any manner leave or abandon any solid waste/trash on property owned by another person, or upon any public property, right-of-way of any kind, or private land, including but not limited to any street, road, or park, owned or operated by the City of Sapulpa. 
Violation of this regulation shall be a violation of the City of Sapulpa's adopted Codes, Part 8, Health and Sanitation, Chapter 1, Section 8-101 through Section 8-112. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-539. - Hazards associated with convenience station operations. 
Any person entering upon the City-operated convenience station, for any purpose, shall be conclusively presumed to know and appreciate the hazard and potential extent of the damage that accompanies the accumulation of scrap wood, glass, nails, brush, and trash of every description. Every person entering upon the City-operated convenience station, shall be conclusively presumed to have assumed the risk of injury connected with, or resulting from, such hazards and danger, and by his or her actions in entering upon such site, in consideration of the permission granted by the City of Sapulpa to enter upon such site, every person shall covenant and be deemed to have covenanted not to sue, and to indemnify, save harmless and defend the City of Sapulpa and its' agent, attendant, officer and employee from and against any and all claims of any nature whatsoever, for injury or damage to person or property, whether real or asserted, arising out of, or resulting from, the entry by such person upon any City-operated site. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-540. - Scavenging unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the City-operated convenience station, for the purpose of uncontrolled and unauthorized removal of any material at any point in the station site, but; shall not mean the searching for and retrieval of articles and/or items of value inadvertently placed at the site. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-541. - Rules and regulations. 
The City Manager of the City of Sapulpa is hereby authorized and directed to develop and promulgate rules and regulations governing the deposit of solid waste, and other acceptable items within the City-operated convenience station. Such fees, rules and regulations are necessary to operate an orderly, safe and efficient convenience station. 
The schedule of fees, rules, and regulations shall, subsequent to development and promulgation, be adopted, amended, or repealed by the City Council of the City of Sapulpa. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
Sec. 17-542. - Prohibitions. 
No person shall violate any regulation prescribed by this Code, regulating the use of the City-owned convenience station, or fail to obey any posted sign giving notice of any regulation maintained at such site. Stake trucks, dump trucks, double axel trailers, and/or trailers over ten (10) feet in length are prohibited and forbidden access for the purpose of depositing any and all solid waste. Violation of any regulation set forth in this Code, shall be a violation of the City of Sapulpa's adopted codes. 
(Ord. 2376, 05/06/2002)  
CHAPTER 6. - WATER DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— For state law as to water districts generally, see 11 O.S. § 298 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-601. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Centerline means the centerline of the watercourse as defined and described in this section; 
High water line means the margin of the City reservoirs when the surface thereof is at the following elevations on the following reservoirs: 
A.  Sapulpa Lake Reservoir, seven hundred twenty-three (723) feet above sea level; 
B.  Middle Dam Reservoir, six hundred eighty-four (684) feet above sea level; 
C.  Pump Station Reservoir, six hundred seventy-two (672) feet above sea level; 
D.  Pretty Water Reservoir, seven hundred thirty-four (734) feet above sea level; and 
E.  Lake Sahoma Reservoir, seven hundred and twelve (712) feet above sea level; according to U.S.C.&G. datum; 
Linear distance of a structure or object from a reservoir, or from a watercourse, means the shortest horizontal distance from the nearest point of the structure or object to the high water line of such reservoir or centerline of a watercourse; 
Reservoirs mean the City reservoirs, maintained as a water supply by the City, or to any tributary which serves as a source of the City reservoirs; and 
Watercourses mean every spring, pond, stream, ditch, gutter or other channel of every kind, the waters of which when running, whether continuously or occasionally, eventually flow or may flow into the City reservoirs. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-27; Ord. 764)  
Sec. 17-602. - Established and described. 
Under and by virtue of the authority granted by Sections 298 and 299 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes, there is hereby created and established a water district in the county, designated as the Sapulpa Water District, which shall embrace all the land in the county and state within the following metes and bounds: 
Beginning at a point which point is 300 feet east 1,700 feet north of the SW corner Section 34 Township 18 N Range 11 E thence N 69º 55 feet W a distance of 3,300 feet; thence S 33º 10 feet W a distance of 1,800 feet; thence S 23º 40 feet W a distance of 2,100 feet; thence S 41º 50 feet W a distance of 2,800 feet; thence S 23º 55 feet W a distance of 2,450 feet; thence S 63º 10 feet W a distance of 1,750 feet; thence N 71º 25 feet W a distance of 2,880 feet; thence S 61º 10 feet W a distance of 3,790 feet; thence S 77º 45 feet W a distance of 1,000 feet; thence N 34º 35 feet W a distance of 2,350 feet; thence N 5º 10 feet E a distance of 3,200 feet; thence West a distance of 900 feet; thence N 76º 10 feet W a distance of 3,250 feet; thence N 9º 40 feet W a distance of 2,150 feet; thence N 69º 50 feet W a distance of 2,820 feet; thence N 53º 20 feet W a distance of 2,400 feet; thence N 70º 0 feet W a distance of 3,650 feet; thence S 71º 25 feet W a distance of 900 feet; thence N 78º 45 feet W a distance of 1,000 feet; thence N 55º 40 feet W a distance of 3,350 feet; thence N 30º 0 feet W a distance of 1,500 feet; thence N 21º 10 feet W a distance of 1,600 feet; thence N 25º 25 feet E a distance of 950 feet; thence N 42º 50 feet E a distance of 2,000 feet; thence N 7º 30 feet E a distance of 1,520 feet; thence N 36º 0 feet W a distance of 850 feet; thence N 56º 45 feet W a distance of 1,900 feet; thence N 31º 10 feet W a distance of 1,100 feet; thence N 5º 15 feet E a distance of 1,000 feet; thence N 27º 15 feet E a distance of 1,000 feet; thence N 45º 30 feet W a distance of 2,000 feet; thence N 27º 10 feet W a distance of 2,800 feet; thence N 64º 20 feet W a distance of 1,400 feet; thence N 44º 20 feet W a distance of 1,750 feet; thence S 61º 10 feet W a distance of 1,200 feet; thence S 44º 30 feet W a distance of 1,400 feet; thence West a distance of 600 feet; thence N 6º 0 feet W a distance of 1,290 feet; thence N 35º 0 feet W a distance of 1,600 feet; thence N 13º 40 feet W a distance of 900 feet; thence N 2º 35 feet W a distance of 4,150 feet; thence N 45º 0 feet E a distance of 500 feet; thence N 81º 30 feet E a distance of 1,200 feet; thence N 13º 35 feet E a distance of 990 feet; thence N 7º 12 feet W a distance of 9,650 feet; thence N 22º 3 feet E a distance of 1,100 feet; thence N 62º 30 feet E a distance of 900 feet; thence N 72º 15 feet E a distance of 1,600 feet; thence N 81º 10 feet E a distance of 4,300 feet; thence N 56º 5 feet E a distance of 1,350 feet; thence N 41º 25 feet E a distance of 3,280 feet; thence S 89º 10 feet E a distance of 1,200 feet; thence S 48º 45 feet E a distance of 6,300 feet; thence S 61º 40 feet E a distance of 1,550 feet; thence S 85º 30 feet E a distance of 3,950 feet; thence N 72º 35 feet E a distance of 1,550 feet; thence N 54º 30 feet E a distance of 2,100 feet; thence N 80º 20 feet E a distance of 900 feet; thence S 64º 30 feet E a distance of 1,050 feet; thence S 39º 15 feet E a distance of 650 feet; thence S 63º 15 feet E a distance of 850 feet; thence S 32º 15 feet E a distance of 1,220 feet; thence S 26º 40 feet E a distance of 3,000 feet; thence S 64º 15 feet E a distance of 700 feet; thence N 88º 0 feet E a distance of 2,500 feet; thence S 79º 25 feet E a distance of 1,900 feet; thence S 55º 0 feet E a distance of 1,300 feet; thence S 10º 45 feet E a distance of 950 feet; thence S 28º 0 feet W a distance of 700 feet; thence S 34º 50 feet W a distance of 2,450 feet; thence S 4º 5 feet E a distance of 1,900 feet; thence S 37º 45 feet E a distance of 1,950 feet; thence S 51º 35 feet E a distance of 1,220 feet; thence S 68º 45 feet E a distance of 1,700 feet; thence 49º 0 feet E a distance of 1,000 feet; thence S 30º 0 feet E a distance of 3,750 feet; thence S 76º 35 feet E a distance of 1,000 feet; thence N 84º 45 feet E a distance of 2,700 feet; thence N 87º 0 feet E a distance of 4,810 feet; thence S 79º 0 feet E a distance of 1,500 feet; thence S 88º 0 feet E a distance of 1,500 feet; thence S 12º 0 feet E a distance of 3,400 feet; thence S 41º 0 feet E a distance of 1,300 feet; thence S 12º 15 feet W a distance of 1,410 feet; thence S 21º 0 feet W a distance of 1,580 feet; thence S 79º 40 feet W a distance of 700 feet; thence S 89º 45 feet W a distance of 1,900 feet; thence S 69º 30 feet W a distance of 1,490 feet; thence N 83º 0 feet W a distance of 1,490 feet; thence N 59º 35 feet W a distance of 1,300 feet; thence N 85º 15 feet W a distance of 1,800 feet; thence S 77º 10 feet W a distance of 1,700 feet; thence S 48º 10 feet W a distance of 3,500 feet; thence S 38º 35 feet E a distance of 3,300 feet; thence S 8º 0 feet E a distance of 850 feet; thence S 1º 15 feet W a distance of 3,210 feet; thence S 49º 55 feet E a distance of 4,300 feet; thence S 8º 10 feet E a distance of 2,800 feet to the point of beginning as here first described. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-28; Ord. 764)  
Sec. 17-603. - Extension of police, powers of City. 
As authorized by the laws of the state, the police power of the City is hereby extended over all lands embraced within the water district described by this chapter, and it is hereby declared that the jurisdiction of the City, the City Council thereof, the courts and all proper officers of the City, in the fullest degree conformable to law, extends over and applies to the entire water district described by this chapter for the protection of the health of the inhabitants and the purity of the water supply of the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-29; Ord. 764)  
Sec. 17-604. - Applicability of health regulations. 
All the rules and regulations of the state, county and City boards of health or health departments, and of the state commissioner of health, and of the county and City health officers respectively, now in force, are hereby extended over and shall apply and have full force and effect within the water district established and described by this chapter; and all such rules and regulations that may lawfully be made in the future shall extend over and have the same effect within such water district as within the City. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-30; Ord. 764)  
Sec. 17-605. - Caretaker. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to appoint a caretaker, whose duty it shall be to maintain complete oversight and inspection of the water district established and described by this chapter and the watershed of the City's reservoirs and shall note any violation of the rules and regulations and, also, any cases of sickness existing within such water district or upon such watershed and make report thereof to the City Manager, and he shall perform such other duties as may be required of him. The salary of such caretaker shall be fixed by the City Council. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-31; Ord. 764)  
Sec. 17-606. - Rules and regulations generally. 
The following rules and regulations of the state commissioner of health are hereby ordained and declared to be in force and effect within the water district established by this chapter: 
A.  Rule 1. No human excrement or compost containing human excrement or the content of any privy, cesspool, septic tank or other receptacle for the reception or storage of human excrement shall be deposited or discharged into or upon the ground in such water district at a point within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the high water line of a City water reservoir or within three hundred thirty (330) feet of the center of a watercourse in such district unless the natural drainage from such point is not into a water reservoir or watercourse. No privy, cesspool, septic tank, sewer or other receptacle for reception or storage of human excrement shall be erected or located within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the high water line of a City water reservoir or within three hundred thirty (330) feet from the center of any watercourse within such district unless the natural drainage therefrom is not into such reservoir or watercourse. However, a septic system approved by the Oklahoma State Department of Health may be located no closer than one hundred (100) feet of the high water line of a City water reservoir or one hundred (100) feet of the center of a watercourse in such water district; 
B.  Rule 2. No house slop, sink waste, water which has been used for washing or cooking, or other polluted water shall be discharged into the City reservoirs, or into any watercourse within such water district; and no slop, sink waste, water which has been used for washing or cooking, or other polluted water shall be discharged into or upon the ground in such water district within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the high water line of the City reservoirs, or within three hundred thirty (330) feet of the center line of any watercourse as defined and described in this chapter. However, a septic system approved by the Oklahoma State Department of Health may be located no closer than one hundred (100) feet of the high water line of a City water reservoir or one hundred (100) feet of the center of a water course in such water district; 
C.  Rule 3. No garbage, manure, or putrescible matter whatsoever shall be put into the City reservoirs or into any watercourse as defined in this chapter; and no garbage, manure or putrescible matter whatsoever shall be put upon the ground in such water district, within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the high water line of the City reservoirs, or within three hundred thirty (330) feet of the center line of any watercourse as defined in this chapter; 
D.  Rule 4. No stable, pig sty, hen house, barn house, hog yard, hitching or standing place for horses, cattle or animals, or other place where animal manure is deposited or accumulated, shall be located, constructed or maintained in such water district, any part of which is within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the high water line of such reservoirs, or within three hundred thirty (330) feet of the center line of any watercourse; except, that the construction and use of buildings, animal lots and pasture land may be permitted only by permission granted in writing by authorized representatives of the City upon the recommendation of local health authorities. Such use shall be permitted only so long as changing conditions in the opinion of local health authorities do not create a health menace; 
E.  Rule 5. No refuse, industrial waste or other waste products or polluting liquids, or other substances of a nature poisonous or injurious whether to human beings or animals, or of such nature as would impart an objectionable taste or odor to any water into which it might be discharged and no putrescible matter whatsoever shall be discharged directly into or at any place from which it may flow or be washed or carried into such reservoirs, or into any watercourse as defined in this chapter; 
F.  Rule 6. No system of sewers or other works for the collection, conveyance, disposal, or purification of domestic or manufacturing wastes, or drainage or any other putrescible matter whatsoever shall, except in accordance with plans first approved in writing by the State Health Department, be constructed or maintained at any place within the water district established by this chapter; 
G.  Rule 7. No private or separate sewers shall be constructed or maintained in such water district having an outlet upon or in the ground within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the high water line of the City reservoirs, or within three hundred thirty (330) feet of the centerline of any watercourse; 
H.  Rule 8. No public or private hospital, or other place intended for the reception or treatment of persons afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall, until the location and construction thereof have been approved in writing by the state board of health, be located or constructed at any place within the water district established by this chapter. No public or private hospital or other place intended for the reception or treatment of persons afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be maintained any place within such water district unless all the provisions required by the state board of health for the purification or disposal of sewage, drainage or other polluting or organic matter, which may be discharged therefrom, have been complied with and unless all orders issued from time to time by the state board of health, in relation to the purification and disposal of sewage, drainage and other polluting or organic matter, which may be discharged therefrom, are fully complied with; 
I.  Rule 9. No persons shall bathe in or wade or seine, or drive or put any animal into the City reservoirs, or bathe or wade in any watercourse; 
J.  Rule 10. No human habitation, cottage, tent, camping site or residence of any kind, temporary or permanent, shall hereafter be built, set up and occupied by persons within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the high water line of the City reservoirs or within three hundred thirty (330) feet of the center line of any watercourse, except at such place the natural drainage of which is not into any such reservoirs or watercourses; provided, however, that the City under the supervision of its duly constituted health officer may construct or maintain such structures within the prohibited territory as may be necessary for the protection of such reservoirs from contamination and pollution and the enforcement of the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the City and statutes of the state, relating to such water reservoirs; 
K.  Rule 11. No manufacturing establishment at which more than five (5) persons are employed, and no slaughterhouse or rendering establishment shall be located upon the watershed of the City reservoirs, unless the state board of health be first notified regarding such manufacturing establishment and consents thereto and issues a permit therefor; 
L.  Rule 12. It is hereby made the duty of all persons having any knowledge of the existence of any contagious or infectious disease, or of any nuisance or violation of the law or of these rules within the limits of the water district established by this chapter, to immediately report the same to the City Health Officer, who shall at once take such action as the case may require; 
M.  Rule 13. No gasoline drips or waste oil drips or drain pipe drips shall be allowed to be placed or used within such water district of the City, and all drips that might be located within such district shall be removed or placed in condition that they do not drain within such water district; 
N.  Rule 14. No owner or occupant of land within the water district established by this chapter shall permit the carcass or any part of any dead animal to remain on the land under his control within such district. It shall be the duty of all owners or occupants of land within such district to immediately remove all dead animals from or upon their premises to points not less than six hundred sixty (660) feet from the high water mark of any reservoir or within three hundred thirty (330) feet of the center line of any watercourse, or of any lake, pond, stream, ditch, watercourse or other body of water, the water of which flows, or may flow, directly or ultimately, into the City reservoirs; and 
O.  Rule 15. There shall be no camping within the water district established by this chapter within a distance of six hundred sixty (660) feet of the high water mark of any reservoir or within three hundred thirty (330) feet of the center line of any watercourse.  
Sec. 17-607. - Additional rules and regulations; extension of district. 
The City Council of the City may from time to time promulgate such additional rules and regulations as may be deemed advisable, by resolution duly published and served as provided by law, and may by ordinance extend, modify or change the metes and bounds of the water district established and described by this chapter so as to embrace any additional lands directly or indirectly flowing or shedding into the City's reservoir basin. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-33; Ord. 764)  
Sec. 17-608. - Burials and interments. 
No burials or interments shall be made in the water district established by this chapter, in any cemetery that may be within such water district or in any other place within such water district. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-34; Ord. 764)  
Sec. 17-609. - Pollution generally. 
No person shall permit or cause any waste matter from oil or gas wells, or any salt water, or other substance of any nature whatsoever that would pollute the water of the City reservoirs, to flow across, over, or under any land in the water district established by this chapter in such a manner that such waste matter, salt water, or other substance will flow directly or ultimately into the City reservoirs, or into any reservoir, lake, pond, stream, ditch, watercourse, or other body of water, the water of which flows or may flow directly or ultimately into the City reservoirs. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-35; Ord. 764)  
Sec. 17-610. - Violations and penalty. 
Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any of the rules and regulations set forth herein, or that may hereafter be promulgated for the water district established by this chapter, shall be punishable as prescribed by Section 1-108 of this Code. Each day's violation of any of the sections or provisions of this chapter, or of such rules and regulations, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, Sec. 30-36; Ord. 764)  
Appendix A - MASTER FEE SCHEDULE 
 
Sec. 1.1-108. - General penalty. 
The general penalty charge referenced in Section 1-108 is unless otherwise provided by state law or a specific part of the City Code, a two hundred dollar ($200.00) fine, plus court costs as set by the City. In addition, the City may make application in the prosecution of any offense for an increased or enhanced penalty upon filing of a separate information or complaint by the City Attorney, in which case said offense shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or thirty (30) days in jail, or both, plus court costs.  
Sec. 2.2-402. - Special assessment certification fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 2-402 is ten dollars ($10.00) per certification.  
Sec. 2.2-609. - Record copying fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 2-609 is twenty-five cents ($0.25) per page.  
Sec. 2.2-610. - Record mechanical reproduction fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 2-610 is the actual cost to the City of the reproduction, including cost of labor, materials and equipment.  
Sec. 2.2-611. - Record search fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 2-611 is the actual cost to the City of producing the record, including the cost of labor, materials, and equipment.  
Sec. 2.2-612. - Record prepayment fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 2-612 is the amount sufficient to cover an estimate of the cost of copying, mechanical reproduction and/or searching for the record.  
Sec. 3.3-102. - Annual alcoholic beverage occupation/business taxes. 
The fees referenced in Section 3-102.A are as follows: 
1. 	Brewer 	$1,250.00 
2. 	Distiller 	$3,125.00 
3. 	Winemaker 	$625.00 
4. 	Oklahoma Winemaker 	$75.00 
5. 	Rectifier 	$3,125.00 
6. 	Wholesaler 	$500.00 
7. 	Class B wholesaler 	$625.00 
8. 	Retail package store 	$905.00 
9. 	Mixed beverage establishment 	$1,005.00 initial 
$905.00 renewal 
10. 	Caterer 	$1,005.00 initial 
$905.00 renewal 
11. 	Special event, per day 	$55.00 
12. 	CAB; SPE — Special event 	$55.00 annual 
13. 	Public event — Annual (PEV) 	$1,005.00 per calendar year 
14. 	Public event — One time (PUE) 	$255.00 per event 
  
Sec. 3.3-104. - Code compliance certification fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 3-104 is twenty-five dollars ($25.00).  
Sec. 4.4-102. - Annual miniature pig license fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 4-102 are as follows: 
Each miniature pig tag: 	$75.00 annually 
Replacement of each lost tag: 	$5.00 each 
  
Sec. 4.4-105. - Annual animal license fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 4-105 are as follows: 
Each dog or cat — 1 year tag: 	$3.00 annually 
Each dog or cat — 3 year tag: 	$9.00 every three years 
Each with microchip — 3 year tag: 	$3.00 every three years 
Replacement of each lost tag: 	$0.50 each 
  
Sec. 4.4-110. - Animal impoundment, reclamation, and adoption fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 4-110.D and Section 4-110.E.3 are as follows: 
Impoundment fee for small animals: 	$15.00 
Impoundment fee for large animals: 	$58.00 
Daily fee for each day beginning at 12:01 a.m.: 	$5.00 
Adoption dogs/cats over 4 months of age: 	$10.00 
Adoption puppies/kittens under 4 months of age: 	$7.00 
Adoption all other animals: 	$5.00 
Rabies vaccination and sterilization: 	Actual and/or contractual cost. 
Treatment costs: 	Actual cost of treating animal. 
  
Sec. 4.4-111. - Commercial animal establishment application fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 4-111 are as follows: 
Type B permit: 	$20.00 annually 
Application processing fee: 	$20.00 
  
Sec. 4.4-114. - Outside animal agency fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 4-114 are as follows: 
Each animal impounded, per day or part thereof: 	$3.00 
Euthanasia, burning, and disposal: 	$1.00 
  
Sec. 4.4-118. - Hobbyist exemption permit fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 4-118 are as follows: 
Initial permit fee: 	$25.00 
Each subsequent renewal: 	$10.00 
  
Sec. 5.5-102. - Building permit and inspection fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 5-102 are as follows: 
Building permit fees: 
New residential and modular homes: 	$75.00 plus $5.00 per 100 square feet 
Residential addition and/or remodel: 	$75.00 plus $5.00 per 100 square feet 
Accessory building: 	$75.00 plus $5.00 per 100 square feet 
Carport, residential driveway, porch 	
or patio with roof: 	$35.00 
New commercial including non- 	
government or institution: 	$100.00 plus $7.50 per 100 square feet 
Commercial addition or remodel: 	$100.00 plus $5.50 per 100 square feet 
Swimming pools (in, above and on ground), hot tubs and spas if requiring water supply or drainage: 	$50.00 
Signs: 	$50.00 
Billboard (outdoor advertising): 	$150.00 for less than 250 square feet; 
$300.00 for 250 square feet and greater 
Demolition: 	$50.00 residential 
$100.00 commercial 	
Right-of-way permit/curb cut permit: 	$60.00 	
Sidewalk repair/replacement 	$25.00 	
Earth change: 	$30.00 	
House moving permit: 	$102.00 	
Engineering Review Fee 
(hydraulic and hydrologic): 	$500.00*** 	
Civil engineering plans: 	$500.00*** 	
Civil engineering plans and 		
Hydraulic and hydrologic plans: 
(when submitted at same time) 	$1,000.00*** 	
 
Any work begun without permit or required inspection subject to double fee amount. 
***(Fee is non-refundable and due and payable upon submittal of plans. Plans will not be submitted to reviewing engineer until all fees have been paid. Applicant is responsible and shall pay all costs for engineering review services incurred by City in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such excess costs shall be billed by City and shall be paid by Applicant within thirty (30) days of invoice. Failure to pay shall result in revocation of building permit, issuance of stop work order and shall constitute a separate violation punishable by Section 1-108 of the Sapulpa City Code.) 
Building inspection fees: 
Residential footing: 	$32.00 per inspection 
Residential slab: 	$32.00 per inspection 
Residential frame: 	$32.00 per inspection 
Residential final: 	$32.00 per inspection 
Residential reinspection (all trades): 	$32.00 per inspection 
Commercial footing: 	$40.00 per inspection 
Commercial slab: 	$40.00 per inspection 
Commercial frame: 	$40.00 per inspection 
Commercial partial wall: 	$40.00 per inspection 
Commercial partial ceiling: 	$40.00 per inspection 
Commercial final: 	$40.00 per inspection 
Commercial reinspection (all trades): 	$40.00 per inspection 
Any inspection after 5:00 p.m. or on weekends: 	$102.00 
  
Sec. 5.5-202. - Plumbing permit and inspection fees. 
The permit and inspection fees referenced in Section 5-202 are as follows: 
Residential plumbing permit fees: 
First 5 fixtures: 	$5.00 each 
Sprinkler system: 	$25.00 
Back flow preventer: 	$25.00 
Repair permit: 	$25.00 
 
Residential plumbing inspection fees: 
Rough in, top out, final: 	$25.00 each 
Sewer tap inspection: 	$30.00 
Gas pipe inspection: 	$30.00 
Water line inspection: 	$30.00 
Reinspection: 	$32.00 each 
All other inspections: 	$25.00 each 
Any inspection after 5:00 p.m. or on weekends: 	$102.00 
 
Commercial plumbing permit fees: 
First 5 fixtures: 	$37.00 each plus 
$3.50 for each additional fixture 
Back flow preventer: 	$37.00 
Fire sprinkler system: 	$37.00 
Lawn sprinkler system: 	$37.00 
Grease trap: 	$37.00 
Repair permit: 	$37.00 
Water service: 	$37.00 
 
Inspection fees: 
Rough in, top out, final: 	$37.00 each 
Sewer tap inspection: 	$37.00 
Gas piping inspection: 	$37.00 
Reinspection: 	$37.00 each 
All other inspections: 	$37.00 each 
Any inspection after 5:00 p.m. or on weekends: 	$102.00 
  
Sec. 5.5-203. - Plumbing contractor license fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 5-203 are as follows: 
Contractor: 	$125.00 
  
Sec. 5.5-302. - Electrical permit and inspection fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 5-302 are as follows: 
Residential electrical permit fees: 	$0.07 cents per square feet of building area 
Other permits: 	$27.00 
 
Residential electrical inspection fees: 
Temporary pole: 	$25.00 
Temporary to building: 	$25.00 
Permanent service: 	$25.00 
Trailer pole: 	$25.00 
Rough in, final: 	$22.00 each 
All other electrical inspection: 	$22.00 each 
Re-inspection: 	$32.00 each 
Any inspection after 5:00 p.m. or on weekends: 	$102.00 
 
Commercial electrical permit fees: 
Range: 	$37.00 
Hood: 	$37.00 
Electric circuit: 	$3.00 each 
Electric panel: 	$17.00 
Electric openings: 	$27.00 plus .50 each after 10 
Fixtures, 1—20: 	$27.00 
Fixtures, 21—50: 	$37.00 
Fixtures, 51—100: 	$57.00 
HVAC roof top unit: 	$37.00 
Transformer: 	$37.00 
Motor: 	$37.00 
Elevator: 	$37.00 
Demolition permit: 	$37.00 
Welders: 	$37.00 
Generators: 	$37.00 
Electrical sign: 	$37.00 
Other permits not listed: 	$37.00 
 
Commercial electrical inspection fees: 
Temporary service: 	$37.00 
Temporary service to building: 	$37.00 
Permanent service: 	$37.00 
Any other inspection: 	$37.00 each 
Re-inspection: 	$40.00 each 
Any inspection after 5:00 p.m. or on weekends: 	$102.00 
	
  
Sec. 5.5-303. - Electrical contractor license fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 5-303 are as follows: 
Contractor: 	$125.00 
  
Sec. 5.5-601. - Building movement permit fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 5-601 are as follows: 
Permit fee: 	$150.00 per structure 
Inspection fee: 	$50.00 per hour 
  
Sec. 5.5-702. - Mechanical permit and inspection fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 5-702 are as follows: 
Residential mechanical permit fees: 
Refrigeration units: 	$25.00 per unit 
Heating appliances: 	$25.00 per unit 
Chimney: 	$25.00 per unit 
Vents/ducts: 	$25.00 per unit 
Other permit not listed: 	$17.00 each 
 
Residential mechanical inspection fees: 
Rough in, top out, final: 	$25.00 each 
Gas piping: 	$25.00 per system 
Any other inspection: 	$25.00 
Re-inspection: 	$32.00 each 
Any inspection after 5:00 p.m. or on weekends: 	$102.00 
 
Commercial mechanical permit fees: 
Boilers: 	$37.00 per unit 
Heating appliances: 	$37.00 per unit 
Refrigeration units: 	$37.00 per unit 
Range: 	$37.00 per unit 
Hood: 	$37.00 per unit 
Vents/ducts: 	$37.00 per unit 
 
Commercial mechanical inspection fees: 
Rough in, top out, final: 	$37.00 each 
Re-inspection: 	$37.00 each 
Any other inspection: 	$40.00 each 
Any inspection after 5:00 p.m. or on weekends: 	$102.00 
  
Sec. 5.5-703. - Mechanical contractors license fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 5-703 are: 
Contractor: 	$125.00 
  
Sec. 5.5-802. - Swimming pool permit fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 5-802 are as follows: 
Permit: 	$35.00 
Inspection charge: 	$45.00 
  
Sec. 5.5-1404. - Burlary alarm user permit fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 5-1404 are as follows: 
Burglary alarm user's permit: 	$20.00 
Permit fee after expiration: 	$20.00 
  
Sec. 5.5-1406. - Alarm response fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 5-1406 are as follows: 
Fourth through fifth alarm response: 	$50.00 each 
Sixth and any additional response: 	$150.00 each 
  
Sec. 5.5-1407. - Alarm reinstatement fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 5-1407 are as follows: 
Reinstatement fee: 	$100.00 
  
Sec. 6.6-129. - Witness fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 6-129 is as follows: 
Per witness per day: 	$35.00 
  
Sec. 6.6-130. - Administrative court fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 6-130 is two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus all required state imposed charges.  
Sec. 6.6-132. - Court fines, costs and assessments. 
The fees referenced in Section 6-132 are as follows: 
A. 	Court costs: 	$35.00 per offense 
B. 	Administrative fee on deferred sentences: 	$500.00 per offense 	
C. 	Deferral fee: 	An amount equal to the maximum fine that may be imposed upon a conviction for the offense 	
D. 	Remittal to defray costs ofalcohol related enforcement: 	$50.00 per offense 	
E. 	DUI speciman collection costs: 	Actual amount incurred by the City 	
F. 	Court technology fee: 	$5.00 per offense 	
G. 	CLEET fee: 	$10.00 per offense 	
H. 	BNDE marijuana and drug paraphernalia fee: 	$5.00 per offense 	
I. 	AFIS fingerprinting fee: 	$9.00 per offense 	
J. 	Forensic science improvement assessment: 	$5.00 per offense 	
K. 	Laboratory analysis fee: 	$150.00 per offense 	
L. 	City retainage for collection of state assessments and fees: 	$0.08 of any penalty assessment or state fee 	
M. 	Incarceration costs fee: 	$27.50 per day 	
  
Sec. 7.7-101. - Returned item fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 7-101 is thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per instrument.  
Sec. 7.7-301. - Telephone exchange fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 7-301 is two (2) percent of gross revenue.  
Sec. 7.7-501. - Utility fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 7-501 is two (2) percent of gross revenue.  
Sec. 7.7-606. - Hotel/motel tax. 
The fee referenced in Section 7-606 is five (5) percent of gross revenue.  
Sec. 7.7-702. - Convenience fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 7-702 is two dollars and seventy-five cents ($2.75) per electronic and e-commerce transaction.  
Sec. 8.8-701. - Tobacco use in City parks prohibited. 
The fee referenced in Section 8-701 is ten dollars ($10.00) plus costs, fees, and assessments. 
Any second or subsequent conviction shall be punished by imposition of a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus costs, fees, and assessments.  
Sec. 9.9-101. - Occupational license fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 9-101 are as follows: 
Food service establishment: 	Thirty-five dollars ($35.00) annually upon production of affidavit from county health department 
Billiard/pool hall: 	$50.00 annually 
Auctioneer: 	$50.00 annually 
Any other trade, profession or occupation: 	$15.00 annually 
Duplicate/replacement: 	$5.00 each 
  
Sec. 9.9-206. - License application fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-206 is fifty dollars ($50.00) per application.  
Sec. 9.9-210. - License fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 9-210 are: 
30 day license 	$50.00 each 
60 day license 	$75.00 each 
90 day license 	$100.00 each 
  
Sec. 9.9-215. - Renewal fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-215 is fifty dollars ($50.00) per renewal license.  
Sec. 9.9-302. - Amusement or coin-operated device fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-302 is thirty-seven dollars ($37.50) per device, or as allowed by state law, with no proration of the amount referenced as due.  
Sec. 9.9-306. - Operation without decal fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-306 is the charge due under Section 9-304 plus: 
Penalty 	$50.00 
  
Sec. 9.9-408. - Taxicab license fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-408 are as follows: 
Per vehicle: 	$25.00 plus 
Non-refundable application Fee 	$10.00 due at the time of submitting the application. 
  
Sec. 9.9-413. - Taxicab operator license fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-413 is 
Operator License Fee: 	$15.00 plus 
Non-refundable Processing Fee: 	$10.00 due at the time of submitting the application. 
  
Sec. 9.9-416. - Taxicab operator license replacement fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-416 is five dollars ($5.00) per replacement.  
Sec. 9.9-606. - Youth recreational facility application fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-606 is twenty-five dollars ($25.00).  
Sec. 9.9-611. - Youth recreational facility license fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-611 is one hundred dollars ($100.00) annually from the date of issuance.  
Sec. 9.9-704. - Massage license fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 9-704 are as follows: 
Application processing fee: 	$25.00 per establishment; 
$15.00 per person 
Annual license fees: 	$100.00 massage establishment 
$50.00 outcall massage service 
$25.00 massage technician 
$15.00 massage apprentice 
  
Sec. 9.9-802. - Wholesale fireworks license fees. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-802 is: 
January 1 through December 31 	$750.00 per location per year 
  
Sec. 9.9-803. - Retail fireworks license fees. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-803 is: 
June15 through July 6: 	$500.00 per location each year 
December 15 through 31st: 	$500.00 per location each year 
  
Sec. 9.9-804. - Firework discharge permit. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-804 is twenty dollars ($20.00) per location.  
Sec. 9.9-1008. - Application fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-1008 is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per application.  
Sec. 9.9-1010. - Approved license fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 9-1010 are as follows: 
90 day license: 	$10.00 
180 day license: 	$15.00 
Annual license: 	$20.00 
  
Sec. 9.9-1304. - Permit application fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 9-1304.C is a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the application and issuance of permit.  
Sec. 11.11-107. - Park and recreational activity fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 11-107 are as follows: 
Picnic shelter reservation fees: 
Single family or 24 people or less: 	$25.00 sunrise to sunset 
Multiple family or 25 or more people: 	$50.00 sunrise to sunset 
Business or 50 or more people: 	$100.00 sunrise to sunset 
 
Building and other rentals: 
BTW Rec. Center: 	$50.00 cleaning deposit which may be returned, plus $15.00 per hour for gym; 
	$12.50 per hour for meeting rooms, lounge and kitchen; 
	$20.00 per hour staff fee for any rental during non-operating hours. 
	During the youth basketball season of January through March an admissions fee of $1.00 per person will be charged to anyone 12 years of age or older for entry into the sporting event held at BTW Recreation Center, Sapulpa, Oklahoma. All persons under the age of 12 will be admitted at no charge. 
Sr. citizen center: 	$37.50 per hour with a 2-hour minimum. 
Entire building rental: 	$250.00 per day plus 
$20.00 per hour staff fee for any rental during non-operating hours. 
Bleacher rentals: 	$50.00 deposit which may be returned plus 
$30.00 per day for 3 row set, or 
$50.00 per day for 5 row set. 
8-foot banquet tables: 	$5.00 per table per day. 
Folding chairs: 	$1.00 each per day. 
RV space: 	$300 per month; 
$12.00 per day; 
$10.00 per day senior rate. 
 
Sapulpa Aquatics Center fees: 
General admission fees: 
Daily admission (ages 4 and up) 	$4.00 
Twilight swim — (ages 4 and up; 
 5:00—6:00 p.m. daily, 7:00—8:00 p.m. on Thursdays) 	$3.00 
Groups of 100 or more during normal operating hours 
 (Fee per swimmer) 	$3.00 
Lap swim (per visit) 	$3.00 
Youth learn to swim lessons 
 (Per child per session) 	$40.00 
Early bird rate if purchased between March 18—April 30 
 (Per child per session) 	$35.00 
 
Sessions are two (2) weeks in length. Classes are held four (4) days per week. Each child lesson is forty (40) minutes in length. 
Locker rentals 	$1.00 plus $1.00 key rental 
(Key deposit refundable when locker key returned) 
 
Season passes: 
Individual season pass (ages 4 and older) 	$100.00 
Early bird rate (March 18—April 30) 	$90.00 
Family of 4 season pass 	$200.00 
Early bird rate (March 18—April 30) 	$180.00 
Each additional family member 	$25.00 
Lap swimming season pass 	$50.00 
Early bird rate (March 18—April 30) 	$40.00 or $4.00/visit 
Youth organization season swim pass 	$75.00 
 
Youth organization shall be defined as 501(c)3 non-profit with a mission of serving "at risk" youth population with an emphasis on abused and/or homeless children in the custody of the State of Oklahoma. Children must be under the age of eighteen (18) and must be accompanied by organization supervisor, counselor, etc. All accompanying adults admitted with regular four dollar ($4.00) daily admission fee. 
Group rentals: All fees are due at the time of reservation. No Refunds will be given for cancellations made less than seventy-two (72) hours in advance. Pool concessions may be open upon request. Group catering options are also available. Group facility rentals are scheduled after public swim hours. Staffing will vary based on the size of the rental party and shall be adjusted to accommodate the participant safety level mandates. 
Small group —Groups up to 50 people 	$150.00 per hour; 2 hour minimum 
Medium group —Groups 51—100 people 	$250.00 per hour; 2 hour minimum 
Large group —Groups 101—200 people 	$450.00 per hour; 2 hour minimum 
Business/corp —Groups 201 to 404 people 	$750.00 Per hour; 2 hour minimum 
 
As facility rentals are not considered to be the "primary purpose" of the Sapulpa Aquatics Center facility, a premium pricing schedule for this service has been designed to cover all operational costs and earn a profit. All facility rentals are by advance reservation. Advance payment of fees are required. No refunds will be given for cancellations made less than seventy-two (72) hours in advance. Pool Concessions may be open. Group catering options are also available. Group facility rentals are scheduled after public swim hours. Staffing will vary based on the size of the rental party and shall be adjusted to accommodate the participate safety level mandates. 
Birthday party package: All fees are due at the time of reservation. The birthday party package includes the four dollar ($4.00) gate admission for children and adults. Birthday parties are allowed to bring in a birthday or celebration cake. No other outside food or drinks are allowed. A party reservation is required in order to bring in a birthday cake. Fee includes a slice of pizza or nachos or a hot dog, a drink, and an ice cream bar for all children. All birthday parties are made by advance reservation. No refunds will be given for cancellations made less than seventy-two (72) hours in advance. (Two (2) hour time limit) 
Up to 10 children: 	$150.00 
Each additional child: 	$15.00 
Up to 30 children: 	$300.00 
East additional child: 	$10.00 
  
Sec. 11.11-308. - Cemetery service fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 11-308 are as follows: 
Chapel fee for burial in a City-owned cemetery: 	$75.00 
Chapel fee for burial in a Non-City-owned cemetery: 	$150.00 
  
Sec. 11.11-334. - Lot or grave space price schedule. 
The fees referenced in Section 11-334 are: 
Adult space: 	$475.00 
Child space: 	$200.00 
Lot transfer fee: 	$10.00 
  
Secs. 11.11-371/11-373. - Internment fees. 
The fees referenced in Sections 11-371 and 11-373 are as follows: 
Adult space burial: 	$425.00 Monday through Friday prior to 4:00 p.m.; 
$675.00 Saturday, Sunday, City holiday or any day after 4:00 p.m. 
Child space burial: 	$400.00 Monday through Friday prior to 4:00 p.m.; 
$650.00 Saturday, Sunday, City holiday or any day after 4:00 p.m. 
Cremation: 	$200.00 Monday through Friday prior to 4:00 p.m.; 
$350.00 Saturday, Sunday, City holiday or any day after 4:00 p.m. 
Disinternment: 	$500.00 Monday through Friday prior to 4:00 p.m.; 
$1,000.00 Saturday, Sunday, City holiday or any day after 4:00 p.m. 
Reinternment: 	$650.00 Monday through Friday prior to 4:00 p.m.; 
$750.00 Saturday, Sunday, City holiday or any day after 4:00 p.m. 
  
Sec. 11.11-402.B.3. - Camping permit fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 11-402.B.3 are: 
Each tent campsite: 	$6.00 per day. 
Each camper and/or recreational vehicle: 	$350.00 per month, or $12.00 per day. 
Senior citizen discount: 	$10.00 per day, limit 1 per campsite. 
  
Sec. 11.11-415. - Hunting permit fees. 
The fee referenced in Section 11-415 is: 
Annual hunting permit: 	$10.00 plus tax per year. 
  
Sec. 11.11-428. - Fishing permit fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 11-428 are as follows: 
General fishing permit: 	$10.00 plus tax per year; or $2.00 plus tax daily, ages 17—64. 
Trout fishing permit: 	$15.00 plus tax — Regular season permit, ages 17—64. 
	$10.00 plus tax — Special season permit. Available to persons 9—16 years of age; 65 years or older; or with a disability or receiving SSI benefits. 
Family season permit: 	$25.00 plus tax. Must be purchased at the Lake Sahoma Bait and Concessions Store only. 
	$5.00 plus tax Daily Permit (valid on day purchased only). Ages 9 and older. 
	Children 8 years and younger—Free. 
Catfish fishing permit: 	$15.00 plus tax — Regular season permit, ages 17—64. 
	$10.00 plus tax — Special season permit. 
	Available to persons 9—16 years of age; 
	65 years or older; or with a disability or receiving SSI benefits. 
	$25.00 plus tax — Family season permit. Must be purchased at the Lake Sahoma Bait and Concessions Store Only. 
	Children 8 years and younger — Free. 
	$5.00 plus tax daily permit (valid on day purchased only). Ages 9 and older. 
	Children 8 years and younger — Free. 
  
Sec. 11.11-505. - Green fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 11-505 are as follows: 
Monday through Friday: 	18 holes at $19.00 (tax included), plus additional holes played on same day charged at twilight rate. 
Saturday, Sunday and 
City observed holidays: 	18 holes at $25.00 (tax included), plus additional holes played on same day charged at twilight rate. 
Twilight play: 	18 holes at $15.00 (tax included), for holes played after 4:00 p.m. between April 1 through September 30 and after 1:00 p.m. between October 1 through March 30. 
Senior rates: 	18 holes at $12.00 (tax included) for citizens 55 years of age or older; senior rate also applicable on weekends and holidays after twilight time. 
Junior rates: 	18 holes at $8.00 (tax included) for citizens 16 to18 years of age; junior rate also applicable on weekends and holidays after twilight time. 
Youth rates: 	18 holes at $8.00 (tax included) for citizens 15 years of age and under; youth rate also applicable on weekends and holidays after twilight time. 
City employee rate: 	18 holes at $10.00 (tax included) for all full time City employees and active auxiliary police on Monday through Friday, and on weekends and holidays after specified twilight time. 
Lifetime permits: 	None; however, existing lifetime permits honored. 
Golf carts: 	$12.00 per person (tax included) per 18 holes weekday rate; $12.00 per person (tax included) per 18 holes per weekend and holiday rate. 
Trail fees: 	$10.50 (tax included) on weekends for 18 holes for individuals owning valid annual player's card; $11.50 (tax included) on weekends for 18 holes for individuals owning valid annual player's card. 
Pull carts: 	$3.00 (tax included) for 18 holes. 
Other discounts: 	As may be authorized by the City Manager and Golf Superintendent. 
Driving range fees: 	Annual Membership: $300.00 (tax included). 
Bucket of balls: 	$3.00 each (tax included). 
 
Ten (10) percent of all driving range revenues shall be deposited into the designated golf course improvement fund. Other driving range fee specials and discounts are permissible as may be allowed and authorized by the City Manager and superintendent of golf. 
Establishment of a yearly golf membership. The Golf Course Committee has recommended the City establish and implement an annual golf membership with the dues set out as follows: 
Individual memberships: 
Senior walking only 	$400.00 — Monday thru Friday 
All other patrons 	$500.00 — Monday thru Friday 
$750.00 — 7 days per week 
Green fees w/cart 	$1,100.00 — Monday thru Friday 
Green fees w/cart 	$1,500.00 — 7 days per week 
 
All individual memberships shall include range balls and a ten (10) percent discount for purchased at the golf pro shop on selected items. 
Corporate memberships: Corporate members shall be entitled to maintain an unlimited number of members on a corporate membership account with the initial executive membership not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per year and each respective membership in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per member per year. Each membership is entitled to be accompanied by up three (3) guests on any one (1) day. Each guest shall be responsible for green fees only charged and collected by the City. The executive membership shall not be subject to a golf cart fee. 
All corporate memberships shall include unlimited number of range balls and a ten (10) percent discount for purchased at the golf pro shop on merchandise available. 
Family memberships: Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) annually, includes golf cart. A second cart may be rented at half the actual full rental price. 
Wednesday special: A "Wednesday Special" shall be available for anyone wishing to play on Wednesday only for a rate of nineteen dollars ($19.00) per person, inclusive of a golf cart rental. Separate changes shall be due for range ball equipment. 
Fifteen (15) percent of the revenue from all annual membership fees shall be deposited into the designated golf course improvement fund.  
Sec. 12.12-203. - Miscellaneous planning/administration fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 12-203 are as follows: 
Amendments submitted to a PUD or plat not requiring Planning Commission approval (including site plans, road plans, grading plans, landscape plans etc): 	$25.00 each 
 
Zoning change applications to SMAPC: 
AG, RE, RS-1, RS-2 or RS-3: 	$150.00 + $2.00 for each acre over 10; $300.00 maximum 
RD, RMH-1, RMH-2, RMT, RM-1,RM-2: 	$150.00 + $5.00 for each acre over 10; $700.00 maximum 
OL, OM, CS, CG, CBD, IR, IL, or IH: 	$350.00 + $10.00 for each acre over 10; $800.00 maximum 
PUD: 	$150.00 + $1.00 for each acre over 10; no maximum 
300 foot list: 	Actual cost of mailing, plus $30.00 for notice preparation 
Legal notice fee: 	Actual cost of publication 
Special exceptions: 	$170.00 plus actual cost of mailing and publication 
Variances: 	$170.00 plus actual cost of mailing and publication 
Zoning change publication fee: 	Actual cost of publication 
Zoning or floodplain verification letter: 	$10.00 
Process request to re-open/close street/easement: 	$250.00 each 
  
Sec. 12.12-304.D. - Alternative compliance fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 12-304.D is fifty dollars ($50.00).  
Sec. 12.12-416. - Plat review filing and lot split fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 12-416 are as follows: 
Sketch plat filing: 	$50.00 
Preliminary plat filing: 	$100.00 
Final plat filing: 	$150.00 
PUD: 	$100.00 
Non-floodplain commercial industrial development: 	$150.00 
Comm./indus. additions: 	$95.00 
Lot split: 	$45.00 
Site preparation permit: 	$50.00 
Subdivision road grading permit: 	$50.00 
Sediment/erosion control permit: 	$75.00 
  
Sec. 12.12-439. - Park and recreation development fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 12-439 are as follows: 
Single-family dwelling: 	$125.00, plus $25.00 per bedroom 
Duplex dwelling: 	$150.00, plus $25.00 per bedroom 
Multi-family unit: 	$200.00 per dwelling unit 
Mobile/Manufactured home: 	$200.00 per lot or space 
  
Sec. 12.12-514.B. - Development permit fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 12-514.B is one hundred dollars ($100.00).  
Sec. 12.12-617. - Gated community registration fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 12-617 is fifty dollars ($50.00).  
Sec. 12.12-804.B. - Fees for permit. 
The fees referenced in Section 12-804.B are as follows: 
Application fee 	$170.00 
Processing fee 	$30.00 
  
Sec. 13.13-111. - Controlled burn permit. 
The fee referenced in Section 13.13-111 is as follows: 
Non-commercial residential burn: 	$20.00 each 
Commercial pit burn: 	$200.00 each 
  
Sec. 13.13-203.A. - Hazardous materials cleanup fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 13-203.A are the actual cost of cleanup.  
Sec. 13.13-203.G. - Hazardous materials report fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 13-203.G is thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per report.  
Sec. 13.13-205. - Rescue and recovery fees. 
The fee referenced in Section 13-205 is $700.00 per hour with one (1) hour minimum.  
Secs. 13.13-207/13-208. - Outside fire run fees. 
The fees referenced in Sections 13-207 and 13-208 are as follows: 
A.  Six hundred seventy-five dollars ($675.00) per hour for each piece of apparatus, with minimum one hour billed; thereafter one hundred sixty-eight dollars and seventy-five cents ($168.75) per one-quarter (¼) hour of each piece of apparatus. 
B.  In lieu of this charge, an owner or resident may contract for services from the fire department on an annual basis as set forth as follows: 
1. Residential/commercial: 	$200.00 
2. Industrial rate: 	2,000 square feet and under: 	$600.00 
	2,000 square feet to 7,500 square feet: 	$1,200.00 
	Each additional 5,000 square feet: 	$600.00 
 
   [Rates above applicable to each structure on property up to maximum of $5,000.00 per business.] 
3. Mobile home park: 	Each occupied space: 	$150.00 
4. Unimproved land: 	Single parcel: 	$150.00 
 
[Provided that any outside fire run to property owned by a public agency without a mutual aid agreement with the City shall be charged at a rate of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per run.] 
( Ord. No. 2829 , § 1, 11-4-2019)  
Sec. 13.13-322. - Emergency telephone fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 13.13-322.A are as follows: 
Existing tariff rate: 	5% of the tariff rate or as otherwise authorized by state law 
No existing tariff rate: 	Rate as set by Council Resolution or as otherwise allowed by state law. 
 
The fees referenced in Section 13.13-322.B are as follows: 
Fifty cents ($0.50) per telephone line or as otherwise authorized by state law.  
Sec. 14.14-103. - Sidewalk sale permit fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 14-103 are as follows: 
72 hour permit: 	$25.00 each 
Annual permit: 	$100.00 each 
  
Sec. 14.14-202. - Paving or curb cut permit fees. 
The fee referenced in Section 14-202 are as follows: 
Curb cut: 	$60.00 (includes tear out and finish inspection) 
Driveway install/replacement: 	$60.00 (includes tear out and finish inspection) 
Street cut: 	$2.00 per square foot with $200.00 minimum (includes base and overlay inspection) 
Any re-inspection: 	$35.00 each 
Any inspection after 5:00 p.m. or on weekends: 	$102.00 
  
Sec. 14.14-410. - Sediment/erosion control permit fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 14-410 are as follows: 
Sediment and erosion control permit fees: 	$25.00 less than 1 acre; $75.00 otherwise. 
  
Sec. 14.14-414. - Stormwater management fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 14-414 are as follows: 
Stormwater utility fees: 
Single-family dwelling: 	$4.15 per month each 
Any structure other than single-family dwelling: 	The greater of $3.51 per month for each equivalent service unit or $28.09 per month, but in no event more than $1,000 per month. 
  
Sec. 15.15-305. - Oversize load permit fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 15-305 are as follows: 
Annual permit 	$300.00 
Per load: 	$40.00 
  
Sec. 15.15-555. - Texting while driving fine. 
The fine referenced in Section 15-555 is as follows: 
A fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding costs, fees and assessments for each offense.  
Sec. 15.15-730. - Two hour parking violation fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 15-730 are as follows: 
Ten dollar ($10.00) fee per violation if paid or cash bond posted within five (5) business days of issuance; 
Twenty dollar ($20.00) fee per violation if paid or cash bond posted after five (5) business days but within twenty (20) business days of issuance; 
Forty dollar ($40.00) fee per violation if paid or cash bond posted after twenty (20) business days of issuance.  
Sec. 15.15-731. - Parking fees and immobilization fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 15-731 are as follows: 
Five dollars ($5.00) fee for violation of two (2) hour free parking; 
Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) fee for immobilization charge.  
Sec. 17.17-104. - Sewer connection permit fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 17-104.A are as follows: 
Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each residential tap or connection. 
One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each commercial or non-residential tap or connection.  
Sec. 17.17-104.E.1. - Calculation of sewer system extension fee and sewer system development fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 17-104.E.1 are as follows: 
Expansion District: 	Extension Fee: 
per Acre/per Eq. L. U. 	Development Fee: 
per Acre/per Eq. L. U. 
Nickel Creek Basin 	$3,329.00/$1,791.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
Polecat Creek East Basin 	$2,482.00/$1,232.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
Polecat Creek West Basin 	$2,595.00/$1,136.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
Elementary School 
East Basin 	$1,748.00/$874.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
Elementary School 
West Basin 	$1,748.00/$874.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
Anderson Creek Basin 	$3,766.00/$1,800.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
Pretty Water Basin 	$2,482.00/$1,232.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
Frankoma Basin 	$1,748.00/$874.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
Indian Mission North Basin 	$4,020.00/$1,853.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
Indian Mission West Basin 	$2,962.00/$1,346.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
Bivin Creek Basin 	$2,045.00/$953.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
Southeast Basin 	$2,307.00/$1,031.00 	$1,503.00/$725.00 
 
(The costs provided above shall be adjusted to the current Engineering News Record, Construction Cost Index (ENR CCI) at the time of payment. As a baseline value, the current ENR CCI is 10878, updated 2018.) 
(Ord. 2691, 02/03/2014)  
Sec. 17.17-112. - Tampering fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 17-112 is one hundred dollars ($100.00) per occurrence.  
Sec. 17.17-202. - Water rates within City. 
The schedule of monthly rates referenced in Section 17-202 are as follows: 
Residential users within Creek County: 
Base rate (min. charge) 	$8.74 
Per 1,000 gallons 	$5.73 
 
Commercial users within Creek County: 
Base rate (min. charge) 	$13.05 
Up to 4,000,000 gallons 	$5.73 per 1,000 gal 
Over 4,000,000 gallons 	$5.16 per 1,000 gal 
 
Residential users within Tulsa County: 
Base rate (min. charge) 	$28.85 
Per 1,000 gallons 	6.90 
 
Commercial users within Tulsa County: 
Base rate (min. charge) 	$28.85 
Up to 4,000,000 gallons 	$6.90 per 1,000 gal 
Over 4,000,000 gallons 	$6.22 per 1,000 gal 
	
Bulk Water base rate (min. charge) 	$25.00 
Bulk Water rate: 	$3.21 per 1,000 gal 
 
Construction meter rate: 	$750.00 deposit, plus $5.00 per day rental plus usage charged at applicable commercial; Deposit refunded if meter returned in same condition as delivered. 
 
(Ord. 2796, 06/04/2018)  
Sec. 17.17-203. - Water rates outside City. 
The schedule for monthly rates referenced in Section 17-203 is as follows: 
Residential: 	Base rate (min. charge) 	$21.47 
	Per 1,000 gallons 	$11.46 
Commercial: 	Base rate (min. charge) 	$30.11 
	Up to 4,000,000 gallons 	$11.46 per 1,000 gallons 
 
(Ord. 2796, 06/04/2018)  
Sec. 17.17-204. - Schedule of minimum charges. 
The schedule of minimum charges referenced in Section 17-204 is as follows: 
The minimum charge fixed in Sections 17.17-202 and 17.17-203 is based upon the use of water through a five-eights inch water connection. An additional minimum charge for larger connections shall apply to all users of water as set forth as follows: 
Inside City limits within Creek County: 
1" 	$1.25 
1½" connection 	$2.91 
2" connection 	$4.58 
3" connection 	$6.25 
4" connection 	$9.58 
6" connection 	$14.57 
 
Inside City limits within Tulsa County: 
1" connection 	$2.49 
1½" connection 	$5.80 
2" connection 	$9.12 
3" connection 	$12.43 
4" connection 	$19.06 
6" connection 	$29.00 
 
Outside City limits: 
1" connection 	$2.50 
1½" connection 	$5.83 
2" connection 	$9.16 
3" connection 	$12.49 
4" connection 	$19.15 
6" connection 	$29.13 
 
Bulk water rate: 	$2.71/1,000 gallons 
Rural water district rate 	$2.71/1,000 gallons 
Construction meter rate: 	$750.00 deposit, plus $5.00/day rental, plus usage charged at commercial rate for inside City limits; deposit refunded if meter returned in same condition as delivered. 
  
Sec. 17.17-206. - Water connection charges. 
The connection charges referenced in Section 17-206 are as follows: 
Installation of a 5/8 " meter including all charges for labor, materials, and equipment. 	$750.00 
Installation of a 1" meter including all charges for labor, materials, and equipment. 	$1,250.00 
Installation of a 2" meter including all charges for labor, materials, and equipment. 	$2,000.00 
Meter larger than 2". 
Contractor is responsible for installation, materials, and equipment charges. 	$1,000.00 tap fee plus actual cost of meter. 
Tap for fire suppression, commercial or residential line.Contractor is responsible for installation, materials, and equipment charges. 	$1,000.00 tap fee. 
  
Sec. 17.17-207. - Requested turn-on and turn-off charges. 
The fee referenced in Section 17-207 is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per cut-on and/or per cut-off.  
Sec. 17.17-209. - Delinquent turn-off charge. 
The fee referenced in Section 17-209 is twenty-five dollars ($25.00).  
Sec. 17.17-210. - Monthly bookkeeping charge. 
The fee referenced in Section 17-210 is five dollars ($5.00) per month.  
Sec. 17.17-211. - Rereads. 
The fee referenced in Section 17-211 is: 
Twenty dollars ($20.00) per reread which does not reflect a reading error.  
Sec. 17.17-222. - Sewage disposal charges. 
The fees referenced in Section 17-222 are as follows: 
Residential users inside City limits within Creek County: 
Nineteen dollars and seventy-seven cents ($19.77) minimum per month, plus two dollars and ninety-five cents ($2.95**) per thousand gallons of water use. 
Residential users outside City limits within Creek County: 
Thirty-nine dollars and fifty-three cents ($39.53) minimum per month, plus five dollars and forty-six cents ($5.46**) per thousand gallons of water use. 
Commercial users inside City limits within Creek County: 
Thirty-nine dollars and fifty-three cents ($39.53) minimum per month, plus two dollars and ninety-five cents ($2.95**) per thousand gallons of water use. 
Commercial users outside City limits within Creek County: 
Seventy-nine dollars and ten cents ($79.10) minimum per month, plus five dollars and forty-six cents ($5.46**) per thousand gallons of water use up to five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons; then two dollars and eighty-eight cents ($2.88**) per thousand gallons over five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons of water use. 
Residential and commercial users inside City limits within Tulsa County: 
Sixty-nine dollars and seventy-six cents ($69.76) minimum per month, plus eight dollars and seventy-six cents ($8.76**) per thousand gallons of water use. 
Sewage district treatment rates: 
Three dollars and seventy cents ($3.70**) per thousand gallons. 
**These usage rate amounts shall each increase by twenty cents ($0.20) annually in FY 20/21, FY 21/22, and FY 22/23. 
(Ord. 2796, 06/04/2018; Ord. No. 2815 , § 1, 6-17-2019)  
Sec. 17.17-302. - Pretreatment permit fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 17-302 are as follows: 
Categorical significant user: 	Undetermined 
Non-categorical significant user: 	$500.00 annual permit fee, plus $250.00 per month 
Industrial user: 	$100.00 annual permit fee, plus $30.00 per month 
Septic sewage truck: 	$100.00 per 1,000 gallons and each overage or fraction less than 1,000 gallons Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.; and 
$150.00 per 1,000 gallons and each overage or fraction less than 1,000 gallons at all other times. 
 
(Ord. 2783, 09/18/2017)  
Sec. 17.17-326. - Pop-off device installation fee. 
The fee and charges referenced in Section 17-326 is thirty dollars ($30.00) per device installed, said fee to be collected prior to installation and/or charged and assessed against the owner's utility account. 
(Ord. 2687, 08/05/2013)  
Sec. 17.17-401. - Septic tank license fee. 
The fee referenced in Section 17-401 is fifty dollars ($50.00), annually.  
Sec. 17.17-403. - Septic tank installation permit fee. 
The fees referenced in Section 17-403 is thirty-five dollars ($35.00).  
Sec. 17.17-407. - Storm water hauler fees. 
The fees referenced in Section 17-407 are as follows: 
Significant industries: 	$500.00 annual permit, plus $250.00 per month service fee, plus $200.00 deposit with utility department and $50.00 per dump fee or $.01 per gallon per dump fee, whichever is greater. 
  
Sec. 17.17-511. - Refuse collection rates and charges. 
The fees referenced in Section 17-511 are as follows: 
Service Type 	Monthly Fee 
Residential at curb side or alley: 	$11.16 
Residential senior citizen curbside: 	$10.16 
Service outside City limits: 	$18.79 
Residential physically challenged 	$11.16 
carry-out service: 	
Residential senior citizen special needs: 	$25.27 
Residential special carry-out service: 	$26.34 
Additional containers: 	$8.70 per container 
 
Commercial rate: Per container size according to following chart: 
Container 	Number of pick ups 
Size 	yd 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	Extra p/u 
96 gal 	Polycart 	$16.74 						
	2 	$57.50 	$95.50 	$128.17 	$148.07 	$171.91 	$195.22 	$35.89 
	3 	$76.31 	$122.81 	$155.00 	$198.21 	$241.05 	$277.14 	$44.86 
	4 	$80.95 	$148.47 	$204.40 	$256.95 	$313.00 	$430.56 	$51.28 
	6 	$112.56 	$210.65 	$289.77 	$372.16 	$453.97 	$533.54 	$62.81 
	8 	$139.13 	$271.89 	$377.28 	$486.38 	$595.70 	$704.27 	$74.34 
 
Locks for lids: 	$11.87 per dumpster per month. 
Senior citizen discount: 	$1.00 per month upon presentation of legal certification of age 65 or older. 
Replacement cart deposit: 	$95.83 if issued cart is lost, stolen or damaged; refunded if original cart located and/or returned to satisfactory working condition. 
 
(Ord. 2727, 06/01/2015; Ord 2796, 06/04/2018)  
Sec. 17.17-531. - Convenience station fees and charges. 
The fees referenced in Section 17-531 are as follows: 
Base Fees: 
Minimum charge 	$5.00 
Passenger car 	$10.00 
Station wagon, Van 	$15.00 
Pickup truck *short bed (6 feet), no side boards 	$20.00 
Pickup truck *short bed with side boards 	$30.00 
Pickup truck *long bed (8 feet), no side boards 	$25.00 
Pickup truck *long bed with side boards 	$35.00 
Single axle trailer 	$20.00 
 
Additional fees: 
Appliances with motor remove, each 	$10.00 
Furniture, couch, chair, love seat, each 	$10.00 
Stoves, water heaters, each 	$10.00 
Mattress, box springs, each 	$10.00 
Sofa bed, hide-a-bed, each 	$15.00 
Rugs, padding, must be rolled and tied secured 
(*attendant discretion based on size) 	$10.00—$20.00 
Televisions, computer monitors, each 	$10.00 
Bulky items, each 	$10.00 
Assorted household items (**as defined below) 	$10.00 
 
* Doors must be removed from refrigerators and furniture must be disassembled. 
** Assorted household items, lamps, tables bookshelves, lawn furniture, dishes, pots/pans, etc. (as designated by the attendant).  
Appendix B - COURT FINES, COSTS, FEES AND BOND AMOUNTS 
CODE OFFENSE 	FINE 	COURT 
COST 	CITY- 
STATE 
FEE 	BOND 
Allow/Encourage Minor Commit Offense: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Assault and Battery: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Assault on Police Officer: 	$750.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$815.00 
Commit Crime in Presence of Minor: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Contribute to Delinquency: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Cruelty to Animals: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Destruction of Private/City Property: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Disorderly Conduct: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Eluding/Attempt to Elude: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Escape/Attempt to Escape: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Failure to Appear: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Failure to Control Minor: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Furnishing Minor with Tobacco: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Furnishing Minor with Beer/Alcohol: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Gambling Offenses: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Gasoline Theft: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Harboring Vicious Animal: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Indecent Exposure: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Interfering with Police Officer: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Library Warrants: 	$50.00 	$35.00 	$0.00 	$85.00 
Liquor Offenses (after hours): 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Possession of CDS: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Minor in Poss. Beer/Alcohol: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Parent Allowing Curfew Offense: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Permit Crime/Disorder by Minor: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Petit Larceny: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Possession Firearm on Person: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Possession Drug Paraphernalia: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Possession of Marijuana: 	$400.00 	$35.00 	$35.00 	$470.00 
Refuse Compel School Attendance: 	$350.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$415.00 
Resisting Arrest: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Selling Beer to a Minor: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Unlawful Carry Weapon 
(other than firearm in vehicle): 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Vicious Dog: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
 
TRAFFIC OFFENSE 	FINE 	COURT 
COST 	CITY- 
STATE 
FEE 	BOND 
Careless Driving: 	$350.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$415.00 
Improper Transport of Firearm: 	$70.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$135.00 
DUS 1st Offense: 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 
DUS 2nd Offense: 	$350.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$415.00 
DUS 3rd or More: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
DUR 1st Offense: 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 
DUR 2nd or More: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Eluding/Attempt to Elude Police: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Failure to Restrain Child: 	$50.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$115.00 
Failure to use Seatbelt: 	$5.00 	$15.00 	$0.00 	$20.00 
Failure to Yield (no collision): 	$50.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$115.00 
Failure to Yield (collision): 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
FTY Emerg. Vehicle (no collision): 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
FTY Emerg. Vehicle (collision): 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Improper Follow Emerg. Vehicle: 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 
Leaving Scene of Accident: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
No Insurance 1st Offense: 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
No Insurance 2nd Offense: 	$150.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$215.00 
No Insurance 3rd or More Offense: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
No DL Issued: 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 
Violation of DL Restriction: 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
Passing Loading/Unloading School bus: 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
Passing in School Zone: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 
Reckless Driving: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 
Texting While Driving: 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
T.O.C. Beer/Alcohol: 	$500.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$565.00 

Speeding Offenses: 
1—10 over 	$50.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$115.00 
11—15 over 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
16—20 over 	$150.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$215.00 
21 plus over 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 

Speeding in School Zone: 
1—10 over 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
11 over plus 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 

Speeding in Construction Zone: 
1—10 over 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
11 over plus 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 

Traffic Control Device Offenses: 
Stop Sign (no collision): 	$50.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$115.00 
Stop Sign with collision: 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 
Other Device (no collision): 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
Any Device with collision: 	$250.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$315.00 

Parking Violations: 
Parking in Handicapped Space: 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$0.00 	$135.00 
Parking in Fire Lane/Zone: 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$0.00 	$135.00 
Other Violation: 	$20.00 	$35.00 	$0.00 	$55.00 

Other City offenses not listed: 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 

Vehicle Offenses: 
Defective Vehicle 	$35.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$100.00 
Expired Tag (60 days or less): 	$50.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$115.00 
Expired Tag (120 days or less): 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
Expired Tag (121 days plus): 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 
Fail Pay Taxes (60 days or less): 	$50.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$115.00 
Fail Pay Taxes (120 days or less): 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
Fail Pay Taxes (121 days plus): 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 
Improper Tag (60 days or less): 	$50.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$115.00 
Improper Tag (120 days or less): 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
Improper Tag (121 days plus): 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 

Code Enforcement Offenses: 
High Grass, Junk, Trash (1st offense): 	$50.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$115.00 
High Grass, Junk, Trash (2nd offense): 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
High Grass, Junk, Trash (3rd or more): 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 
Sign Violation: 	$100.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$165.00 
Other Code Violation: 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 
				
Any Other Offense Not Listed: 	$200.00 	$35.00 	$30.00 	$265.00 
  
Appendix C - LIST OF TREES 
Trees, as required, shall be selected from this List of Trees as approved by Resolution through the City Council of the City of Sapulpa. Trees listed below were obtained from the book: Plant Materials Guide - The Characteristic Use and Culture by Dr. Larry Fugatt, a Landscape Architect for the Oklahoma State University Extension Services Office. The List of Trees has been modified by the use of an asterisk (*) to identify those trees that are consistent with the Resolution to protect the urban forest of Creek County and the City of Sapulpa. 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 
	
DECIDUOUS TREES 
Ash, Green* 	Fraxinus pennsylvanica 
Ash, White* 	Frazinus americana 
Beech, American 	Fagus grandifolia 
Birch, River* 	Betula nigra 
Birch, Asian White* 	Betula plalyphylla 
Birch, European White 	Betula pendula 
Buckeye, Ohio 	Aesculus glabra 
Catalpa* 	Catalpa bignonioidea 
Cherry, Black Wild 	Prunus serotina 
Cherry, Oriental 	Prunus serrulata 
Chestnut, Chinese 	Castanea mollissima 
Chittam Wood 	Bumelia langinosa 
Cleyera 	Cleyera japonica 
Coffee Tree, Kentucky* 	Gymnocladus dioica 
Cottonwood, Eastern* 	Populus dettoides 
Crabapple, Flowering* 	Malus spp. 
Crape Myrtle 	Logerstroemia indica 
Cypress, Bald* 	Taxodium distichum 
Cypress, Pond 	Taxodium ascendens 
Dogwood, Cornelian Cherry 	Cornus mas 
Dogwood, Flowering* 	Cornus florida 
Dogwood, Kousa 	Cornus kousa 
Elm, Lacebark* 	Ulmus parvifolia 
Elm, Siberian 	Ulmus pumila 
Elm, Winged 	Ulmus alata 
Fringetree, White 	Chinonanthus virginicus 
Ginko* 	Ginko biloba 
Golden Rain Tree 	Koelreuteria paniculata 
Gum, American Sweet* 	Liquidambar styraciflua 
Gum, Black Sour 	Nussa sylvatica 
Hackberry* 	Celtis occidentalis 
Hawthorn* 	Crataegus spp. 
Hickory* 	Carya spp. 
Holly, Possumhaw, Deciduous* 	Ilex decidua 
Hophornbeam, American, Ironwood* 	Ostrya virginiana 
Hornbean, American* 	Carpinus caroliniana 
Jujube, False Date 	Jiziphus jujuba 
Katsuratree 	Cerdidiphyllum japonicum 
Linden, American* 	Tilia americana 
Linden, European, Littleleaf 	Tilia cordata 
Locust, Black* 	Robinia pseudoacacia 
Locust, Thornless honey* 	Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis 
Magnolia, Saucer 	Magnolia soulangeana 
Magnolia, Sweetbay* 	Magnolia virginiana 
Maple, Amur 	Acer ginnala 
Maple Japanese 	Acer plamatum 
Maple Norway 	Acer platanoides 
Maple, Red* 	Acer rubrum 
Maple, Silver* 	Acer saccarinum 
Maple, Sugar* 	Acer saccharum 
Mimosa 	Albizzia julibrissin 
Mockorange, Sweet 	Philadelphus coronarius 
Mulberry, Paper 	Broussonetia papyrilera 
Mulberry, White* 	Morus alba 
Oak, Black* 	Quercus velutina 
Oak, Blackjack* 	Quercus marilandica 
Oak, Bur* 	Quercus macrocarpa 
Oak, English* 	Quercus rolur 
Oak, Northern Red* 	Quercus rubra 
Oak, Pin* 	Quercus palustris 
Oak, Post* 	Quercus stellata 
Oak, Sawtooth* 	Quercus acutissima 
Oak, Scarlet 	Quercus coccinea 
Oak, Shumard* 	Quercus shumardii 
Oak, Southern Red* 	Quercus falcata 
Oak, Swamp White* 	Quercus bicolor 
Oak, Water* 	Quercus nigra 
Oak, White* 	Quercus alba 
Oak, Willow* 	Quercus phellos 
Orange, Trifolicate 	Poncius trifoliata 
Osage-Orange, Bois D'Arc 	Maclura pomilera 
Pagoda, Japanese 	Sophora japonica 
Paulownia, Royal, Empress Tree 	Paulownia tomentosa 
Panicled Golden Raintree 	Koelreuteria paniculata 
Pawpaw 	Asimina triloba 
Pear, Bradford Callery* 	Pyrus calleryana 
Pecan* 	Carya illinaensis 
Persimmon, Common* 	Diospyros virginiana 
Persimmon, Oriental 	Diospyros kaki 
Pistachio, Chinese* 	Pistacia chinensis 
Planetree, London* 	Platanus acerifolia 
Plum, Purpleleaf 	Prunus cerasifera 
Poplar, Lombardy 	Populus nigra 'Italica" 
Poplar, Eastern cottonwood 	Populus deltoides 
Poplar, Silver-Leafed, White* 	Populus alba 
Redbud, Eastern* 	Cercis canadensis 
Redwood, Dawn 	Metasequoia glyptostroboides 
Russian Olive* 	Elaeagnus angustifolia 
Sassafras* 	Sassafras albidum 
Serviceberry 	Amelanchier arborea 
Silverbell Carolina 	Halesia carolina 
Smoketree* 	Cotinus coggygria 
Soapberry, Western* 	Sapindus driummondi 
Sourwood 	Oxydendrum arboreum 
Sugarberry 	Celtis laevigate 
Sycamore 	Platanus occidentalis 
Tree of Heaven 	Ailanthis altissima 
Tuliptree, Yellow Poplar 	Liriodendron tulipifera 
Vites, Chastetree 	Vitex negundo 
Walnut, Black* 	Juglans nigra 
Willow, Black 	Salix nigra 
Willow, Weeping 	Salix babylonica 
Witch Hazel 	Hamamelis virginiana 
Yellowwood, American 	Cladralis lutea 
Zelkova, Elm* 	Zelkova carpinifolia 
Zelkova, Japanese 	Zelkova serrata 
	
EVERGREEN AND BROADLEAF EVERGREEN TREES 
Aborvitae, Chinese 	Thuja orientails 
Cedar, Altas* 	Cedrus atlantica 
Cedar, Calif, Incense 	Libocedrus decurrens 
Cedar, Deodar 	Cedrus deodara 
Cedar, Eastern Red 	Juniperus virginiana 
Cedar, of Lebanon 	Cedar libani 
Cherry Laruel (b) 	Prunus caroliniana 
China Fir 	Cunninghania lanceolata 
Cypress, Arizona 	Cupressus arizonica 
Cypress, Italian 	Cupressus sempervirens 
Holly, American* 	Ilex opoca 
Holly, Yaupon 	Ilex vomitoria 
Juniper, Rock Mountain 	Juniperus scopulorum 
Magnolia, Southern 	Magnolia grandiflora 
Oak, Live (b) 	Quercus virginiana 
Pine, Austrian* 	Pinus nigra 
Pine, Japenese Black* 	Pinus thunbergii 
Pine, Lacebark 	Pinus bungeana 
Pine, Loblolly* 	Pinus taeda 
Pine, Mugo 	Pinus mugo 
Pine, Scotch* 	Pinus sylvestris 
Pine, Short Leaf* 	Pinus echinata 
Pine, Slash 	Pinus elliotti 
Pine, White 	Pinus strobus 
Spruce, Colorado Blue 	Picea pungens 
	
DECIDUOUS SHRUBS 
Althea, Rose-of-Sharon 	Hibicus syriacus 
Cotoneaster, Rockspray 	Cotoneaster horizontalis 
Crape Myrtle 	Lagerstroemia indica 
Euonymus, Winged 	Euonymus alatus 
Fig, Common 	Ficus carica 
Forsythia, Goldenbell 	Forsythia x intermedia 
Hydrangea, Common 	Hydrangea macrophylla 
Hydrangea, Oakleaf 	Hydrangea quercifolia 
Jasmine, Winter 	Jasminum nudiflorum 
Lilac, Common 	Syringa vulgaris 
Mockorange, Sweet 	Philadelphus coronarius 
Pampasgrass 	Cortaderia selloana 
Pomegranate 	Punica granatum 
Privet 	Ligustrum spp. 
Quince, Flowering 	Chaenomeles speciosa 
Rose 	Rosa spp. 
Spirea, Vanhoutte 	Spirea x vanhouttei 
Viburnum, Arrowwood 	Viburnum dentatum 
Viburnum, Japanese Snowball 	Viburnum plicatum 
Viburnum, Mapleleaf 	Viburnum acerifalium 
Viburnum, Siebold 	Viburnum sieboldii 
Viburnum, Tea 	Viburnum setigerum 
Weigelia 	Weigelia florida 
Wisteria, Chinese 	Wisteria sinensis 
	
EVERGREEN AND BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS 
Abelia, Glossy (b) 	Abelia grandiflora 
Aucuba, Japenese (b) 	Aucuba japonica 
Azalea, Kurume (b) 	Azalea obtusum 
Bamboo (b) 	Bambusa spp. 
Boxwood, Common, English (b) 	Buxus sempervirens 
Cleyera (b) 	Cleyera japonica 
Elaegnus, Silverberry (b) 	Elaegnus pungens 
Euonymus, Spreadling 	Euonymus kiautschovica 
Euonymus, Winter Creeper (b) 	Euonymus fortunei 
Holly, Chinese (b) 	Ilex cornuta 
Holly, English (b) 	Ilex aquifolium 
Holly, Inkberry (b) 	Ilex glabra 
Holly, Japanese (b) 	Ilex crenata 
Holly, Yaupon (b) 	Ilex vomitoria 
Honeysuckle, Winter (b) 	Lonicera fragiantissima 
Juniper, Chinese 	Juniperus chinensis 
Juniper, Japenese Garden 	Juniperus procumbens 
Juniper, Savin 	Juniperus sabina 
Juniper, Shore 	Juniperus conferta 
Ligustrum, Wax Leaf (b) 	Ligustrum indicum 
Mohonia, Leatherleaf (b) 	Mahonia bealei 
Mahonia, Oregon Grape (b) 	Mahonia aquifolium 
Myrtle, Wax (b) 	Myrica cerifera 
Nandina, Heavenly Bamboo (b) 	Nandina domestica 
Pine, Mugo 	Pinus mugo 
Pyrancantha, Scarlet Firethorne (b) 	Pyracantha coccinea 
Viburnum, Leatherleaf (b) 	Viburnum rhytidothyllum 
Yew, Anglojap 	Taxus media 
Yew, Japanese 	Taxus cuspidata 
Yucca, Adam's Needle (b) 	Yucca, filamentosa 
Yucca, Red (b) 	Hesperaloe parviflora 
Yucca, Spanish Bayonett (b) 	Yucca aloifolia 
Yucca, Spanish Dagger (b) 	Yucca gloriosa 
	
GROUND COVER 
Ajuga 	Abelia grandiflora 
Fescue, Blue 	Festuca ovina-glauca 
Liriope, Monkeygrass 	Liriope muscari 
Mondo Grass, Mondeygrass 	Opropogon japonicus 
Periwinkle, Comon 	Vinca minor 
Santolina, Gray 	Santalina chamaecyparissus 
	
VINES 
Clematis 	Clematis spp. 
Honeysuckle, Japanese 	Lonicera japonica 
Ivy, Boston 	Parthenocissus tricuspidata 
Ivy, English 	Hedra helix 
Jessamine, Carolina 	Gelsemium sempervirens 
Virginia Creeper 	Parthenocissus quinefolia 
  
Appendix D - GAS FRANCHISE 
Ordinance Number 2774 dated June 19, 2017, and as may be amended, is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out herein.  
Appendix E - CABLE FRANCHISE 
Ordinance Number 2131 dated June 6, 1994, and as may be amended or transferred is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out herein.  
Appendix G - ELECTRIC FRANCHISE 
Ordinance Number 1842 dated October 3, 1983, and as may be amended, is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out herein.  
Appendix H - ZONING ORDINANCE 
https://library.municode.com/ok/sapulpa/codes/zoning_code 

ZONING CODE CITY OF SAPULPA, OKLAHOMA 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
  
ARTICLE 1 - CITY PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2814 , § 1, adopted May 6, 2019, repealed the former Article 1, §§ 100—130, and enacted a new Article as set out herein. The former Article 1 pertained to similar subject matter. 
 
Sec. 100. - Membership. 
That the membership of the City Planning Commission of the City of Sapulpa shall be and the same is hereby set at seven (7) members. One (1) member of the City Council of the City of Sapulpa shall be appointed by the Mayor to serve as one (1) of the members of said Commission, and one (1) resident at large of the City of Sapulpa shall be appointed by the Mayor to serve as one (1) of the members of said Commission. 
( Ord. No. 2814 , § 1, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 110. - Election. 
Five (5) members of said Commission shall each be nominated by a member of the City Council. Said nomination shall be seconded by a member of the City Council and said nominee's name shall then be put to a vote of the City Council. Said nominee must be appointed to membership in said Commission by a majority vote of the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 2814 , § 1, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 120. - Qualifications. 
Each member of said Commission shall be a resident of the City of Sapulpa; a qualified and registered voter therein; a taxpayer; and a person of good character. At no time shall more than one (1) resident of any ward serve as a member upon said Commission, except as to the City Council member and the resident at large who are each appointed to serve by the Mayor. 
( Ord. No. 2814 , § 1, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 130. - Terms. 
A.  On the first appointment of full membership, the members shall be appointed to serve terms as follows: 
1.  Each member appointed from Wards 1, 3, and 5, and the member appointed by the Mayor from the City Council, shall serve for a term of two (2) years; and 
2.  Each member appointed from Wards 2 and 4, and the member appointed by the Mayor from the City at large, shall serve for a term of three (3) years; and 
3.  Members appointed to all posts thereafter, shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. 
B.  Each member appointed shall serve until his or her qualified successor is appointed. In the event of a member vacating or being removed from said appointment, the City Council and/or Mayor shall appoint a replacement in the same manner as provided for the initial appointment of said member and said replacement member shall serve only the unexpired term of the member being replaced. 
( Ord. No. 2814 , § 1, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 140. - Compensation. 
All members shall serve without pay. No member of said Commission shall receive any item, money or thing of material value for his or her services as a member of said Commission. 
( Ord. No. 2814 , § 1, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 150. - Rules and procedures. 
The members of said City Council shall adopt the rules and regulations under and by which said Commission shall function. The Commission shall determine and elect its officers and prescribe such officer's duties. Further, said Commission shall determine all orders of business before said Commission and shall set and determine dates and places of such meetings, both regular and special, as they may deem necessary. 
( Ord. No. 2814 , § 1, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 160. - Duties. 
The City Planning Commission of the City of Sapulpa shall be responsible for the administration of the Planning and Zoning Ordinances of the City of Sapulpa and shall have all powers and functions as provided in the Oklahoma Statutes, relating to City Planning Commissions. 
( Ord. No. 2814 , § 1, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 170. - Removal from Commission membership. 
Any Commission member, upon written charges and after public hearing, may be removed by the City Council for any one (1) of the following causes: 
A.  Failure to attend three (3) consecutive regular or special meetings, or failure to attend two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the regular or special meetings held during any six (6) month period; or 
B.  Actions and conduct unbecoming to a public official of the City of Sapulpa; or 
C.  Repeated acts and conduct detrimental to the peace, health, safety, and welfare of the City of Sapulpa. 
( Ord. No. 2814 , § 1, 5-6-2019)  
Chapter 1 - TITLE, PURPOSES, INTERPRETATION AND JURISDICTION 
 
Sec. 100. - Title. 
This Code shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Code of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma.  
Sec. 110. - Purposes, interpretation, and jurisdiction. 
110.1.  Purposes. This Code is enacted for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity, order and general welfare; lessening danger and congestion of public transportation and travel; securing safety from fire and other dangers; preventing overcrowding of land avoiding undue concentration of population; providing adequate light and air, police protection, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, forest, recreational facilities, military and naval facilities, and other public requirements, and preventing undue encroachment thereon; conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land; encouraging the industrial, commercial and residential growth of the community; and promoting the development of the community in accordance with a comprehensive plan. 
110.2.  Interpretation. 
A.  Validity of other laws. Where this Code imposes a lesser restriction upon the use of structures or land or upon height or bulk of structures, or requires larger open space or yards than are imposed by other ordinances, laws, or regulations, the provisions of this Code shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other ordinances, laws, or regulations which prescribed more restrictive limitations. 
B.  Severability. Should any portion of this Code by adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of said code shall remain in full force and effect. 
C.  Tense and definition. For the purposes of this Code certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in Chapter 15 of this Code: Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular number shall include the plural and words used in the plural number shall include the singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicated otherwise. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory. 
110.3.  Jurisdiction. 
A.  Territorial jurisdiction. This Code shall be in full force and effect and shall apply to all lands within the incorporated limits of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
B.  Annexed territory. When any territory shall be brought into the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, by annexation or otherwise, such territory shall be deemed to be allowed to retain its former zoning status. This provision shall not operate to preclude subsequent zoning of such property by amendment in the manner set forth in Chapter 14. 
C.  Property owned, leased or operated by the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, or any other public or governmental body or agency, shall be subject to the terms of this Code.  
Chapter 2 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 200. - Zoning districts established. 
The zoning districts set forth below are hereby established and shall be identified by the symbol to the left thereof: 
AG 	Agriculture District 
RE 	Residential Estate District 
RS-1 	Residential Single-Family Low Density District 
RS-2 	Residential Single-Family Medium Density District 
RS-3 	Residential Single-Family High Density District 
RD 	Residential Duplex District 
RM-1 	Residential Multi-Family Low Density District 
RM-2 	Residential Multi-Family Medium Density District 
RMH 	Residential Mobile Home Park District 
RMT 	Residential Multi-Family Townhouse District 
OL 	Office Low Intensity District 
OM 	Office Medium Intensity District 
CS 	Commercial Shopping Center District 
CG 	Commercial General District 
CBD 	Central Business District 
IR 	Industrial Research District 
IL 	Industrial Light Manufacturing District 
IM 	Industrial Moderate District 
IH 	Industrial Heavy District 
  
Sec. 201. - Supplemental districts established. 
The supplemental district set forth below is hereby established and shall be identified by the symbol to the left thereof. 
HP 	Historic Preservation 
PUD 	Planned Unit Development 
  
Sec. 202. - Official zoning. 
The locations and boundaries of the various districts as defined herein shall be established by ordinance and shall be shown and delineated on the official zoning map of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. The official zoning map shall bear the endorsement of and be maintained by the City Planner and may be divided into parts, and such parts may be separately employed for identification purposes when adopting or amending the official zoning map or for any reference to the official zoning map.  
Sec. 203. - District boundary description and interpretation. 
District boundary lines shall be described by legal description or by a map. When a legal description is used, the boundary line shall be deemed to extend to the centerline of abutting streets and shall be so designated on the official zoning map. When a map is used, district boundary lines shall be established by dimensions, property lines, recorded lot lines, or the centerline of abutting streets, alleys, or railroad rights-of-way, as the same appear of record at the time of adoption. In all cases where there is doubt as to the exact location of district boundary lines, the same shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment.  
Sec. 204. - Limitation of land use. 
No land or building shall be used and no building, structure, or improvement shall be made, erected constructed, moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the use, height, area, yard, space, and other requirements established in the district in which such land, building, structure, or improvement is located except as provided by Chapter 11, Nonconformities. In order to avoid undue hardship: 
A.  Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building, where a building permit was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this Code, and pursuant to such permit, construction is diligently carried to completion. Upon completion such building or use shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue as regulated by Chapter 11, Nonconformities. 
B.  For one (1) year after the effective date of this Code a building permit or zoning clearance permit may be issued or a use of land commenced in accordance with the terms and conditions of a Special Exception or Variance granted by the Board of Adjustment prior to the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 205. - Division of lots. 
A lot shall not hereafter be divided into two (2) or more lots, unless each lot resulting therefrom conforms to all the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which located and each comply with the subdivision regulations, the minor subdivisions, procedures and standards, standards and regulations for the subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of the Sapulpa Metropolitan Area Planning Commission.  
Sec. 206. - Street frontage required. 
No lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residential purposes unless such lot has a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet of frontage on a public street or dedicated right-of-way, except a substandard lot of record, a lot within an approved planned unit development, or a lot within an approved townhouse development.  
Sec. 207. - One single-family dwelling per lot of record. 
Not more than one (1) residential structure may be located on a lot in an RE, RS or RD district except in the case of a lot which is within an approved planned unit development.  
Sec. 220. - Height exceptions. 
The following structures shall not be subject to the height limitations of the district in which they are located: 
A.  Farm building and structures. 
B.  Belfries, chimneys, cupolas, domes, elevators, flagpoles, monitors, smokestacks, spires, cooling towers and ventilators, provided they are not intended for human occupancy. 
C.  Ground and structure-supported accessory antennas and aerials, including elevating structures (poles and towers), which do not exceed a total aggregate height of sixty (60) feet above the natural land grade and which meet the following requirements: 
1.  No portion of the antenna, aerial, elevating structure or any anchor or guy line may encroach upon the land area or airspace of any adjoining or abutting property; 
2.  In a residential district no portion of the antenna, aerial, elevating structure, or any anchor or guy line, may extend beyond the front yard building setback line or extend into any established front yard or into any side yard; 
Provided that: 
a.  Height and location restrictions shall not be applicable to radio communication facilities owned, operated and maintained by any city, county, state or federal governmental entities; 
b.  Non-guyed, Omni-directional, single element vertical antennas not exceeding one hundred twelve (112) inches in height, and not exceeding one and three-fourths (1¾) inches outside diameter shall be permitted in addition to the sixty (60) foot aggregate height limitation; 
c.  The restrictions established by this section may be modified by the Board of Adjustment Special Exception approval, subject to the minimum requirements for special exception approval and such additional safeguards and conditions as may be imposed by the Board of Adjustment.  
Sec. 230. - Lot area and width exceptions. 
Except for fire protection and ambulance service, the lot area and width requirement of the zoning districts shall not apply to the uses included within Use Unit 4, public protection and utility facilities.  
Sec. 240. - Yards. 
240.1.  Compliance with yard requirements. Except as otherwise provided, required yards shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky. Yards provided for a building for the purpose of complying within the provisions of this Code shall not be considered the yard for any other building and yards provided for a lot shall not be considered the yard of any other lot. 
240.2.  Permitted yard obstructions. Obstructions are permitted in required yards as follows: 
A.  Cornices, canopies, eaves and similar architectural features may project not more than two (2) feet into a required yard. 
B.  Fire escapes may project not more than four and one-half (4½) feet into a required yard. 
C.  Fences, hedges, plant materials and walls may be located in any yard provided that corner traffic visibility is maintained in accordance with the City of Sapulpa ordinances. 
D.  Signs which are permitted as accessory uses in residential districts may be located within any yard which is bounded by a public street. 
E.  In the RE and RS residential districts, a detached accessory building or buildings may be located in a required rear yard provided: (1) the building or buildings do not cover more than twenty (20) percent of the area of the minimum required rear yard, and (2) the total gross floor area for any accessory building or buildings located in the rear yard, required rear yard, and/or both, does not exceed six hundred (600) square feet. 
F.  Swimming pools, tennis court, patios, fallout and other protective shelters shall be located in the rear yard and shall have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any side yard or rear lot lines. 
G.  Mobile home hitches. 
H.  Carports (located in any yard) by special exception requiring Board of Adjustment approval. 
I.  Customary accessory structures, such as clothes lines, barbecue pits, and playground equipment. 
J.  Antennas and antenna support structures and guy lines may be located in the required rear yard. 
240.3.  Use of yards in R districts. No inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicles or vehicle bodies or vehicle parts shall be parked or stored within the yard in an R district. No vehicle shall be parked except on a hard surfaced area constructed of a dust free all-weather material. Within the RM-1 and RM-2 districts, not more than one (1) vehicle shall be parked for each six hundred (600) square feet of area contained in a required front or exterior side yard.  
Sec. 241. - Existing building encroachment in front yards or building setbacks. 
Where an existing building or buildings on the same side of the street and within the same block encroach on the required front yard or building setback, the required front yard or building setback for new construction shall be established as follows: 
A.  If the proposed building is to be located more than two hundred (200) feet from an encroaching building, the proposed building shall conform to the front yard or setback established for the district in which the proposed building is to be located. 
B.  If the proposed building is to be located between adjacent buildings which conform to the required front yard or building setback, or between a conforming building and an intersecting street, the proposed building shall conform to the front yard or setback established for the district in which the proposed building is to be located. 
C.  If the proposed building is to be located within two hundred (200) feet of encroaching buildings on both sides and there are no intervening buildings, the front yard or building setback shall be the average of the front yard setback of the two (2) nearest front corners of the encroaching buildings. 
D.  If the proposed building is to be located within two hundred (200) feet of an encroaching building on one (1) side, but not both sides, and there are no intervening buildings, the front yard or building setback shall be the average of the otherwise required front yard or setback and the setback of the nearest front corner of the encroaching building. Provided, however, that in the application of [subsection] B or C above, the front yard or building setback shall not be reduced to less than five (5) feet plus one-half (½) of the right-of-way width designated on the major street plan for the abutting street or five (5) feet plus one half (½) of the dedicated street right-of-way whichever is greater, or five (5) feet plus twenty-five (25) feet if the street is not designated on the major street plan.  
Sec. 242. - Antennas and antenna support structures. 
A.  Antennas and antenna support structures, which are principle uses in agricultural and industrial districts, are regulated by Chapter 9, Section 904.1—6 of this Code. 
B.  Antennas and antenna support structures which are accessory uses are regulated by Sections 320.1 and 320.2, 420.1, 420.2, 520.2, 620.2, 720.1 and 720.2. 
C.  Antennas and antenna support structures which are accessory to principle uses permitted in the agricultural, office, commercial or industrial zoning districts shall be setback from residential district boundary line one hundred ten (110) percent of the height of the antenna and antenna support structure as measured at the average ground elevation at the base of the structure. The setback distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the residential zoning district boundary line, excluding freeways zoned residential.  
Sec. 250. - Screening wall or fence. 
250.1.  Specifications. For the purpose of maintaining a compatible relationship between certain land uses, a screening requirement is hereby established for the initiation and continuance of particular uses in such instances as may be hereinafter designated. 
A.  Shall be constructed, designed, and arranged to provide visual separation of uses, irrespective of vegetation; 
B.  Shall not be less than six (6) feet in height; 
C.  Shall be constructed with all braces and supports on the interior, except when both sides are of the same design and appearance; 
D.  Shall be erected prior to the occupancy of the building or initiation of the use required to screen; and 
E.  Shall be of live shrubbery or standard, conventional fencing material. 
250.2.  Maintenance. The screening wall or fence shall be maintained by the owner of the lot containing the use required to construct the screening. Failure to maintain after notice by the building inspector shall constitute an offense hereunder. 
250.3.  Modification of the screening wall or fence requirements. The Board of Adjustment, as a variance may: 
A.  Modify or remove the screening requirement where existing physical features provide visual separation of uses; 
B.  Modify the screening requirement where an alternative screening will provide visual separation of uses; 
C.  Grant an extension of time to erect a screen where properties which are to be benefited by the screen are undeveloped; and 
D.  Remove the screening requirement where the purpose of the screening requirement cannot be achieved.  
Sec. 260. - Driveways. 
All driveways used for ingress and egress shall have a maximum width of twenty-five (25) feet measured at the property line. Driveways in R districts shall have five (5) feet radius curb returns. Driveways in O, C or I districts shall have a maximum curb return radius of fifteen (15) feet.  
Sec. 270. - Platting requirement. 
For the purposes of providing a proper arrangement of streets and assuring the adequacy of open spaces traffic, utilities, and access of emergency vehicles commensurate with the intensification of land use customarily incident to a change of zoning, a platting requirement is established as follows: 
For any land which has been rezoned upon application of a private party, or for any land which has been granted a special exception by the Board of Adjustment as enumerated within Use Units 2, 4, 5, 8 and 20, no building permit shall be issued until that portion of the tract on which the permit is sought has been included within a subdivision plat or re-plat, as the case may be, submitted to the Planning Commission for their review and recommendation, approved by the City Commission, and filed in the office of the County Clerk of the county in which the property is situated. Provided that the Planning Commission may remove the platting requirement upon a determination that the above stated purposes have been achieved by previous platting or could not be achieved by a plat or re-plat.  
Sec. 280. - Major street plan. 
The City of Sapulpa Street and Highway Plan, hereafter referred to as the major street plan, as adopted by the City Commission of the City of Sapulpa, is hereby made a part thereof.  
Sec. 290. - Code of ethics. 
The Mayor or any member of the City Commission, Planning Commission, or Board of Adjustment to whom some private benefit, direct or indirect, financial or otherwise, may come as a result of a public action concerning this Code, shall not be a participant in that action. The possibility, not the actuality, of a conflict shall govern. The individual experiencing a conflict of interest shall declare his interest, abstain from voting on the matter, and refrain from any deliberations on the matter. The individual shall not discuss the matter with a fellow official for the purpose of influencing a decision thereon.  
Chapter 3 - AGRICULTURE DISTRICT PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 300. - Purposes of Agriculture District. 
The Agriculture District is designed to: 
A.  Protect agricultural land. 
B.  Discourage wasteful scattering of development in rural areas. 
C.  Obtain economy of public fund expenditures for improvements and services.  
Sec. 310. - Principal uses permitted in the Agriculture District. 
The principal uses permitted in the Agriculture Districts are designated by use units. The use units are groupings of individual uses and are fully described, including their respective off-street parking, loading, screening requirements and other use conditions in Chapter 9. The use units permitted in the Agriculture District are set forth in Table 1. 
Table 1 
Use Units Permitted in the Agriculture District 
UU # 	Name of Use Unit (see Chapter 9) 	Permitted 
1. 	Area wide uses by right 	X 
2. 	Area wide special exceptions uses 	E 
3. 	Agriculture 	X 
4. 	Public protection, utility and public parks 	X*** 
5. 	Community services and similar uses 	E 
6. 	Single-family dwelling 	x 
8. 	Multi-family dwelling and similar uses 	E** 
9. 	Manufactured dwelling 	E 
20. 	Commercial recreation: Intensive 	E 
21. 	Business sign and outdoor advertising 	X 
23. 	Land intensive industrial uses 	E 
 
X — Use by right. 
E — Special exception. 
**Nursing home, community group home, convent, monastery novitiate are the only uses within Use Unit 8 permitted by special exception. 
***Antennas and antenna support structures are permitted in the Agriculture District only upon approval of a Special Exception by the Board of Adjustment as provided by Section 904 of this Code.  
Sec. 320. - Accessory uses in the Agriculture District. 
320.1.  Accessory uses permitted. Accessory uses customarily incident to a principal use permitted in an Agriculture District are permitted in such district. In addition, the uses set forth in Table 2 are permitted as accessory uses. 
Table 2 
Accessory Uses Permitted in the Agriculture District 
No. 	Uses 
1. 	Bulletin boards 
2. 	Identification signs 
3. 	Real Estate signs 
4. 	Wind energy conversion systems* 
5. 	Home occupation* 
6. 	Antennas and antenna support structures 
 
*See conditions set forth in Section 320.2.B, which are also applicable in an AG District. 
320.2.  Accessory use conditions. 
A.  General Conditions. 
1.  An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements. 
2.  Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum yard or building setback requirements. 
B.  Wind energy conversion systems (WECS). 
1.  All WECS tower structures shall comply with the design and construction techniques in the BOCA Basic Building Code. Compliance shall be certified in writing by the manufacturer's engineering staff or by a registered structural engineer. 
2.  Towers shall have either tower-climbing apparatus located not closer than two (2) feet from the ground or shall have a locked anti-climb device installed on the tower. 
3.  Safety wires shall be installed on the turnbuckles of the guy wires for all guyed WECS towers. 
4.  A WECS shall be equipped with both manual and automatic controls to limit the rotational speed of the blade below the design limits of the rotor. The conformance of rotor and over speed control design with good engineering practices shall be certified by the manufacturer's engineering staff or by a registered mechanical engineer. The compatibility of the tower and the rotor shall also be certified by the manufacturer or by a registered mechanical engineer. 
5.  If a WECS is within three hundred (300) feet of a structure or a tree, the lowest moving part shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet above the highest structure or potential tree height, whichever is higher. 
6.  No part of a WECS shall be located within or over drainage, utility, or other established easements. No part of a WECS shall be located within or over any required minimum front, side, or rear yard setbacks. 
C.  Antennas and antenna support structures. 
1.  Antennas and antenna support structures which are accessory to a principal use are permitted to be mounted on a permitted agricultural building or a customary accessory building; provided that it does not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height measured from the average ground elevation at the base of such structure to the highest horizontal point of the antenna and antenna support structure and that the horizontal surface area of all such mounted antennas shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. Only one (1) side having the largest surface area is to be calculated. These provisions do not apply to principle use antennas which are accessory to uses requiring Board of Adjustment approval. 
2.  Structures other than a permitted principal structure or customary accessory building, which are used to support accessory antennas (including guy lines) shall: 
a.  Be located in the rear yard only and limited to one (1) such structure; 
b.  Not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height, measured from the average ground elevation at the base of the structure to the highest point of the antenna and antenna support structure; 
c.  Not encroach upon the land or airspace of any abutting property; and 
d.  Not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in width above twenty-five (25) feet in height, exclusive of guy lines.  
Sec. 330. - Bulk and area requirements in the Agriculture District. 
Table 3 
Bulk and Area Requirements in the Agriculture District 
	Requirement 
Lot width (minimum feet) 	150 
Lot area (minimum acres) 	1 
Land area (minimum acres per dwelling unit) 	1 
Front yard and any yard abutting a public street 	
 One-half (½) of right-of-way if designated on the major streets and highway plan (MSHP) 	— 
Not on MSHP 	— 
Major (minimum feet) 	35 
Not a Major (minimum feet) 	25 
Side yard 	
 One side yard (minimum feet) 	10 
 Other side yard (minimum feet) 	10 
Rear yard (minimum feet) 	40 
Building height (maximum feet) 	36 
  
Sec. 340. - Requirements for special exception uses in the Agriculture District. 
The special exception uses permitted in the Agriculture District, as designated in Table 1, are subject to the requirements set out below, and the Board of Adjustment may impose such additional safeguards and conditions as: 
A.  The accessory use provisions of the Agriculture District pertaining to signs are applicable to accessory signs for uses permitted by special exception. 
B.  Special exception uses, except as provided in [subsection] A above, shall conform to the bulk and area requirements of the use district in which located, unless the use unit requirements are more restrictive, in which case the more restrictive shall control. 
C.  A nursing home, community group home, monastery, and novitiate shall meet the use conditions as set forth in Section 908.3.  
Chapter 4 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 400. - Purposes of residential districts. 
400.1.  General purposes. The residential districts are designed to: 
A.  Achieve the residential objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Protect the character of residential areas by excluding non-harmonious commercial and/or industrial activities. 
C.  Achieve a suitable environment for family by permitting in residential areas appropriate neighborhood facilities, such as churches, schools, and certain cultural and recreational facilities. 
D.  Preserve openness of living areas and avoid overcrowding by requiring minimum yards, open spaces, lot areas, and by limiting the bulk of structures. 
E.  Permit a variety of dwelling types and densities to meet the varying needs of families. 
F.  Control the density of residential development to facilitate the planning for an economical provision of streets, utilities, and other public facilities. 
400.2.  Purposes of the RE Residential Estate District. The RE District is designed to permit the development and conservation of single-family detached dwellings in a suitable environment for family life on large parcels of land at a low population density. It is the intent of this district to prohibit any other use, which would substantially interfere with the stated purposes of this district, and discourage any use that generate traffic and create congestion on neighborhood streets other than the normal traffic serving the residents on those streets. 
400.2(A).  Purpose of RE Estate Performance standards. The intent of the RE District is to provide the opportunity for development and conservation for single-family detached dwellings on larger parcels of land and with lower population densities in areas suitable for family life. The addition of these "performance" based standards helps to expand the development opportunity by allowing for adaptive alternatives for quality residential design that will meet or exceed the present standards of the RE District in areas that have unique topographical challenges and/or constraints, without compromising or waiving the City of Sapulpa Asphalt Pavement Standard Details for Residential and Commercial Streets. 
A.  RE Estate performance standards. The City Council shall determine if unique topographical challenges and/or constraints are contained in a project development site and warrant application of these, and may determine whether portion(s) or the entirety of the development project will comply. The following constraints must, at a minimum, exist on the proposed development to warrant application: 
1.  A slope analysis of the proposed development site documents that a minimum of sixty-five (65) percent of the project consists of slopes that are equal to or greater than ten (10) percent. 
2.  A determination has been made that the City of Sapulpa wastewater facilities will not be able to be expanded to support the development proposal or that one (1) or more lift station would be required to be constructed in order to utilize the City of Sapulpa facilities. 
B.  The City Council shall have the ability to approve alternative design solutions that are determined by the City Council to be equivalent to or exceed the present City of Sapulpa Engineering Design Criteria and Standards Specifications, provided that the following performance standards are followed and apply in their entirety: 
1.  The project will establish and maintain a home owners' association and will be governed according to by-laws approved by the residents of the project for the purpose of maintaining restrictive covenants and the maintenance up-keep of the project. 
2.  The project shall be designed to integrate with and otherwise preserve the character of the existing topography, including but not limited to such things as steepness of slopes, existing drainage features, river and stream terraces, ridgelines, rock outcroppings, and other scenic topographic features. These unique features will, to the reasonable extent feasible, be preserved in separate open-space development tracts, to be jointly owned and maintained by the home owners' association. 
3.  The project shall be designed so that the proposed development will minimize the degradation of these unique characteristics in the development terms of the following: 
a.  Use; 
b.  Density; 
c.  Traffic generation; 
d.  Quality of runoff water. 
4.  Recognizing the issues that can be associated with the unique topography mentioned above in [subsections] 500.2.A and 500.2.A.1, the installation of underground stormwater conveyance structures may not be feasible. If this occurs, the project may be allowed to design and construct aboveground conveyance systems that may include the use of borrow ditches. In such situations, the design and construction of said aboveground conveyance system shall be in accordance with the City of Sapulpa Engineering Design Criteria and Standard Specifications as well as the City of Sapulpa Asphalt Pavement Standard Details for Residential and Commercial Streets. 
5.  The project shall, to the reasonable extent feasible, preserve significant existing native vegetation as well as existing trees. 
6.  The project will construct and the home owners' association will maintain in perpetuity, a public trail or public pedestrian walkway system, to provide for public access throughout the development project, and provide links to adjacent existing and/or proposed pedestrian systems. If it is determined by the City Council that the construction of the above mentioned system is not feasible for the development, the project may substitute the construction and maintenance of a neighborhood park, clubhouse, or other recreation amenity. 
7.  The project shall provide a development agreement with the City of Sapulpa outlaying the construction and maintenance responsibilities of the developer and future property owners. The City of Sapulpa will not assume or accept dedication or maintenance responsibilities for common areas, wastewater collection systems that do not connect to City of Sapulpa facilities, stormwater conveyance systems and detention facilities, and public trail and/or public pedestrian walkway systems. 
400.3.  Purposes of the RS Residential Single-Family Districts. The RS-1, RS-2, and RS-3 districts are designed to permit the development and conservation of single-family detached dwellings in suitable environments in a variety of densities to meet the varying requirements of families. 
400.4.  Purpose of the RD Residential Duplex District. The RD District is designed to permit a more intense yet compatible use of tracts in or near single-family residential and other neighborhood, which because of size, topography or adjacent land use are not ideally suited for single-family use. 
400.5.  Purposes of RM Residential Multi-Family Districts. The RM-1 and RM-2 districts are designed to permit the development and conservation of multi-family dwelling types, such as garden apartments and townhouses, in suitable environments in a variety of densities to meet the varying requirements of families. 
400.6.  Purposes of the RMH Residential Mobile Home Park District. The RMH District is designed to recognize mobile home living as a residential use necessitating location in residential areas yet requiring regulation to insure a suitable living environment. 
400.7.  Purposes of the RMT Residential Multi-Family Townhouse District. The RMT district is designed to permit the development of attached single-family townhouse dwellings, on separate lots, which are designed expressly for separate ownership, in suitable residential environments at a higher density than conventional detached single-family dwellings.  
Sec. 410. - Principal uses permitted in residential districts. 
The use unit designates the principal uses permitted in the residential districts. The use units are groupings of individual uses and are fully described, including their respective off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use conditions in Chapter 9. The use units permitted in residential districts are set forth in Table 1. 
Table 1 
Use Units Permitted in Residential Districts* 
Number Name of Use Unit 
(see Chapter 9) 	Districts 
	RE 	RS 	RD 	RM 	RMH 	RMT 
1. Area wide uses by right 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
2. Area wide special exception uses 	E 	E 	E 	E 	E 	E 
4. Public protection, utility and public parks 	E# 	E# 	E# 	E# 	E# 	E# 
5. Community services, and similar uses 	E 	E 	E 	E 	E 	E 
6. Single-family dwelling 	X 	X 	X 	X 	E 	E 
7. Duplex dwelling 		E*** 	X 	X 		
8. Multi-family dwelling and similar uses 		E## 	E## 	X 		X** 
9. Manufactured housing 	E### 				X 	
 
X — Use by right. 
E — Special exception. 
# — Antennas and antenna support structures are not permitted by special exception in any R district. 
**Multi-family dwellings, other than townhouses, are not permitted in the RM-T District. 
***Duplexes are permitted only in the RS-3 District upon approval of a special exception from the Board of Adjustment. 
## Nursing homes, community group homes, convents, monasteries and novitiates are the only uses in Use Unit 8 that are permitted by special exception in RS-3 and RD Districts. 
### Mobile home dwellings are not permitted in the RS districts. 
Table 2 
Accessory Uses Permitted in Residential Districts 
	Uses 	Districts 
1. 	Home occupations 	All R Districts* 
2. 	Roomers and boarders: 	
	 Two persons 	All R Districts 
	 More than two people 	All R Districts* 
3. 	Shelters 	All R Districts 
4. 	Signs: 	All R Districts 
	 Bulletin board* 	
	 Identification sign 	
	 Real estate 	
	 Construction sign 	
5. 	Swimming pool 	All R Districts 
6. 	Management and office and private recreation, laundry, and storage Facilities 	RM-1, RM-2, RMH, RM-T 
7. 	Wind energy conversion systems 	RE, RS-1*** 
8. 	Antennas and antenna support structures 	All R Districts** 
9. 	Family day care home 	All R Districts 
10. 	Marijuana cultivation 	All R Districts 
 
*By special exception requiring Board of Adjustment approval. 
**In rear yards only. 
***Wind energy conservation systems are permitted only in the RE and RS-1 districts upon approval of a special exception from the Board of Adjustment. 
420.2.  Accessory use conditions. 
General conditions: 
1.  An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements applicable to the principal building. 
2.  A detached accessory building shall not be located in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line, but this limitation shall not apply to carports, provided the minimum required front yard or side yard or setback line is observed. 
3.  Within the rear yard, a detached accessory building shall be located at least five (5) feet from any interior lot line. 
4.  One (1) unoccupied recreational vehicle, a length of thirty-five (35) feet or less, may be parked upon a lot as an accessory use, in the rear yard on hard surface only. 
A.  Home occupations. An occupation, profession, or trade customarily carried on by occupants of a dwelling unit as a secondary use, which is clearly incidental to the principal use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes, is allowed as an accessory use in residential districts, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Location: Home occupation shall be conducted only within principal structure. 
2.  Area: The maximum floor area utilized for home occupation purposes shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor is of the principal structure. 
3.  Employees: Only the family or person occupying the dwelling as a private residence shall engage in the home occupation. No person shall be employed in the home occupation other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
4.  Visibility of merchandise: No merchandise shall be displayed in such a manner as to be visible from off the premises. 
5.  Outdoor storage: No outdoor storage shall be allowed in connection with any home occupation. 
6.  Maintenance of residential character: No alteration of the residential character of the premises may be made. 
7.  Signs: One (1) identification sign shall be permitted for each home occupation advertising its use; the sign shall be affixed to the principal building or customary accessory buildings and shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area. No illumination of any type shall be permitted. 
8.  Disturbances: No mechanical or electrical equipment or other activities shall be allowed which create a noise, dust, odor, or electrical disturbance. 
9.  Traffic and parking: No home occupation shall generate more than fifteen (15) additional trips per day to and from the premises and all parking needs generated shall be accommodated by off-street parking which does not alter the residential character of the premises. 
B.  Roomers and boarders. In a dwelling unit occupied as a private residence, one (1) or more rooms may be rented or table board furnished, to not more than: (a) two (2) persons who are non-members of the family occupying said premises as a permitted accessory use; or (b) more than two (2) persons by special exception requiring Board of Adjustment approval. However, in case, no window displays or sign board shall be used to advertise such use. 
C.  Antennas and antenna support structures. 
1.  Antennas and antenna support structures which are accessory to a residential use are permitted to be mounted on a residential dwelling or a customary accessory building; provided, that it does not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height measured from the average ground elevation at the residential dwelling to the highest horizontal point of the antenna and antenna support structure and that the surface area of all such mounted antennas shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. Only one (1) side having the largest surface area is to be calculated. These provisions do not apply to principal use antennas or to antennas which are accessory to uses requiring Board of Adjustment approval. 
2.  Structures other than a dwelling or customary accessory building which are used to support accessory antennas (including guy lines) shall: 
a.  Be located in the rear yard only, and be limited to one such structure; 
b.  Not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height, measured from the average ground elevation at the residential dwelling to the highest point of the antenna and antenna support structure; 
c.  Not encroach upon the land or airspace of any abutting property; and 
d.  Not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in width above twenty-five (25) feet in height, exclusive of guy lines. 
D.  Marijuana cultivation.  
Sec. 430. - Bulk and area requirements in residential districts. 
430.1.  Bulk and area requirements in the RE, RS, RD, and RM districts are shown in Table 3. 
Table 3 
Bulk and are Requirements in the RE, RS, RD and RM Districts 
	RE 	RS-1 	RS-2 	RS-3 	RD 	RM-T 	RM-1 	RM-2 
Lot Width 
(minimum feet) 								
One family 	150* 	100 	75 	60 	60 		60 	60 
Two family 					80 	70 	60 	60 
Multi-family (other than RM-T) 							100 	100 
Lot Area 
(minimum square feet) 								
One family 	24,000 	13,500 	9,000 	6,900 	6,000 		6,000 	6,000 
Two family 					8,000 		7,450 	6,900 
Multi-family (other than RM-T) 							9,800 	8,300 
Land Area per D.U. 
(minimum square feet) 								
One family 	28,375 	16,000 	10,875 	8,400 	7,500 		7,500 	7,500 
Two family 					5,000 		4,600 	4,200 
Multi-family (other than RM-T) 								
For each of the first two 								
D.U.'s on the Lot 					4,600 	4,200 		
For each additional D.U. 								
Less than two bedrooms 					3,100 	2,400 		
Two or more bedrooms 					4,356 	3,100 		
Townhouse
Development** 								
Development width 
(minimum feet) 				100 	100 	100 		
Lot width 
(minimum feet) 						20 	20 	20 
Lot area 
(minimum square feet) 						1,600 	1,600 	1,600 
Land area (of development) per D.U. 
(minimum square feet) 						4,500 	4,500 	3,100 
Structure height (maximum feet) 	26 	26 	26 	26 	26 	26 	26*** 	26 
Livability space per D.U. (min square feet) 	12,000 	7,000 	5,000 	4,000 	2,000 	1,800 	1,500 	1,000 
Front Yard Abutting a Public Street: 
Measured from centerline of abutting street; add one-half (½) of right-of-way designated on the major street plan or 25 feet if not designated on major street plan (minimum feet). 
Major 	35 	35 	35 	35 	35 	35 	35 	35 
Not a major 	35 	35 	30 	25 	25 	25 	25 	10 
All Other Yards Abutting a Public Street: 
Measured from centerline of abutting street; add one-half (½) of right-of-way designated on major street plan or twenty-five (25) feet if not designated on major street plan (minimum feet). 
Major 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	15 	15 
Not a major 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 	15 
Rear yards 
(minimum feet) 	25 	25 	25 	20 	20 	20 	20 	10 
Side yards 
(minimum feet)**** 								
 One side yard 	15 	10 	10 	5 	5 	5 	10 	10 
 Other side yard 	15 	10 	5 	5 	5 	— 	5 	10 
 
*The frontage of any lot in the RE district which meets the requirements of minimum lot size may be less than the minimum frontages as long as the front building line on said lot is a minimum of one hundred twenty-five (125) linear feet. 
**A minimum of three (3) townhouse lots. 
***In the RM-1 district, a one-story limitation shall apply to structures containing more than three (3) dwelling units which are within fifty (50) feet of an adjoining RE or RS district. 
****Does not apply to interior lot line of townhouse developments. 
430.2.  Bulk and area requirements in the RMH district. 
A. 	The mobile home park development: 	5 acres 
	Tract area (minimum) 	300 feet 
	Tract width (minimum) 	5,445 square feet 
	Land area per dwelling unit (minimum) 	300 square feet 
	Livability space shall be provided in common areas of not less than 7,500 square feet, located so as to be conveniently accessible to the mobile homes it is intended to serve 	
	Front yards and any yard abutting a public street: 	
	Measured from centerline of abutting street; add ½ of right-of-way designated on major street plan 	
	Or 25 feet if not designated on major street plan (minimum feet) 	
	Abutting a major 	35 feet 
	Not abutting a major 	25 feet 
	Side yard (minimum) 	10 feet 
	Rear yard (minimum) 	10 feet 
	Height (maximum) 	One story 
	Internal requirements: 	
	Mobile home space (minimum) exclusive of streets, 	
	Required off-street parking, and required 	
	Livability space 	3,000 square feet 
	Separation between mobile homes (minimum) 	20 feet 
	Mobile Home Setback from Centerline of a Private 	
	Internal Street (minimum) 	22 feet 
 
Private streets will be allowed, but they must meet the standards for public streets. 
B.  Mobile home subdivisions. A mobile home park development containing a tract area of not less than five (5) acres may be subdivided to permit individual ownership of mobile home spaces, provided the resulting lots shall comply with the bulk and area requirements set out below and a subdivision plat incorporating the bulk and area requirements is submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission and filed of record in the office of the county clerk where the property is located. 
Land area per dwelling unit (minimum) 	5,000 square feet 
Lot size (minimum) 	4,000 square feet 
Lot width (minimum) 	35 feet 
Livability space per dwelling unit (minimum) 	1,000 square feet 
Height (maximum) 	One story 
Front yard and any yard abutting a public street: 	
Measured from centerline; add to the distance designated in the column below ½ of the right-of-way width designated on the major street plan 
Or 25 feet if not designated on major street plan (minimum) 
Private streets will not be allowed 
Abutting a major 	35 feet 
Not abutting a major 	25 feet 
One side yard (minimum) 	10 feet 
Other side yard (minimum) 	10 feet 
Rear yard (minimum) 	10 feet 
 
430.2(A).  Definitions and terms. 
A.  Residential manufactured home subdivision means an exclusive family residential housing subdivision for manufactured homes and modular housing units in which the home or housing unit owner owns the property upon which the home is situated; 
B.  Residential manufactured home means transportable, factory built, detached single-family residential dwelling built in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standard of 1995. 
430.2(B).  Use conditions. All units in a residential manufactured home subdivision shall meet with no variance of the following conditions: 
A.  All residential manufactures housing subdivisions shall be platted according to the adopted subdivision regulations meeting all requirements therein with no variances from the SMAPC or council. A building permit is required prior to installation or construction on any lot. Application for a building permit requires a site plan, footing and foundation plan and show a front and side view of the manufactured house as it will appear after installation, demonstrating architectural compliance with the ordinance. No RMH shall be located next to RS-1 or RS-2 zoned property. 
B.  The unit must bear a seal certifying compliance with the Federal Manufactured Construction and Safety Standards as revised on April 1, 1995. In addition, the structure must comply with the wind safety standards provisions for Wind Zone 1, as set forth in said standards. 
C.  The unit is dual or triple sectional with a minimum front width of twenty-four (24) feet and a minimum floor area of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
D.  Every manufactured home must have a site plan, and footing plan. Footing and foundation/stemwall installation shall be inspected by the building inspector prior to installation of a manufactured home to insure conformance with the regulations of this chapter. The unit must be attached to a continuous concrete or concrete block foundation that complies with the building code. The foundation must be an excavated and back filled foundation that complies with the building code. The foundation must be excavated and back filled foundation, enclosed at the perimeter with the finished floor being a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches above the exterior grade of the lot. Due to differences in construction between manufactured and modular homes the attachment to the foundation will differ, manufactured housing, shall use methods described in attachment A, Modular housing may use methods described by attachment A or B. If the dwelling is multi-leveled, the lowest finished floor above exterior shall meet this requirement. The manufactured unit shall have a brick or rock wainscot to the bottom of the windows. No metal will be allowed. Transport axels and towing tongue must be removed. 
E.  The roof must be gable or hip type construction with at least Class C fire resistant shingle roofing material. No dwelling shall have a roof covered with continuous rolled metal. The roof slope must have a minimum vertical rise of three (3) inches for every twelve (12) inches of horizontal run with a minimum cave projection and roof overhang of twelve (12) inches, which may include guttering. 
F.  Front and rear porches and site built steps must be constructed with exterior materials matching the structure. All units must have an attached two (2) car garage. The exterior covering material used on the garage shall be the same as exterior covering material used on a substantial portion of the dwelling and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The same roofing material shall be used on the garage and dwelling. 
G.  The exterior finish must be comparable to and compatible with site-built houses on the block face. No bare metal siding or roofing is allowed. 
H.  No residential manufactured home can be site adjacent to any structure designated as a historic landmark or within a locally designated historic district. 
I.  Items A—H of this section as listed above may not waived, modified, or otherwise altered by the Board of Adjustment or City Council except by amendment of this section. 
430.4.  Residential Manufactured Home Subdivision RMH. 
(1)  General description. 
A.  This zoning district is intended to provide for an alternative living style land dwelling and dwelling type to conventional single-family housing. The purpose of this district is to provide a grouping of home sites within the setting of a residential subdivision for manufactured and modular housing. This district provides for individual lots which allow the manufactures home owner to own the property in which the home is situated. A minimum subdivision size is established to assure that a desirable residential environment is created, and to provide separation from neighboring conventional housing areas. Residential manufactured homes can provide a major source of acceptable housing for persons of moderate income at a time when the cost of conventional housing is increasing. 
B.  The RMH zone will allow the maximum amount of freedom possible in the design of the homes in the areas, and will provide for related recreational, commercial and other service facilities for the planned residential developments. The requirements established in this district are intended to afford adequate design planning and utilization of the land, provide for open and pedestrian space, to encourage site and development plans which will maximize compatibility between manufactured home developments and developments on adjoining land, and to protect and enhance the manufactured home site and its environs. 
(2)  Uses permitted. Property in the residential manufactured home subdivision district shall be used exclusively for the following purposes: 
A.  Single-family detached dwellings, modular homes, and residential-design manufactured homes; 
B.  Public facilities such as parks, playgrounds, community centers, churches, schools, libraries, and noncommercial facilities such as golf courses, shuffleboard courts, swimming pools and tennis courts; and 
C.  Accessory buildings and uses customary and incidental to any of the above uses when located on the same lot. 
(3)  Special exceptions. Since the manufactured home subdivision district is an exclusive district, only municipal uses, public buildings and public utilities which hold the right of eminent domain may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment as special exceptions. 
(4)  Area requirements. In order to ensure adequate light, air, fire safety, convenience and amenities for the residents in the manufactured home subdivision development, the following area requirements shall apply: 
A.  The manufactured home subdivision district shall not be allowed on tracts of land less than five (5) contiguous acres; 
B.  Front yard set-back: All manufactured homes shall be set back from the front property line a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. When a lot has double frontage, the front yard setback shall be provided on both streets. 
C.  Side yard setback: All manufactured homes shall be set back from the side yard property line a minimum distance of ten (10) feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use shall be set back from the side yard property line and other buildings a minimum distance of five (5) feet. On any corner lot, dwellings, manufactured homes and accessory buildings shall be set back from the side property line a distance of fifteen (15) feet when a lot is back to back with another corner lot, and a distance of twenty (20) feet in all other instances; 
D.  Rear yard setback: All manufactured homes shall be set back from the rear property line a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear of the yard, but shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the alley line or rear property line and clear of utility easements. 
(5)  Intensity of use. 
A.  For each manufactured home site, there shall be a minimum lot area of not less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet. Each lot will have a minimum of eighty (80) feet of front lot width. 
B.  Individual manufactured home site lots on cul-de-sacs and exterior curve radiuses shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than forty (40) feet. 
C.  Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary lines of that lot touch land under other ownership on the effective date of these regulations, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches, permitted by these regulations. 
D.  For churches and main accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to the dwelling, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking areas required in Chapter 10 et seq. of this Code. 
E.  There shall be no more than one (1) dwelling unit and one accessory use per lot in the RMH Manufactured Home Subdivision District. 
(6)  Coverage. 
A.  Maximum density in any manufactured home subdivision development shall not exceed four point eight (4.8) units per gross acre for all single-family dwellings. For purposes of these regulations, gross acreage is to be computed as all usable land area within the exterior boundaries of the property, including streets, common open space, lands occupied by recreation facilities, community buildings, manufactured homes and utility easements. No manufactured housing shall be allowed in a designated floodplain. 
B.  Manufactured home dwelling units and their accessory uses shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the total usable lot area on interior lots, and thirty-five (35) percent of the lot area on a corner. 
(7)  Height. No building shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. In no instance shall the height be increased on the manufactured or modular home nor shall the manufactured or modular home be structurally altered, modified, enlarged or added to in any way which will increase the height of the dwelling or structurally alter the roof of the dwellings; however, accessory use structures may be modified, enlarged, altered or added to upon review. It shall be permissible to enhance the outward appearance of the manufactured home dwelling so long as its structural integrity is not compromised.  
Sec. 440. - Site plan review—Mobile home parks and multi-family complexes over eight units. 
440.1.  Purpose. By reason of potential adverse effects on public services or to neighboring land uses, site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission is required for all mobile home park developments and multi-family complexes over eight (8) units for the purposes of assuring proper accessibility, circulation, functional relationships of uses, and compatibility with adjoining and nearby development. No building permit shall be issued nor use commenced on a site approved for these uses except in accordance with a site plan submitted and approved. 
440.2.  Application for site plan review. The application shall be in such a format and content as the Planning Commission may by resolution establish, with twenty (20) copies of the site plan submitted. The Planning Commission staff shall review and approve or deny site plans on developments of eight (8) units or less. Appeals from denial by staff are made to the Planning Commission. 
All other site plans shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the Planning Commission. A site plan shall consist of maps containing: 
A.  Proposed location of uses, including off-street parking, open spaces, public uses, and placement of mobile homes; 
B.  Location, height, and size of buildings and other structures; 
C.  Proposed location of all existing or proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences; 
D.  Public and private vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
E.  Hydrology report as per Article VI, Sections 6-45 to 6-52 of the Sapulpa City Code; 
F.  Proposed location and development of buffer areas, screening and landscaping; 
G.  The location of all residential uses expressed in number of dwelling units; 
H.  A computation of lot area, building floor area, and building coverage; 
I.  Proposed location, height, and size of any ground sign; 
J.  Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the development to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed; 
K.  Existing and topographic character of the land including identification of floodplain areas, treed areas and slope analysis; 
L.  An explanation of the character of the development.  
Sec. 450. - Special exception uses in residential districts. 
Requirements: The special exception uses, permitted in the residential districts, as designated in Table 1, are subject to the minimum requirements set out below and such additional safeguards and conditions as may be imposed by the Board of Adjustment. 
A.  The accessory use provisions of the residential districts pertaining to signs are applicable to accessory signs for principal uses permitted by special exception. 
B.  In the RE and RS districts, children's nurseries shall comply with the lot width, lot area, height, and yard requirements for single-family use and, in addition, a maximum floor area ratio of five-tenths (.5) shall apply. 
C.  Except as provided in subsection B, above, and Section 230, special exception uses shall comply with the least restrictive yard and height requirements of the district in which located and, in addition, shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Maximum floor area ratio of five-tenths (.5). 
2.  Minimum lot size of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
3.  Minimum frontage of one hundred (100) feet. 
4.  A minimum building setback of twenty-five feet from abutting properties located within an R District. 
Provided that if the use unit requirements are greater, the use requirements shall control. 
D.  Wind energy conversion systems (WECS). All WECS in RE and RS-1 zones shall comply with the restrictions and requirements of Section 320.2.B.  
Chapter 5 - OFFICE DISTRICT PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 500. - Purposes of office districts. 
500.1.  General purposes. The office districts are designed to preserve and promote the development of efficient office facilities and to maximize the compatibility with other land uses by: 
A.  Establishing bulk and area controls. 
B.  Requiring off-street parking and loading facilities. 
C.  Establishing the several districts necessary to meet the need for a variety of office types. 
D.  Controlling the number, area, location, and types of signs. 
500.2.  Purposes of the OL Office Low Intensity District. The OL District is designed to facilitate the development and preservation of low intensity office development. 
500.3.  Purposes of the OM Office Medium Intensity District. The OM District is designed to provide area for offices, together with certain community facilities normally compatible with primary office uses. It is designed to preserve existing medium intensity office development and to facilitate the development of new medium intensity office areas.  
Sec. 510. - Principal uses permitted in office districts. 
The principal uses permitted in the office districts are designated by use units. The use units are groupings of individual uses and are fully described, including their respective off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use conditions in Chapter 9. The use units permitted in office districts are set forth in Table 1. 
Table 1 
Use Units Permitted in Office Districts* 
No. 	Use Units 	Districts 
		OL 	OM 	
1. 	Areawide uses 	X 	X 	
2. 	Areawide special exception 	E 	E 	
4. 	Public protection, utility and parks 	E*** 	E*** 	
5. 	Community services, cultural and recreational uses 	E 	X** 	
8. 	Multi-family dwellings and similar uses 	E 	E 	
10. 	Off-street parking areas 	X 	X 	
11. 	Offices and studios 	X 	X 	
 
X — Use by right. 
E — Use by special exception. 
**  Emergency and protective shelter permitted by special exception only. 
***  Antennas and antenna support structures are not permitted by special exception in any O District.  
Sec. 520. - Accessory uses permitted in office districts. 
520.1.  Accessory uses permitted. Accessory uses customarily incident to a principal use permitted in an office district are permitted in such a district. In addition, the uses set forth in Table 2 are permitted. 
Table 2 
Accessory Uses Permitted in Office Districts 
Uses 	Districts 
Barber and beauty shop 	OL*, OM 
Business signs 	OL, OM 
Convenience goods and services 	OL*, OM 
Eating places, other than drive-ins 	OL*, OM 
Construction sign 	OL, OM 
Real estate sign 	OL, OM 
Private clubs 	OL*, OM 
Shopping goods and services 	OL*, OM 
Antennas and antenna support structures 	OL, OM 
 
*By special exception requiring Board of Adjustment approval subject to the requirements set forth in Section 540. 
520.2.  Accessory use conditions. 
A.  General conditions. 
1.  Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum building setback lines of the applicable district. 
2.  An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall therewith and shall comply with the requirements applicable to the principal building. 
B.  Convenience goods and services and shopping goods and services. 
1.  Limited to the uses included in Use Unit 13 (Chapter 9). 
2.  Shall be located entirely within the principal building. 
3.  Shall not occupy more than fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor of the building in which located. 
C.  Eating places other than drive-ins. 
1.  Limited to the uses included in Chapter 9, Use Unit 12 designed and located for the convenience of the occupants of the principal building. 
2.  Shall be located entirely within the principal building. 
3.  Shall not occupy more than five (5) percent of the gross floor area of the building in which located. 
4.  Exterior signs identifying the eating place are prohibited. 
D.  Private clubs. With the OM District the private club shall be located entirely within the principal building and shall not occupy more than five (5) percent of the gross floor area of the building in which located. 
E.  Within the OM District, the principal office structure may include an eating place (five (5) percent maximum), private club (five (5) percent maximum), and accessory goods and services (fifteen (15) percent maximum), or a total of twenty-five (25) percent maximum of the total gross floor area devoted to the uses. Provided, the eating place, private club, and accessory convenience goods and services do not exceed the maximum allowable for each individual use. 
F.  Special housing facilities in Use Unit 5 (Community Services), Use Unit 6 (single-family), and Use Unit 8 (multi-family) shall meet applicable use conditions and off-street parking and loading requirements as provided in Chapter 10. 
G.  Antennas and antenna support structures. 
1.  Antennas and antenna support structures which are accessory to an office use are permitted to be mounted on an office building or customary accessory building; provide that it does not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height measured from the average ground elevation at the office building to the highest horizontal point of the antenna and antenna support structure and that surface area of all such mounted Antennas shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. Only one (1) side having the largest surface area is to be calculated. These provisions do not apply to principal use antennas or to antennas which are accessory to uses requiring Board of Adjustment approval. 
2.  Structures other than an office building or a customary accessory building which are used to support accessory antennas (or guy lines) shall: 
a.  Be located in the rear yard only and be limited to one such structure; 
b.  Not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height, measured from the average ground elevation at the office building to the highest point of the antenna and antenna support structure; 
c.  Not encroach upon the land or airspace of any abutting property; and 
d.  Not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in width above twenty-five (25) feet in height, exclusive of guy lines.  
Sec. 530. - Bulk and area requirements in the office districts. 
Table 3 
Bulk and Area Requirements in the Office District 
	Districts 
Frontage (minimum feet) 	OL 	OM 
Major and freeway service road 	75 	100 
Not a major 	50 	50 
Floor area ratio (maximum) 	.25 	.50 
Setback from centerline of abutting street (minimum feet): 
Measured from centerline of abutting street; add ½ of the right-of-way width designated on the major street plan, or 25 feet if the street is not designated on the major street plan: 
Major 	50 	50 
Not a major 	25 	25 
Setback from abutting R District boundary lines (minimum feet) 	10 	10* 
Building Height (maximum feet) 	18 	N/A 
 
*Plus one (1) foot of setback for each one (1) foot of building height exceeding eighteen (18) feet, from an abutting, RE, RS, or RD District.  
Sec. 540. - Special exception uses in office districts, requirements. 
The special exception uses, permitted in the office districts as designated in Tables 1 and 2, are subject to the minimum requirements set out below and such additional safeguards and conditions as may be imposed by the Board of Adjustment: 
A.  The accessory provisions of the office districts pertaining to signs apply to signs which are accessory to uses permitted by special exception; provided that each sign permitted shall primarily identify the principal office building; permitted accessory convenience goods and services shall be secondary. 
B.  Multi-family use in the OL and OM District shall comply with the bulk and area requirements of the RM-1 District. 
C.  Convenience goods and services in the OL District shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  No accessory convenience goods and services shall be permitted unless the principal building contains a minimum of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor space. 
2.  The permitted accessory goods and services listed below shall be located entirely within the principal building and shall have its own pedestrian entrance and exit through the principal building. 
3.  Permitted accessory convenience goods and services in the OL District are limited to the following uses and groupings: 
a.  Barber shop; 
b.  Beauty shop; 
c.  Book store; 
d.  Florist; 
e.  Gift, novelty, souvenir shop; 
f.  Liquor store; 
g.  Newsstand; 
h.  Medical, dental, optical, and orthopedic supplies (prescription service only); 
i.  Stationary and office supplies; 
j.  Tobacco, candy, and nut store. 
i.  The permitted accessory convenience goods and services listed above shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the building in which located; provided that if a club is requested that the total gross floor area for all accessory uses, including a private club, shall not exceed twelve and one-half (12.5) percent. 
ii.  Each accessory use shall be limited to a maximum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area per specific use grouping (a.—j.) listed above. 
D.  Private clubs or eating places, other than drive-ins in the OL District shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The private club or eating place shall be located within the principal building. 
2.  The private club or eating place shall not occupy more than five (5) percent of the gross floor area of the building in which located. 
3.  The private club or eating place shall be listed on the building directory only. 
E.  Except as provided in Section 230 for public protection and utility facilities, a minimum frontage of one hundred (100) feet are the requirements of the special exception uses unless the use unit requirements are more restrictive, in which case the more restrictive shall apply.  
Sec. 550. - Site plan review. 
By reason of potential adverse effects on public services or to neighboring land uses, site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission is required for all office developments for the purpose of assuring proper accessibility, circulation, functional relationships of uses and compatibility with the adjoining and nearby development. No building permit shall be issued nor use commenced within this development except in accordance with an approved site plan. See Sections 660.2 and 660.3 which also apply to the office site plan review process.  
Chapter 6 - COMMERCIAL DISTRICT PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 600. - Purposes of commercial districts. 
600.1.  General purposes. The commercial districts are designed to: 
A.  Achieve the commercial objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Meet the needs for commercial services and goods of the trade area. 
C.  Preserve and promote the development of efficient commercial facilities and encourage a compatible relationship between commercial facilities and other land uses and thoroughfares by: 
1.  Differentiating the types and purposes of commercial activities. 
2.  Establishing bulk and area controls. 
3.  Requiring off-street loading and parking facilities. 
4.  Controlling the number, area, location, and types of signs. 
5.  Protecting the character of commercial districts and their peculiar suitability for commercial uses. 
600.2.  Purposes of the CS Shopping Center District. The CS District is designed to accommodate convenience, neighborhood, sub-community, community, and regional shopping centers providing a wide range of retail and personal service uses. 
600.3.  Purpose of the CG General Commercial District. The CG District is designed to: 
A.  Accommodate existing development of mixed commercial uses which are well established, while providing a degree of protection to adjacent residential areas. 
B.  Accommodate the grouping of certain commercial and light industrial uses which are compatible with one another. 
600.4.  Purpose of the CBD Central Business District. 
A.  Accommodate and encourage the most desirable, productive, and intense use of land, without regard to the regulations of building height, floor area, or parking space requirements, within the central core area of the city designated by the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Encourage a diversity of high intensity customer intense uses which mutually benefit from close proximity to each other and from the available service of the uptown corridor district. 
C.  Preserve and promote the public and private investment of the existing central core area.  
Sec. 610. - Principal uses permitted in commercial districts. 
The principal uses permitted in the commercial districts are designated by use units. The use units are groupings of individual uses and are fully described, including their respective off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use conditions in Chapter 9. The use units permitted in Commercial Districts are set forth below in Table 1. 
Table 1 
Use Units Permitted in Commercial Districts* 
No. 	Name of Use Unit (see Chapter 9) 	Districts 
		CS 	CG 	CBD 
1. 	Area wide uses 	X 	X 	X 
2. 	Area wide special exception 	E 	E 	E 
4. 	Public protection, utility and public parks 	X*** 	X*** 	X*** 
5. 	Community services, and similar uses 	X 	X 	X 
8. 	Multi-family dwellings and similar uses 	E** 	E** 	E** 
10. 	Off-street parking areas 	X 	X 	X 
11. 	Offices and studios 	X 	X 	X 
12. 	Eating places other than drive-ins 	X 	X 	X 
13. 	Convenience goods and services 	X 	X 	X 
14. 	Shopping goods and services 	X 	X 	X 
15. 	Other trades and services 		X 	
16. 	Gasoline service stations 	X 	X 	X 
17. 	Automotive and allied activities 	E 	X 	E 
18. 	Drive-in restaurants 			X 
19. 	Hotel, motel, and recreation facilities 	X 	X 	X 
20. 	Commercial recreation, intensive 		E 	E 
21. 	Business signs and outdoor advertising 	X 	X 	X 
22. 	Warehousing and wholesaling 		E 	
24. 	Light manufacturing and industry 		E 	
27. 	Research and development 			E 
 
X — Use by right. 
E — Special exception. 
**Nursing home, community group home, convent, monastery, and novitiate are permitted as a matter of right; all other uses within use Unit 8 are permitted by Special Exception. 
***Antennas and antenna support structures are permitted only upon approval by the Board of Adjustment as a Special Exception in all C Districts as provided in Chapter 9, Section 904 of this Code 
610.1.  Outside storage and display in CS District. Outside storage and/or display is allowed in a CS District in and under the following conditions: 
A.  "Outside storage and/or display" means the placement of non-perishable items for retail sale in an open area on a lot upon which a commercial structure of fifteen thousand (15,000) or more square feet is located and which structure is open to the public for retail sales of the items placed in the outside storage and/or display area; 
B.  The outside storage and/or display area cannot exceed one hundred sixty (160) square feet and must: 
1.  Maintain a setback of at least thirty (30) feet from any public street right-of-way. 
2.  Be located within thirty-five (35) feet of a public entrance to the commercial structure located on the lot. 
3.  Be adequately separated from the lot parking area so as to preclude the passage or movement of vehicular traffic through the open area. 
4.  Not negatively impact by more than four (4) percent of the required lot parking spaces mandated by the Code. 
5.  Maintain an open air status (no tents or canopies allowed). 
C.  The outside storage and/or display area cannot be used for commercial signage display except for normal pricing and item description advertising similar in size to that located within the commercial structure upon the lot.  
Sec. 620. - Accessory uses permitted in commercial districts. 
620.1.  Accessory uses permitted. Accessory uses customarily incident to a principal use permitted in a commercial district are permitted in such district. 
620.2.  Accessory use conditions. 
A.  Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum building setback lines of the applicable district. 
B.  An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements applicable to the principal building. 
C.  Signs in the commercial districts, whether accessory or principal uses, are subject to the use conditions of the Use Unit 21 of Chapter 9. 
D.  Antennas and antenna support structures. 
1.  Antennas and antenna support structures which are accessory to a commercial use are permitted to be mounted on a commercial office building or customary accessory building; provided, that it does not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height measured from the average ground elevation at the commercial building to the highest horizontal point of the antenna and antenna support structure and that the surface area of all such mounted antennas shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. Only one (1) side having the largest surface area is to be calculated. These provisions do not apply to principal use antennas or to antennas which are accessory to uses requiring Board of Adjustment approval. 
2.  Structures other than an office building or customary accessory building which are used to support accessory antennas (including any guy lines) shall: 
a.  Be located in the rear yard only, and be limited to one such structure; 
b.  Not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height, measured from the average ground elevation at the commercial building to the highest point of the antenna and antenna support structure; 
c.  Not encroach upon the land or airspace of any abutting property; and 
d.  Not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in width above twenty-five (25) feet in height, exclusive of guy lines.  
Sec. 630. - Bulk and area requirements in the commercial districts. 
Table 2 
Bulk and Area Requirements in the Commercial District 
	CS 	CG 	CBD 
Frontage (minimum feet) 			
Major and freeway service road 	150 	100 	25 
Not a major 	50 	50 	50 
Floor area ratio (maximum) 	.35 	.50 	.85 
Setback from centerline of abutting street (minimum feet): 			
Measured from centerline of abutting street; add ½ of the right-of-way width designated on the major street plan, or 25 feet if the street is not designated on the major street plan: 			
Major 	50 	50 	50 
Not a Major 	25 	25 	0 
Setback from abutting R District boundary lines (minimum feet) 	10* 	10* 	10* 
Building height (maximum feet) 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
 
*Plus two (2) feet of setback for each one (1) foot building height exceeding fifteen (15) feet if the abutting property is within an RE, RS, RD, or RMT District.  
Sec. 640. - Special exception uses in commercial district requirements. 
A.  Multi-family use, where permitted by special exception, shall comply with the bulk and area requirements of the RM-2 District. 
B.  Except as provided above, all special exception uses shall comply with the bulk and area requirements of the use district in which located. 
C.  Special housing facilities in Use Unit 8 (multi-family) shall meet applicable use conditions and off-street parking and loading requirements as provided in Chapter 10.  
Sec. 650. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
650.1.  Definitions: As used in this section, the terms sexual conduct and specified anatomical areas shall mean as follows: 
A.  Sexual conduct includes the following: 
1.  The fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
2.  Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy; 
3.  Masturbation; and 
4.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities as set forth in subsections 1 through 3 above. 
B.  Specified anatomical areas includes the following: 
1.  Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
C.  For purposes of this Code, sexually-oriented businesses are defined as follows: 
1.  Adult amusement or entertainment: Amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or material depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, including but not limited to topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment. 
2.  Adult bookstore: An establishment having as a significant portion of its stock in trade books, film, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
3.  Adult mini motion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguishing or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
4.  Adult motel: A motel wherein material is presented, as part of the motel services, via closed circuit T.V. or otherwise, which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
5.  Adult motion picture arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled, still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
6.  Adult motion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct specified anatomical areas. 
7.  Massage parlor: Any place where for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with sexual conduct or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes specified anatomical areas. 
8.  Model studio: Any place other than university or college art classes where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specific anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity. 
9.  Sexual encounter center: Any building or structure which contains, or is used for commercial entertainment where the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with or to allow personal contact by, employees, devices or equipment or by personnel provided by the establishment which appeals to the prurient interest of the patron, to include, but not to be limited to bath houses, massage parlors, and related or similar activities. 
650.2.  Prohibition. No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any of the sexually oriented businesses as defined in Section 650.1, in an area zoned other than "CG". In addition, no person shall cause or permit the establishment of any of the sexually-oriented businesses, as defined in Section 650.1 within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other sexually-oriented business, or within five hundred (500) feet of the nearest property line of a lot containing a church, school, (type which offers a compulsory education curriculum), public or private park, or within three hundred (300) feet of nearest property line of a lot zoned residential or within three hundred (300) feet of a non-major street which provides direct access to a residentially zoned area. 
The establishment of a sexually-oriented business shall include the opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business, the enlargement of such business in either scope or area, or the conversion of an existing business location of any of the uses described in Section 650.1. 
Nothing in this Code is intended to make legal any business or activity that is expressly declared illegal under the provision of this Code or under any state or federal laws.  
Sec. 660. - Site plan review. 
660.1.  Purposes. By reason of potential adverse effects on public services or to neighboring land uses, site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission is required for all commercial developments for the purposes of assuring proper accessibility, circulation, functional relationships of uses, and compatibility with adjoining and nearby development, except as noted in Section 660.2. No building permit shall be issued nor use commenced within this development except in accordance with an approved site plan. 
660.2.  Application for site plan review. An application for site plan review shall be filled with the Planning Commission staff at the time of the sketch plat application. The application shall be in such format and content as the Planning Commission may by resolution establish, with twenty (20) copies of the site plan submitted. The plan must show information showing compliance with applicable sections of this Code and all other applicable City Codes and ordinances. The Planning Commission staff shall review and approve or deny site plans on tracts less than eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet or structural amendment of less than two thousand (2,000) square feet or ten (10) percent (whichever is greater). All other site plans shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the Planning Commission. Appeals from denial by staff to be made to the Planning Commission. 
660.3.  The site plan shall contain: 
A.  Proposed location of uses, including off-street parking design and layout (see Chapter 10 for minimum required dimensions and design standards) open spaces and public uses; 
B.  Location, height, and size of buildings and other structures; 
C.  Proposed location of all existing or proposed site improvements including curb lines, curb cuts and their radii, neighboring curb cuts, drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences; 
D.  Hydrology report as per Article VI, Sections 6-45 through 6-52 of the Sapulpa City Code. 
E.  Internal public and private vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
F.  Proposed location and development of buffer areas, screening and landscaping; 
G.  The location of all uses expressed in floor area, allocation to each identifiable segment of the development; 
H.  A computation of lot area, building floor are, and building coverage for each type proposed use; 
I.  Proposed location, height, and size of any ground signs; 
J.  Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the development to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed; 
K.  Existing topographic character of the land including identification of floodplain areas, treed areas, slope analysis and soil analysis; 
L.  An explanation of the character of the development.  
Chapter 7 - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 700. - Purposes of industrial districts. 
700.1.  General purposes. The industrial districts are designed to: 
A.  Achieve the industrial objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Meet the needs for industrial services and goods of the City of Sapulpa trade area. 
C.  Preserve and promote the development of efficient industrial areas and to minimize the adverse effects of industrial uses on other land uses and thoroughfares by: 
1.  Differentiating the types and purposes of industrial or industrial activities. 
2.  Establishing bulk and area controls. 
3.  Requiring off-street loading and parking facilities. 
4.  Protecting the character of industrial districts and their peculiar suitability for industrial uses. 
700.2.  Purposes of the IR Industrial Research District. The IR District is designed to provide an environment conducive to the development of modern industrial and scientific research facilities, conducted entirely within enclosed buildings and having no objectionable environmental influences. 
700.3.  Purposes of the IL Industrial Light Manufacturing District. The IL District is designed to provide areas suitable for manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing, and other industrial activities which have no objectionable environmental influences. 
700.4.  Purposes of the IM Industrial Moderate District. The IM District is designed to group together a wide range of industrial uses which may produce moderately objectionable environmental influences in their operation and appearance. 
700.5.  Purposes of the IH Industrial Heavy District. The IH District is designed to provide areas for manufacturing and other industrial activities which may constitute substantial objectionable environmental influences or hazards.  
Sec. 710. - Principal uses permitted in industrial districts. 
The principal uses permitted in the industrial districts are designated by use units. The use units are groupings of individual uses and are fully described, including their respective off-street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use conditions in Chapter 9. The use units permitted in the industrial districts are set forth below in Table 1. 
Table 1 
Use Units Permitted in Industrial Districts 
		Districts 
No. 	Name of Use Units 	IR 	IL 	IM 	IH 
1. 	Area wide uses 	X 	X 	X 	X 
2. 	Area wide special exception uses 	E 	E 	E 	E 
3. 	Agriculture 	X 	X 	X 	X 
4. 	Public protection, utility and public parks 	X** 	X** 	X** 	X** 
10. 	Off-street parking areas 	X 	X 	X 	X 
11. 	Offices and studios 	X 	X 	X 	X 
12. 	Easting places other than drive-ins 	E 	E 	E 	E 
13. 	Convenience goods and services 	X 	E 	E 	E 
14. 	Shopping goods and services 	X 	E 	E 	E 
15. 	Other trades and services 		X 	X 	X 
16. 	Gasoline service stations 	X 	X 	X 	X 
17. 	Automotive and allied activities 	X 	X 	X 	
20. 	Commercial recreation; intensive 	E 	E 	X 	X 
21. 	Business signs, outdoor advertising 	X 	X 	X 	
22. 	Warehousing and wholesaling 	X 	X 	X 	
23. 	Land intensive industrial uses 		E 	E 	
24. 	Light manufacturing and industry 	E 	X 	X 	X 
25. 	Moderate manufacturing and industry 	E 	X 	X 	
26. 	Heavy manufacturing and industry 			E 	X 
27. 	Research and development 	X 	X 	X 	X 
 
X — Use by right. 
E — Special exception. 
**Antennas and antenna support structures are permitted only upon approval by the Board of Adjustment as a special exception in all I Districts as provided in Chapter 9, Section 904 of this Code.  
Sec. 720. - Accessory uses permitted in industrial districts. 
720.1.  Accessory uses customarily incident to a principal use permitted in an industrial district are permitted in such district. 
720.2.  Accessory use conditions. 
A.  Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum building setback lines of the applicable district. 
B.  An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements applicable to the principal building. 
C.  Accessory storage of materials, equipment or products within two hundred (200) feet of an abutting R district shall be screened by the erection of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the abutting R district. 
D.  Accessory signs in the IL, IM, and IH districts are subject to the use conditions in Use Unit 21. 
E.  Antennas and antenna support structures. 
1.  Antennas and antenna support structures which are accessory to an industrial use are permitted to be mounted on an industrial building or a customary accessory building; provided, that it does not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height measured from the average ground elevation at the industrial building to the highest horizontal point of the antenna and antenna support structure and that the surface area of all such mounted antennas shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. Only one (1) side having the largest surface area is to be calculated. These provisions do not apply to principal use antennas or to antennas which are accessory to uses requiring Board of Adjustment approval. 
2.  Structures other than an industrial building or customary accessory building which are used to support accessory antennas (including guy lines) shall: 
a.  Be located in the rear yard only, and be limited to one such structure; 
b.  Not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height, measured from the average ground elevation at the industrial building to the highest point of the antenna and antenna support structure; 
c.  Not encroach upon the land or airspace of any abutting property; and 
d.  Not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in width above twenty-five (25) feet in height, exclusive of guy lines.  
Sec. 730. - Bulk and area requirements in the industrial districts. 
(Except as provided in Table 3 for scientific research facilities and institutions.) 
Table 2 
Bulk and Area Requirements in the Industrial Districts 
	Districts 
	IR 	IL 	IM 	IH 
Frontage (minimum feet) 				
Major 	200 	150 	200 	200 
Not a major 	200 	50 	50 	50 
Floor area ratio (maximum) 	.50 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
Setback from centerline of abutting street (minimum feet): 				
Measured from centerline of abutting street, add to the distance designated in the column to the right, ½ of the right-of-way width designated on the major street plan or 25 feet if the street is not designated on the major street plan 				
Major 	50 	50 	50 	50 
Not a major 	50 	25 	25 	25 
Setback from abutting AG, R, or O District 				
Boundary lines (minimum feet)* 	50 	75 	75 	75 
Building height (maximum feet) 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
 
*Does not apply when lot abuts a freeway zoned AG, R or O; however, in those instances a ten (10) feet setback shall be required.  
Sec. 740. - Special exception uses, requirements. 
Special exception uses shall conform to the bulk and area requirements of the use district in which located.  
Sec. 750. - Site plan review. 
By reason of potential adverse effects on public services or to neighboring land uses, site plan review and approval is required for all industrial developments for the purpose of assuring proper accessibility, circulations, functional relationships of uses and compatibility with adjoining and nearby development. No building permit shall be issued nor use commenced within this development except in accordance with an approved site plan. See Sections 660.2 and 660.3 which also apply to the industrial site plan review process.  
Chapter 8 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
 
Sec. 800. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter are to: 
A.  Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public through the conservation, preservation, protection and regulation of historic resources within the City of Sapulpa. 
B.  Safeguard the cultural, social, political and architectural heritage of the City by conserving, preserving and regulation historic preservation districts. 
C.  Conserve, preserve and enhance the environmental quality and economic value of historic preservation districts. 
D.  Strengthen the City's economic base by promotion of conservation and reuse of the City's historic resources. 
E.  Promote the development of the community in accordance with the Comprehensive and historic preservation plans.  
Sec. 810. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Arts Council means the Arts Council of the City of Sapulpa. 
Certificate of appropriateness means the official document issued by the Preservation Commission authorizing work within a historic preservation district. 
Design guidelines means the criteria which shall be used to guide the Preservation Commission in review of an application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
Historic preservation district means a supplemental zoning district consisting of a building, structure, or site or an area containing buildings, structures, or sites that is a historic resource. 
Historic resource means a building, structure, or site, or an area containing a concentration, linkage, or continuity of buildings, structures, or sites which are generally fifty (50) years or older and which contain one (1) or more of the following attributes: 
1.  Has significant character, interest, or value as part of the historical development, history or cultural heritage of the city, state or nation; 
2.  Has significance as the site of a historic even in the past of the city, state, or nation; 
3.  Associated with a person or group of persons, who played a significant role in the historical development, history and cultural heritage of the city, state, or nation; 
4.  The embodiment of distinguishing characteristic, design detail, materials or craftsmanship which represent a historically significant architectural or engineering innovation, type, style or specimen; 
5.  It portrays the environment in an era of history characterized by a distinctive architectural, engineering, or construction style; 
6.  It represents a significant and distinguishable entity of historical importance whose components may lack individual distinction; 
7.  Has yielded, and is likely to yield, important information in prehistory or history; 
8.  Meets the criteria for listing on National Register of Historic Places. 
Planning Commission means the Sapulpa Metropolitan Area Planning Commission. 
Preservation means the adaptive use, conservation, protection, reconstruction, rehabilitation, restoration or stabilization of a historic resource. 
1.  Adaptive use means the restrained alteration of historic resource to accommodate uses for which the resource was not originally constructed, but in such a way so as to maintain the general historical and architectural character. 
2.  Conservation means the sustained appearance of a resource essentially in its existing state. 
3.  Protection means the security of a historic resource as it exists through the establishment of the mechanisms of this chapter. 
4.  Reconstruction means the process of recreating or reproducing by new construction all or part of the form and detail of a vanished historic resource as it appeared at a specific period in time. 
5.  Rehabilitation means the process of recreating a historical resource to a state of efficiency or soundness by repair or alteration designed to encourage its continued use, but without noticeable changing of the exterior appearance of the historic resource. 
6.  Restoration means the process of accurately recovering all or part of the form and detail of a historic resource and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work and the replacement of mission earlier work. 
7.  Stabilization means the process of applying measures designated to halt deterioration and to establish the structural stability of an unsafe or deteriorated resource while maintaining the essential form as it presently exists without noticeable changing the exterior appearance of the historic resource. 
Significant characteristics or a historic resource means those characteristics which are important to the historic resource by design or location, and include, but ae not limited to materials, detail, height, orientation, proportion, rhythm, scale, setback, setting, shape and workmanship. 
1.  Materials means the physical elements of a building, structure, site of area which creates an aesthetic and structural appearance of the resource, including characteristics such as texture, form, composition and style. 
2.  Detail means aspects of a building, structure, site or area which, due to particular treatment, draw attention to certain parts of features of the building, structure, site or area. 
3.  Orientation means the position of a building, structure, site, or area relative to a particular point in which it is viewed or in relation to other fixed elements in the environment. 
4.  Proportion means the visible relationship and order established between buildings, structures, sites or areas, their individual parts to one another, as well as between the parts and the whole. 
5.  Rhythm means the regular pattern or harmonious recurrence of lines, shapes, or forms, such elements occurring within or between buildings, structures, sites or areas; including, but not limited to, windows, doors, roofs, porches, driveways, sidewalks, setbacks and heights. 
6.  Scale means the size of the parts of a building, structure, site or area in relationship to one another and to the human figure. 
7.  Setback means the location of a building of structure as it relates to the street and other buildings and structures around it. 
8.  Setting means the surrounding buildings, structures, landscaping and familiar features which proved a visual aesthetic or perceptual quality of historic resources. 
9.  Shape means the physical configuration of a building, structure, site or area, established by its form, surfaces, edges, heights, width and depth. 
10.  Workmanship means a level of quality exhibited in the construction, detailing, or design of a historic resource. 
Work means any changes to an existing building, structure, lot or any portion thereof, including but not limited to the erection, construction, reconstruction, renovation alteration, painting, removal, or demolition of a building, structure, or lot, irrespective of whether or not a building permit is required.  
Sec. 820. - Sapulpa Preservation Commission. 
820.1.  Creation. There is hereby created a Sapulpa Preservation Commission, hereinafter referred to as "Preservation Commission." 
820.2.  Appointments. The Preservation Committee shall be appointed in one (1) of the following ways: 
A.  The City Commission may confer the supplemental designation of the Preservation Commission upon an existing civil organization, this supplemental designation may be removed from said civic group by the mayor, subject to approval by the City Commission. 
B.  In lieu thereof, the mayor may appoint members of the Preservation Commission, subject to approval by the City Commission, selected from a list of nominee solicited from the appropriate organizations related to the position being filled, such as; architectural, landscape architectural, planning, building and real estate organizations, neighborhood associations, Uptown Sapulpa Action, Sapulpa Arts Council and the Sapulpa Historical Society. 
820.3.  Terms. If an existing civic group is designated as Preservation Commission by the Board of Commissioners, they shall set their own terms. If the Preservation Commission is appointed by the mayor and City Commission, the terms shall be for three (3) years, except that initial terms shall be staggered as follows: One-third ( 1/3 ) of the appointments, one (1) year term; one-third ( 1/3 ) for two (2) year terms, and the remaining one-third ( 1/3 ) shall be for three (3) year terms. All members shall serve until their successor takes office. 
820.4.  Vacancies. If an existing civic group is designated as Preservation Commission by the Board of Commissioners, they shall set their own replacements. If the Preservation Commission is appointed by the Mayor and City Commission, in the event of a vacancy occurring in the membership of the Preservation Commission for any reason, an appointment shall be made in the same manner as regular appointments. 
820.5.  Compensation. Members of the Preservation Commission shall serve without compensation. 
820.6.  Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary. If the Preservation Commission is appointed by the Mayor and City Commission, the Preservation Commission shall annually elect from its appointed members a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary, vacancies shall be filled in similar manner as regular election. 
820.7.  Rules of procedure. The Preservation Commission shall make and adopt regulations for the conduct of its business. 
820.8.  Meetings. The Preservation Commission shall meet at least once a month for the purpose of transacting its business and duties as set forth in the chapter; provided however, in fulfilling its duties related to Certificate of Appropriateness applications, the Preservation Commission may hold at least one (1) addition meeting a month, as necessary. All meetings, deliberation and voting of the Preservation Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon all actions, or if failing to vote, indication that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the City Planner and shall be a matter of public record. 
820.9.  Minimum vote. Issues shall be decided by a simple majority of votes by those members present. 
820.10.  Conflict of interest. Members of the Preservation Commission to whom some private benefit, directly or indirectly, may come as a result of a public action taken by the Preservation Commission, should not be a participant in that action. The possibility, not actuality, of a conflict should govern. The individual experiencing a conflict of interest shall declare his interest, and abstain from the voting in the matter. The individual should not discuss the matter with fellow member or member of the City Commissioner, Planning Commission of the purpose of influencing a decision thereof. 
820.11.  Staff. The Department of Technical Services shall provide staff to the Preservation Commission to assist in the performance of its duties. 
820.12.  Powers and duties. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the duties of the Preservation Commission shall be: 
A.  Prepare, or cause to be prepared, a comprehensive inventory of historical resources within the City of Sapulpa and update said inventory as deemed necessary. 
B.  Prepare, or cause to be prepared, proposed Historic Preservation Zoning Map amendments or other amendments to the Sapulpa Historic Preservation Plan to be recommended to the Planning Commission for public hearing and adoption as part of the Comprehensive Plan for the City of Sapulpa. 
C.  Prepare findings relating to, and make recommendations on, zoning map amendments as set forth in Section 840 of this chapter. 
D.  Promulgate Design Guidelines as are necessary for the review and approval of applications for certificate of appropriateness and to inform resident property owners, and the general public of those guidelines, design guidelines shall relate to the significant characteristics of the historic resource(s) being proposed for "HP" designation, the design guidelines shall be developed by the Preservation Commission and shall include review and input of the property owner(s) or agents and other parties directly affected by the proposed designation. Such design guidelines shall be subject to approval and adoption by the City Commission, upon the holding of a public hearing by the Planning Commission, and their recommendation of the Preservation Commission and Planning Commission. 
E.  Act upon applications for certificate of appropriateness and perform other duties as set forth in Section 850 of the chapter. 
F.  Make recommendations to the City Commission concerning grants and programs from federal and state agencies, private groups and individuals and the utilization of budgetary appropriations to promote the preservation of historic resources in the City of Sapulpa. Coordinate and oversee such programs and projects as may be directed by the City Commission. 
G.  Recommendations to the City Commission the need for employing staff making contracts with professional and technical experts as may be required for the furtherance of Preservation Commission work. 
H.  Increase public awareness of the historic resources in the City of Sapulpa and disseminate information to the public concerning historic resources in the City of Sapulpa deemed worthy of preservations. Provide notification, as effectively as possible, to property owners within the HP zoning districts of designation and requirements of such designation. Advise and disseminate information to property owners on the preservation, conservation, protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of Historic Resources. 
I.  Place, or cause to be placed, monuments, markers or other identifying elements at locations of historical resources as funds are available. 
J.  Coordinate, comment on and make recommendations to the appropriate body concerning actions undertaken by other city, state and federal agencies with respect to the effect of such actions upon the historical resources in the City of Sapulpa. 
K.  Consider methods other than those provided for in this chapter for encouraging and achieving preservation of historic resources in the City of Sapulpa and make appropriate recommendations to the City Commission and to other bodies and agencies, both public and private. 
L.  Prepare, or cause to be prepared, studies and reports and undertake other preservation related tasks as may be deemed appropriate. 
M.  Prepare, or cause to be prepared, in accordance with the goals and objectives set forth for neighborhood conservation in the Comprehensive Plan of the Sapulpa Metropolitan Area, programs and plans designed to implement neighborhood stabilization, revitalization and conservation in those neighborhoods of the City of Sapulpa that are fifty (50) years old or older which may lack significance according to the criteria in Section 840, yet represents valuable resources to the City of Sapulpa. 
N.  Preform any other duties and functions imposed by this chapter or which may be specified by the City Commission.  
Sec. 830. - Historic preservation district provisions. 
830.1.  General provisions. Property located within a historic preservation district is supplemental a zoning district having the designation HP. 
830.2.  Permitted uses. Property located within a historic preservation district may be used for the purposes permitted within the general zoning district in which located. 
830.3.  Historic preservation district regulations and exemptions. Within a historic preservation district, work as defined in this chapter, shall not commence unless a certification of appropriateness has been first issued; provided however, that work related to the following shall not require a certificate of appropriateness; 
A.  Ordinary maintenance and repair which shall include the removal, installation, or replacement of guttering; the removal or replacement of roof covering with like material and the application of any paint color to non-masonry surfaces. 
B.  Interior of buildings and structures. 
C.  Portions of parts of buildings, structures, or sites not visible from adjoining streets. 
D.  Accessory structures or buildings, such as storage sheds, garage, decks, patios, fencing, swimming pools and pool houses that are not part of the primary structure, provided, however, such structures and buildings are not located in front yards. 
E.  Installation or radio or television antennae. 
F.  General landscape maintenance and planting or new organic materials. 
G.  Work required for temporary stabilization of building or structure due to damage.  
Sec. 840. - Historic preservation district—Zoning map amendments. 
840.1.  General. The City of Sapulpa may establish amend, or repeal a "HP" historic preservation zoning district according to the following criteria and procedures, provided however, design guidelines for a proposed "HP" zoning district shall be adopted prior to or concurrent with the mapping or an "HP" zoning district. 
840.2.  HP zoning map amendments initiated by application. 
A.  Any person, corporation, partnership, association or by combination thereof having a legal and equitable interest in or to real property may file an application for an HP zoning classification on such property in accordance with the provisions of Section 1430.1. 
B.  An application shall include in addition to those items contained in Section 1430.1, information descriptive of the building, structure, site or area and its relationship to the historical development, history of cultural heritage of the City of Sapulpa, a statement of the criteria felt to have been met as set forth in this chapter and may include photographs, publications, about the subject building, structure, site or area, and any information deemed worthy for proper consideration, such information and application shall be upon forms established by the Preservation Commission and the Planning Commission. 
840.3.  Reserved. 
840.4.  HP amendments initiated by Planning Commission. In any instance, the Planning Commission upon its own motion may, or on the written request of any person or the Preservation Commission may, or at the direction of the City Commission shall, hold a public hearing, the Planning Commission shall within fifteen (15) days transmit its report and recommendation to the City Commission. 
840.5.  Preservation Commission action of HP zoning map amendments. The Preservation Commission shall prepare or cause to be prepared, a report and recommendation concerning a proposed HP map amendment. The report and recommendation shall include specific findings as to whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the criteria for designation as set forth in this chapter. A map shall be prepared showing the boundaries of the proposed map amendment, including all lots therein and identifying those properties whose owners may have indicated support or oppositions to such amendment. Property owners may indicate their support or opposition at informal informational meetings, at public meetings or in writing to the Preservation Commissioner Planning Commission. The report, recommendation, map and other pertinent information shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission prior to the public hearing. 
840.6.  Notice required on HP zoning map amendments. The Planning Commission shall give notice of public hearing on any proposed HP zoning changes as follows: 
A.  At least twenty (20) days' notice of the date, time and place of the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Sapulpa. Said notice shall include a map of the area to be affected which indicates street names or numbers, streams, or other significant landmarks in said area. 
B.  At least twenty (20) days' notice by posting on designated properties within the area affected by the proposed zoning reclassification the sign and the lettering thereon shall be of sufficient size so as to be clearly visible and legible from the public street or streets toward which it faces and shall state: 
1.  The date, time, and place of the public hearing; 
2.  Who will conduct the public hearing; 
3.  The present zoning of the property and the supplemental HP zoning sought by the applicant; 
4.  The proposed HP designation of the property; and 
5.  Other information as may be necessary to provide adequate and timely public notice. 
C.  At least twenty (20) days' notice by mailing written notice to all property owners included in the proposed change, the notice shall contain: 
1.  A map of the area proposed for HP amendment; 
2.  The present zoning of the property and the supplemental HP zoning sought by the applicant; 
3.  The date, time and place of the public hearing; and 
4.  A statement that "work" general requires a certification of appropriateness. 
840.7.  Planning Commission action on HP zoning map amendments. After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission shall vote to: 
A.  Recommend to the City Commission that the application be approved as submitted or as amended, or be approved subject to modification; or 
B.  Recommend to City Commission that the application be denied. 
An application recommended for approval, or approval subject to modification shall be transmitted with the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and the Preservation Commission to the City Commission within fifteen (15) days from the date of Planning Commission action. An application recommended for denial shall not be considered further, unless the applicant within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Planning Commission action, files a written request with the City Clerk for a hearing by the City Commission. The request for hearing shall be accompanied by the payment of a fifteen dollar ($15.00) fee. Upon notice of such request, the Planning Commission shall forthwith transmit the application and its report and recommendation, including all material and minutes received from the Preservation Commission to the City Commission. In the event the Planning Commission arrives at a tie vote, the application shall be transmitted with a report and notation of the tie vote, to the City Commission within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Planning Commission action. 
840.8.  Appeal by Preservation Commission. The Preservation Commission may appeal the denial of an amendment, by the Planning Commission by following the procedures set forth in Section 840.7. 
840.9.  City Commission action on HP zoning map amendments. The City Commission shall hold a hearing on each application transmitted from the Planning Commission and on any proposed zoning map amendment initiated pursuant to Section 840.7. The City Commission shall approve the application as submitted, or approve the application subject to modification or deny the application. In case of a protest against such zoning change filed at least three (3) days prior to said public hearing by owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fifths ( 3/5 ) of all members of the City Commission. 
840.10.  Recording of HP zoning map amendments. The City Clerk should file or cause to be filed, a copy of the HP zoning map amendment ordinance and map in the office of the County Clerk.  
Sec. 850. - Certificate of appropriateness (COA). 
850.1.  General provisions. The Preservation Commission shall review application for a certification of appropriateness (hereinafter designated as "COA") and may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the same in accordance with the provision on this chapter and the design guidelines. 
The Preservation Commission shall transmit a copy of the COA along with a set of approved plans to the Technical Services Division. Technical Services shall not issue any permit in violation of the chapter or inconsistent with a COA. 
850.2.  Application and document required. An application for COA shall be filed with the Technical Services Division upon forms established by the Preservation Commission. An application shall contain a general description of the proposed work its location, its relationship to the structure and other additional information as required by the Preservation Commission. 
An application for a COA shall be accompanied by at least two (2) sets of plans of sufficient clarity and detail to show the nature of the work to be performed and the materials to be used. Such plans shall include: 
A.  A site plan, if applicable showing the location of new and existing structures on the site and their location with respect to the building line, property lines and in the case of new construction, the location of the new building or structure with respect to the front of those buildings or structures immediately adjacent to each side of the lot to be built upon. 
B.  A floor plan, if applicable identifying the location and limits of the proposed work. 
C.  Façade elevation(s), if applicable of the proposed work in sufficient detail to identify the limits and location of the proposed work, and the existing and proposed work, and the existing and proposed materials to be used. 
D.  Any other drawings, photographs, materials brochures or samples, specifications, or information that may be necessary to determine and provide for compliance with this chapter. 
850.3.  Preservation Commission action. The Historic Preservation Commission in its review of COA applications shall utilize the design guidelines to measure the appropriateness or inappropriateness of the proposed work and shall, to the highest extent possible, strive to affect a fair balance between the purposes and intent of this chapter and the desires and needs of the property owner. 
In addition, the Historic Preservation Commission shall review the application and shall consider: 
A.  The degree to which the proposed work is consistent with the design guidelines which have been approved and adopted by the City Council. 
B.  The degree to which the proposed work would destroy or alter all or part of the historic resource. 
C.  The degree to which the proposed work would serve to isolate the historic resource from its surroundings or introduce visual elements that are out of character with the historic resource and its setting, or that would adversely affect the physical integrity of the resource. 
D.  The degree to which the proposed work is compatible with the significant characteristics of the historic resource. 
E.  The purposes and intent of this character. 
850.4.  Applications involving demolition—Stay. An application for demolition, if not approved shall automatically be stayed for a period of sixty (60) days, unless the Historic Preservation Commission determines that the building or structure is: 
A.  Imminently dangerous to life and property; or 
B.  That the building or structure does not contribute significantly to the district; or 
C.  That the building or structure cannot be preserved. 
During this period the Historic Preservation Commission shall consult with the property owner and other interested parties to find alternatives to demolition. Should alternatives suitable to the property owner not be found, the COA for demolition shall automatically be approved and issued upon termination of the stay period. 
Prior to the expiration of the sixty (60) day period, the Historic Preservation Commission may request the City Council to extend the stay for a period not to exceed an additional sixty (60) days. The Historic Preservation Commission shall by mail notify the property owner of such request and the date for public hearing. The City Commission shall consider whether: 
A.  The Historic Preservation Commission has presented reasonable alternatives that would preserve the structure; or 
B.  Suitable alternatives have been found and further time is required to finalize arrangements for achieving such alternatives; or 
C.  The property owner desires further time to search for or continue action on available alternatives. 
After notice and public hearing, the City Council shall vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny such request to extend the stay period for an additional sixty (60) days. Denial shall constitute approval and issuance of a COA for demolition. 
During any period of the stay of demolition, the property owner may use the property in question in any legal manner except that no action shall be taken that would place the property in danger or damage or destruction. 
850.5.  Action on COA—Time limits. If no action has been taken, due to lack of a quorum or otherwise, on an application within sixty (60) days of application receipt, the COA shall be deemed approved, except in those cases where a continuance has been requested by the applicant. 
850.6.  Appeal of Preservation Commission action. Appeal from any decision of the Historic Preservation Commission concerning a COA, except in the case of demolition, may be taken to the Board of Adjustment, in accordance with the procedures and provisions of Section 12-1340. 
850.7.  COA use—Time limitation. A COA which has not been utilized within one (1) year from the date issued shall thereafter be void, provided that the Historic Preservation Commission has not extended the time for utilization. For the purpose of this provision, utilization shall mean that the work authorized under a COA, a building permit has been issued and work is being diligently carried to completion. 
850.8.  Additional COA provisions. 
A.  Non-conforming work. Work initiated and being diligently carried to completion or work completed on any building, structure, site, or area prior to the designation as HP shall be deemed non-conforming and may continue or remain without the necessity of complying with this chapter. 
B.  Preliminary design or conceptual plan review. The Historic Preservation Commission may approve, approve with conditions or deny a preliminary design or conceptual plan of the proposed work provided however, that any such approval or approval with conditions shall be subject to the approval of the COA application. 
C.  Approval of COA by Historic Preservation Commission staff. When such work is of a rehabilitative nature on an existing structure or building, and such work does not include new construction or alteration, and such work involves replacement of existing elements with like materials, and such work complies with the guidelines for such work and such work will have no material effect on the building or structure, the Historic Preservation Commission staff may issue a COA, noting "no material effect" and transmit the application to Building Permit Department for issuance of a building permit.  
Chapter 9 - USE UNITS 
 
Sec. 900. - Introduction of the use units. 
900.1.  General. The use unit is a grouping of individual uses having similarities in characteristics of function and/or performance which enable systematic consideration of location and other regulation. Within each zoning district, the permitted uses are the included uses of the designated use unit. The use units, herein established, are identified by number and name. Set forth in each use unit is a descriptive statement, an alphabetical listing of the included uses, use conditions, and off-street parking and loading requirements. 
900.2.  Interpretation. Questions of the inclusion or exclusion of a particular principal use within a use unit shall be decided by the Board of Adjustment. A use, if specifically listed in a use unit, shall not by interpretation be included as a principal use within any other use unit. 
900.3.  Applicable of use conditions. A use shall be subject to the provision of the district in which located, and, in addition, shall be subject to the use conditions specified in the applicable use unit. Where the requirements of the use unit are greater than the requirements of the use district, the use unit requirements of the use district, the use unit requirements shall govern. 
900.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. The off-street parking and loading requirements shall not apply to uses located within the CH Commercial High Intensity District.  
Sec. 901. - Use Unit 1—Areawide uses by right. 
901.1.  Description. Area wide uses by right shall include certain public uses, agricultural uses, open land uses, and similar uses which are either subject to other public controls or which do not have adverse effects on other land uses. 
901.2.  Included uses. Passive agricultural uses such as: Cultivation, forestry, grazing, planting; open land uses such as: Arboretum, flood management project, reservoir, wildlife preserve; public uses such as: Fire alarm, historical marker, street sign, thoroughfare, utility line, political campaign signs and temporary construction facilities. 
901.3.  Off-street parking. None.  
Sec. 902. - Use Unit 2—Areawide special exception uses. 
902.1.  Description. Uses which in some instances may be suitable for location in any use district but, because of their potential adverse influence on adjacent properties, require site review and are, therefore, permitted in all use districts as a special exception requiring Board of Adjustment approval. 
902.3.  Included uses. Adult detention center, airport, heliport, bus station, cemetery, correctional community treatment center, crematory, governmental services NEC, hydro-electric generation plant, jail, post office, prison, sanitary land fill, juvenile delinquency center and temporary office structures not otherwise allowed by building and zoning codes. 
Temporary or pre-manufactured non-residential structures, where permitted by special exception shall: 
A.  Be constructed to federal manufacture, home construction and safety standards and bearing a HUD label red in color identifying the home as "manufactured home" or otherwise meet the current BOCA Code. 
B.  Temporary use of the structure as an office or non-residential use shall not exceed a time limit of two (2) years. At which time, the applicant would need to return to the Board of Adjustment for a rehearing. 
C.  That such a temporary or pre-manufacture non-residential structure shall require a zoning clearance permit before placement on the site. 
902.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Airport 	1 per each 500 square feet of enclosed passenger terminal area 	1 per 2,000—40,000 square feet of floor area, plus 1 per 40,000—100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet 
Other uses 	As may be required by the Board of Adjustment in granting the special exception use. 
  
Sec. 903. - Use Unit 3—Agriculture. 
903.1.  Description. Agricultural uses and services and certain other uses suitable for location in an agricultural environment. 
903.2.  Included uses. Animal and poultry raising, chick hatchery, dairy farming, farming, fishery, guest ranch or dude ranch, riding stable, horticultural nursery, kennel. 
903.3.  Use conditions. Horticultural nursery permits the growing of plant stocks only and permits no retail sales on site. 
903.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. None.  
Sec. 904. - Use Unit 4—Public protection, utility and public parks. 
904.1.  Description. Public protection and utility facilities which may have technical location requirements necessitating specific locations in and around areas serviced and certain open air land uses which can be objectionable to certain other uses and are, therefore, permitted in certain districts only by Special Exception and in the remaining districts by right. 
904.2.  Included uses. Ambulance service, electric regulation station (excluding storage or service garages and yards), fire protection facility, pressure control station (gas or liquid, excluding storage or service garages and yards), shelter (civil defense or storm), antenna and antenna support structure, water storage facility NEC, water treatment facility NEC, public park, sewage disposal facility, temporary open air facilities such as carnival, Christmas tree sales, circus, and tent revival. 
904.3.  Use conditions for Use Unit 4 temporary open air facilities excluding antennas and antenna support structures. These facilities may continue for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days per each application for a special exception approved by the Board of Adjustment. 
904.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Public parks 	1 per 3 stadium seats plus 1 per 200 square feet of community center or recreation building, plus 1 per 200 square feet of pool area 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
 
904.5.  Use conditions for antennas and antenna support structures. 
A.  The installation of new antennas and antenna support structures on existing such facilities which predate this Code and have otherwise been approved as a use by right or special exception by the City may be permitted by right upon the certification of a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oklahoma that the existing structure will accommodate the new user without requiring structural modification and otherwise obtaining the required permits. Excluding the requirement for obtaining approval of a special exception from the Board of Adjustment, such new facilities shall be subject to Section 904.6. (excluding the collocation design requirement). 
B.  The installation of antennas and antenna support structures, in agricultural and industrial districts shall require approval of an application to the Board of Adjustment for a special exception. Such application shall include a site plan showing all proposed improvements and a scale drawing which displays the location of all existing such sites and sites on which applications are pending with the City for antennas and antenna support structures within a one-fourth (¼) mile radius of the site proposed in the application. 
904.6.  Conditions for Board of Adjustment approval. In order to obtain approval of a special exception for an antenna and antenna support structure, the Board of Adjustment shall require, subject to modification and additional requirements as deemed necessary by said board as a part of the review process, that the antenna and antenna support structure satisfy the following: 
A.  Written evidence shall be presented to the City by the proposer of such facility that the new facility is not closer than one-quarter (¼) mile from any existing such site or site for which an application is pending with the City for an antenna support structure on which collocation space is reasonably available. 
B.  The setback from an R district boundary is at least one hundred ten (110) percent of its height as measured at grade and in no case shall it exceed a maximum of two hundred (200) feet tall. 
C.  Shall be subject to initial and continuing compliance with all other applicable local, state and federal codes and standards for operation of that particular facility. These requirements shall include, but not be limited to: Meeting the standards and requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission, Electronic Industries Association and American National Standards Institute. 
D.  Shall be buffered with landscaping and vegetative or other screening to mitigate the operational and visual impacts of such uses on abutting and adjacent uses. 
E.  If the operation and use of such facilities ceases for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, unless or except said period it shall be removed by the owner at the owner's cost or be subject to removal by the City at the owner's cost. 
F.  It shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to accommodate collocation of a minimum of two (2) wireless telecommunication system providers unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant to the satisfaction of the Board of Adjustment that such collocation was not technically feasible or that it would unreasonably impede or otherwise impair the operation of the initial or subsequently located facilities. 
G.  If the collocation is determined by the Board of Adjustment to unreasonably impede or impair the operation of the proposed facility, a minimum spacing of one-fourth (¼) mile from other such facilities shall be met. 
H.  The antenna support structure shall be of monopole design. 
I.  Certification from a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oklahoma shall be submitted with the Board of Adjustment application that the antenna and antenna support structure is designed and constructed in such a manner as to accommodate the collocation of minimum of two (2) wireless telecommunication system providers, and that it meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute and the Electronic Industries Association. Further, certification from such an engineer shall be required upon completion of construction and prior to commencement of operation that the antenna and antenna support structure has, in fact, been constructed in accordance with the plans as approved by the City. 
J.  Written evidence of compliance with the standards of the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Aviation Administration. 
K.  Operators of such facilities shall give the City Planner of the City of Sapulpa thirty (30) days prior written notice of any change or modification in the operation of the facility that would cause the facility to no longer be in compliance with subsections A through J above and the conditions of approval granted by the Board of Adjustment. Said notice shall include detailed information about the nature of all such changes. Further, such changes shall cause the approval of the Special Exception to be summarily revoked and become the basis for requiring submission of a new application to the City of Sapulpa if operation is to continue. 
L.  Notwithstanding the preceding sections, upon obtaining approval for collocation of a specified number of users on a particular facility by a special exception from the Board of Adjustment, subsequent users up to the specified number may be permitted by right upon demonstrating compliance with all conditions of the original approval.  
Sec. 905. - Use Unit 5—Community services, and similar uses. 
905.1.  Description. Community services, cultural, educational recreational and religious facilities and certain residential facilities which are needed in residential areas to serve the residents or need a residential environment, but which may be objectionable to nearby residential uses. These uses are permitted by special exception in some districts, by right in some districts, and prohibited in other districts. 
905.2.  Included uses. Aquarium, art gallery (not operated for profit), children's nursery, church, college, community center, cultural facility not elsewhere classified (NEC), day camp, emergency and protective shelter, golf course, hospital, library, marina, museum, planetarium, residential treatment center, private club or lodge (the chief activity which is a service and is not operated as a business or for profit, and which hold and maintain an income tax exempt status. Includes charitable, eleemosynary, educational and recreational establishments) public tennis court, sanitation, schools, offering a compulsory education curriculum, transitional living center and university. 
905.3.  Use conditions. 
A.  Churches when located within an AG or R district: 
1.  Minimum lot area of one (1) acre and minimum lot width of one hundred (100) feet. 
B.  Schools: 
1.  High schools shall have their principal vehicular entrance and exit on a major street. 
C.  College, university, convent, monastery, novitiate, hospital: 
1.  A minimum site area of one (1) acre shall apply. 
2.  A minimum lot width of one hundred (100) feet. 
3.  The principal vehicular access shall be on a major street. 
D.  Residential treatment center, transitional living center, emergency or protective shelter: 
1.  To avoid clustering, a residential treatment center, transitional, or emergency or protective shelter shall not be located on a lot within one-quarter (¼) mile (one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet) from any other lot containing such facilities or any lot containing a neighborhood group home, community group home, or detention/correctional facility. 
905.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Aquarium, art gallery, museum, planetarium, cultural facility NEC 	1 per 400 square feet of floor area 	1 per 10,000—20,000 plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area 
Children's nursery 	1 per 400 square feet of floor area 	N/A 
Church 	1 per 40 square feet of chapel or sanctuary floor area 	1 per 10,000—200,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area 
College, university 	1 per 400 square feet of classroom floor area plus 1 per 4 dormitory beds plus 1 per 3 stadium seats 	1 per 10,000—200,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area 
Community center 	1 per 200 square feet of floor area 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 10,000 square feet of floor area 
Emergency protective shelter 	1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
Golf course 	6 per green plus 1 per 400 square feet of club house floor area 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
Hospital 	1 per bed 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
Library 	1 per 300 square feet of floor area 	1 per 10,000—200,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area 
Private club 	1 per 250 square feet of floor area 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
Public park 	1 per 3 stadium seats plus 1 per 200 square feet of community center or recreation building, plus 1 per 200 square feet of pool area 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
Residential treatment center and transitional living center schools 	1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
Schools: 		
Elementary and junior high 	1 per 800 square feet of floor area 	1 per 10,000—200,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area 
Senior high if parking areas are combined 	1 per 600 square feet of floor area plus 1 per 3 stadium seats 	1 per 10,000—200,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area 
If parking is separate 	1 per 400 square feet of floor area plus 1 per 3 stadium seats 	
Tennis court 	2 per court, plus 1 per 400 square feet of club house area 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
  
Sec. 906. - Use Unit 6—Single-family dwelling. 
906.1.  Description. Single-family detached dwelling and similar uses. 
906.2.  Included uses. Single-family detached dwelling, neighborhood group home and foster home. 
906.3.  Use conditions. 
Neighborhood group home: 
A.  Must be licensed by the State of Oklahoma, Oklahoma State Health, Department and meet contracting standards of the State of Oklahoma, Department of Human Services for group homes for mentally retarded persons. 
B.  No building may be occupied after the effective date of this amendment until a zoning clearance permit is obtained. This permit will be revoked automatically upon revocation of the state license. 
C.  No signs advertising the neighborhood group home shall be permitted on the lot. 
D.  No exterior alterations of the dwelling or any customary accessory structure including ramps shall be made which would detract from the residential character of the structure. Fire escapes, if required, must be located on the rear of the structure if architecturally feasible or on the side of the structure and screened. 
E.  To avoid clustering, a neighborhood group home shall not be located on a lot within one-quarter (¼) mile (one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet) of any other lot containing a neighborhood group home, a community group home, a residential treatment center, a transitional living center, an emergency or protective shelter, or detention/correctional facility. 
906.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Single-family detached dwelling 	2 behind street right-of-way 	N/A 
Neighborhood group home and foster home 	2 abreast behind street right-of-way 	N/A 
  
Sec. 907. - Use Unit 7—Duplex dwelling. 
907.1.  Description. Duplex dwelling. 
907.2.  Included uses. Duplex dwelling. 
907.3.  Use conditions. None. 
907.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking spaces 	Load Berths 
Duplex dwelling 	2 behind street right-of-way 	N/A 
  
Sec. 908. - Use Unit 8—Multi-family dwelling and similar uses. 
908.1.  Description. Multi-family dwellings and similar uses. 
908.2.  Included uses. Apartment, community group home, convent, monastery, novitiate, elderly retirement housing, fraternity or sorority houses, life care retirement center, multi-family dwelling, nursing home, rooming/boarding house, and townhouse. 
908.3.  Use conditions. 
A.  Fraternity, sorority, rooming/boarding house: In the determination of the applicable bulk and area requirements, a fraternity, sorority, or rooming/boarding house shall be considered a multi-family dwelling, with each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area constituting a one-bedroom dwelling unit. 
B.  Convent, monastery, novitiate, community group home, life care retirement center, and nursing home shall have a maximum floor area ratio of five-tenths (.5). 
C.  Convent, monastery and novitiate shall have a minimum lot size of one (1) acre. 
D.  Townhouse: A townhouse is subject to the submission to and approval of a subdivision plat by the City Commission after receiving prior review and recommendations of the Planning Commission, in accord with existing laws and regulations, and the subsequent filing in the office of the County Clerk where the property is located. 
E.  Community group home: 
1.  Must be licensed by the State of Oklahoma, Oklahoma State Department and meet contracting standards of the State of Oklahoma, Department of Human Services for group homes for mentally retarded persons. 
2.  No building may be occupied after the effective date of this amendment until a zoning clearance is obtained. This permit will be revoked automatically upon revocation of the state license. 
3.  No signs advertising the community group home shall be permitted on the lot. 
4.  No exterior alterations of the dwelling or any customary accessory structure including ramps shall be made which would detract from the residential character of the structure. Fire escapes, if required, must be located on the rear of the structure if architecturally feasible or on the side of the structure and screened. 
5.  To avoid clustering, a community group home shall not be located on a lot within one-quarter (¼) mile (one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet) of any other lot containing a neighborhood group home, a community group home a residential treatment center, a transitional living center, an emergency or protective shelter, or detention/correctional facility. 
F.  Life care retirement center: The nursing facility or medical facility must be licensed by the State of Oklahoma State Health Department as an intermediate care facility or as a skilled nursing home. 
G.  Nursing home: The nursing home must be licensed by the State of Oklahoma, Oklahoma State Health Department as an Intermediate Care Facility or as a skilled nursing home. 
H.  Elderly/retirement housing: Design requirements for elderly/retirement housing include as a minimum: (a) elevators for multi-family structures other than townhouses over one-story in height; (b) emergency alarm systems in every dwelling unit; and (c) safety "grab bars" in bathrooms. 
I.  Screening requirements: The uses included in Use Unit 8, when located on a lot abutting an RE, RS, or RD district, shall be screened from the abutting RE, RS, and RD district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with these R districts. 
908.4.  Screening Requirements. The uses included in use Unit 8, when located on a lot abutting an RE, RS, or RD district, shall be screened from the abutting RE, RS, and RD district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with these R districts. 
908.5.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Community group home 	1 per 900 square feet of floor area 	None 
Convent, monastery and novitiate 	1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area 	1 per 10,000—200,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area 
Elderly/retirement housing 	.75 per dwelling unit 	None 
Fraternity or sorority house 	1 per 2 beds 	1 per 10,000—200,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area 
Life care retirement center 	.75 per dwelling unit and .35 per nursing center bed 	1 per 10,000—220,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area 
Multi-family dwelling 	1.5 per efficiency or 1 bedroom dwelling unit. 
2 per 2 or more bedroom dwelling unit 	None 
Nursing home 	.35 per nursing center bed 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
Rooming/boarding house 	1 per 2 beds 	1 per 10,000—200,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area 
Townhouse 	1.5 per efficiency or 1 bedroom dwelling unit. 
2 per 2 or more bedroom dwelling unit 	None 
  
Sec. 909. - Use Unit 9—Manufactured housing. 
909.1.  Description. 
Dwelling, manufactured: A structure designed and intended for human occupancy on a year round or temporary or seasonal basis which has undergone at least partial prefabrication or pre-assembly under indoor factory conditions, excluding dwellings utilizing only pre-fabricated or pre-assembled sub-elements such as roof trusses, plumbing trees, or wiring harness. Included are the following sub-classes: 
A.  Pre-fabricated. A manufactured dwelling involving no pre-assembly but all components have been cut and fabricated and then assembled on-site. 
B.  Panelized. A manufactured dwelling partially pre-assembled into roof, wall, floor, and ceiling components (which may range from exposed wood to having all finishing completed) which are assembled on-site, and constructed to national building code standards. 
C.  Sectionalized or modular. A manufactured dwelling partially pre-assembled into two (2) or more sections, none of which are habitable individually, permanently joined together and, utilize customary residential siding and roofing materials, built to national building code standards and are either: 
1.  Wood frame units designed to be transported by flatbed truck and installed on conventional permanent foundations, or 
2.  Chassis/under-carriage units designed to be towed or structurally capable of being towed on wheels and installed on permanent foundations after all hitches, running gear and chassis have been removed. 
D.  Mobile home or trailer home. A manufactured dwelling other than a recreational vehicle either: 
1.  Fully pre-assembled into one (1) unit or one (1) expandable/telescoping unit of more than thirty-five (35) feet in length and is fully habitable upon arrival at a site except for minor and incidental installation activities and utility connections and is installed on either temporary or permanent foundations, or 
2.  A dwelling manufactured in two (2) or more units but either fails to utilize customary, residential roofing and siding materials or retains chassis or other equipment related to being towed or is not placed on a conventional permanent foundation. 
909.2.  Included uses. Mobile home dwelling, pre-fabricated dwelling, panelized dwelling, sectionized or modular dwelling. 
909.3.  Use conditions. All mobile home dwellings placed in any district by right or special exception shall be certified that they have been constructed and comply with the National Mobile Construction and Safety Standards. 
The mobile home dwelling when located within an RMH district and located on a lot which is abutting an RE, RD, or RS district shall be screened from the abutting RE, RS, or RD district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line in common with RE, RS, or RD district. 
All mobile home dwellings placed in any district by right or special exception shall be anchored and tied. 
909.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Manufactured home 	2 spaces per each unit behind the street ROW 	None 
  
Sec. 910. - Use Unit 10—Off-street parking areas. 
910.1.  Description. Off-street parking areas which are principal uses. 
910.2.  Included uses. Off-street parking areas. 
910.3.  Use conditions. Off-street parking areas shall conform to the design, lighting, and improvement requirements for off-street parking contained in Chapter 10. 
910.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. Not applicable. 
910.5.  Use conditions. In the CS District there shall be no open air display offered for sale within three hundred (300) feet of an abutting R district. The uses included in Use Unit 13, when located within a district other than an R district and located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 911. - Use Unit 11—Offices and studios. 
911.1.  Description. Offices, studios, medical and dental laboratories, and certain other compatible or supporting services. 
911.2.  Included uses. Including, but not limited to: Abstract company, advertising agency, artist's studio, broadcasting or recording studio, computing service, copying service, data processing service, drafting service, dental clinic and laboratory, employment agency, financial institution (other than pawn shop), funeral home, interior design consultant (no retail sales), medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories, general business offices (excluding on premise sale of merchandise), optician or optical offices laboratories, photography studio, prescription pharmacy (provided that no sundry or other merchandise is sold or offered for sale), studio or school for teaching ballet, dance, drama, fine arts, music, language, business, or modeling, transportation ticket office, travel agency, and veterinary office (excluding boarding services), commercial fitness facility. 
911.3.  Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 11, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
911.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Funeral home 	1 per 40 square feet of assembly floor area plus 1 per 300 square feet of non-assembly floor area 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories 	1 per 200 square feet of floor area 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet, plus 1 per additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
Other uses 	1 per 300 square feet of floor area 	1 per 10,000—100,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum dimension and design criteria.  
Sec. 912. - Use Unit 12—Eating places other than drive-ins. 
912.1.  Description. Eating places offering on premise consumption of food and drink within the principal structure and/or providing carry-out service if no curb service is provided, and if no in car on premise consumption is permitted. Use Unit 12 is established in recognition of the desirability of providing dining facilities in certain environments in which commercial facilities of higher use intensity would be objectionable. 
912.2.  Included uses. Eating places such as: Cafeteria, coffee shop, delicatessen, and restaurant. 
912.3.  Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 12, when located within a district other than an R district and located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
912.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Eating places 	1 per 200 square feet of floor area 	1 per 2,000—10,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 15,000 square feet of floor area 
  
Sec. 913. - Use Unit 13—Convenience goods and services. 
913.1.  Description. Retail trade and service establishments which are desirable conveniences in certain residential and office districts. Use Unit 13 is established to permit the location of convenience goods and services in certain environments in which commercial facilities of a higher use intensity would be objectionable. 
913.2.  Included uses. Including, but not limited to: Retail trade establishments such as drug store, florist, baker, candy and confection and/or nut store, dairy store, food specialty store, grocery, health food store, ice cream store, gift, novelty, and souvenir shop, liquor store, news stand, tobacco store; and service establishments such as dry cleaning and pickup, barber shop, beauty shop, and laundry and pickup, cleaning, taxidermist, woodworking shop; repair services such as armature rewinding service, business machine repair, computer repair, data processing machine repair, electrical repair service, furniture, mattresses and pillows, tavern, upholstery, and rug repair; and schools such as barber, beauty and trade. 
913.3.  Use conditions. 
A.  In the CS District there shall be no open air display offered for sale within three hundred (300) feet of an abutting R district. 
B.  The uses included in Use Unit 13, when located within a district other than an R district and located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
913.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Grocery store 	1 per 100 square feet of floor area 	1 per 2,000—10,000 square feet of floor area 
Retail trade and service establishments 	1 per 200 square feet of floor area 	1 per 5,000—10,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 15,000 square feet of floor area 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 914. - Use Unit 14—Shopping goods and services. 
914.1.  Description. Retail establishments engaged in the merchandising of shopping goods and services. 
914.2.  Included uses. Retail trade establishments such as commercial art gallery, antique shop, artist supply store, automotive parts and accessories store, bicycle shop, book store, business and office machine sales and repair establishment, camera and photographic supply store, clothing and accessories store, cosmetic shop, decorator department store, dressmaking shop, dry goods store, fur storage, furriers, garden supply store, hardware store, hobby shop, home furnishings (selling appliances, china, glassware, metal-ware, draperies, curtain, upholstery, floor coverings, and furniture), jewelry store, leather goods and luggage store, medical, dental, and orthopedic appliances and supply store, musical instrument and supply store, office furnishing establishment, office supplies store, paint store, pawn shop, pet shop, phonograph and record shop, radio and TV sales, shoe repair shop, shoe store, sporting goods store, stationery store, tailor shop, toy shop, variety store, wall paper store, wig shop; and retail building material establishments, exclusive of fabrication or repair, such as building materials, electrical supply, and plumbing fixtures; and service establishments, such as caterer, custom rental service, dry cleaning (limited to seven thousand (7,000) square feet of floor area), gun smith, household appliance repair, interior decorating, self-service laundromat, (coin operated), locksmith, photo finishing, picture framing, radio and television repair, and watch and jewelry repair. 
914.3.  Use conditions. 
A.  In the CS District there shall be no open air storage or overnight display of merchandise offered for sale within three hundred (300) feet of an abutting R district. 
B.  The uses included in the Use Unit 14, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
914.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Furniture store 	1 per 300 square feet of floor area 	1 per 2,000—25,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area 
All other uses 	1 per 225 square feet of floor area 	Plus 1 per each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 915. - Use Unit 15—Other trades and services. 
915.1.  Description. Trade establishments primarily providing business and household maintenance goods and services ordinarily not found in the primary retail districts because of a differing market and site requirements. 
915.2.  Included uses. Trade establishments, including incidental fabricating, processing, installation, and repair; air conditioning and heating, bait shops, wholesale baker, bottled gas, carpeting, fence, fuel oil, general merchandising establishment NEC, glass greenhouse, heating equipment, ice plant, lumber yard, mini-storage, model homes, monument (excluding shaping), plastic materials, plumbing shop, portable storage building sales, printing and publishing, reproduction services, and vending machine sales and services; service establishments such as air conditioning, carpentry, decorating, electrical, furnace cleaning, landscape contractor, painting, paper hanging, plastering, plumbing, sign painting, tile setting; armored car service; and personal services such as auctioneer, bindery, cabinet maker, draper service, frozen food locker, laundry, linen supply and industrial laundry, packing and crating of household and other similar rug goods. 
The uses included in Use Unit 15, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
915.3.  Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 15, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
915.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Trade establishments 	1 per 400 square feet of floor area 	1 per 5,000—25,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area 
Service establishments 	1 per 400 square feet of floor area 	1 per 5,000—25,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 916. - Use Unit 16—Gasoline service stations. 
916.1.  Descriptions. Establishments engaged in the retail sale of gasoline, lubricants, tires, batteries, and automobile accessories and performing minor repair, installation, and maintenance services. 
916.2.  Included uses. Gasoline service stations, oil and lubrication service (three (3) bay maximum) tune-up service (three (3) bay maximum). 
916.3.  Use conditions. 
A.  The uses included in Use Unit 16, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
B.  Within the CS district there shall be an open air storage or display of merchandise offered for sale or rental within three hundred (300) feet of an adjoining R district. 
916.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. Two (2) spaces, plus two (2) spaces per bay.  
Sec. 917. - Use Unit 17—Automotive and allied activities. 
917.1.  Description. Automotive and allied activities. 
917.2.  Included uses. The following types of sales: Aircraft, agriculture, implement, automobile (new and used), boat, camper, mobile home, motorcycle, and truck; and the following types of services: Automobile rental, auto wash, vehicle repair and service, and mini-storage. 
917.3.  Use conditions. 
A.  The uses included in Use Unit 17, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
B.  Within the CS District, there shall be no open air storage or display of merchandise offered for sale within three hundred (300) feet of an adjoining R district. 
917.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Agriculture implements, automotive, camper, motorcycle, and truck sales 	1 per 600 square feet of floor area plus 1 per 1,000 square feet of open air display storage, or service area. 	1 per 5,000—10,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 15,000 square feet of floor area 
Auto wash 	N/A 	N/A 
Automobile rental 	1 per 600 square feet of floor area plus adequate off street parking shall be provided for storage of rental vehicles. No on-street parking of rental vehicles shall be permitted. 	N/A 
Mobile home sales 	0 to 30,000 square feet of open air display storage or service will require 1 vehicle parking space per 10,000 square feet of open air display storage or service area. 	N/A 
Vehicle repair 	1 per 200 square feet of floor area. 	N/A 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 917A. - Use Unit 17A—Mini-storage. 
917A.1.  Mini-storage defined. A structure(s) which contains separate, small size, self-service storage facilities leased to individuals or businesses. These facilities are designated to accommodate access only from passenger vehicles and two-axle trucks. 
917A.2.  Included uses. Mini-storage. 
917A.3.  Use conditions. 
A.  The uses included in Use Unit 17A, when located on a lot which is abutting a residential (hereafter R) district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by a screening wall or fence along the lot-line or lines in common with the R district. 
B.  Within the CS, CG, CBD, or OL district, there shall be no open air storage of any kind that is visible at ground level from an R district or an office (hereafter O) district or from a public street. Open air storage is defined as and storage not within a permanently affixed structure having one (1) or more floors and a roof and which is bounded on all sides by walls so as to prevent exposure to open air. 
C.  The development site shall have frontage on and access to an arterial street unless provided otherwise by the Board of Adjustment. 
917A.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Mini storage 	1 per 5,000 square feet of floor area. 	N/A 
 
917A.5.  Mini-storage facilities located in the CS, CG, CBD, and O districts shall comply with the following requirements and require special exception from the Board of Adjustment: 
A.  The building height is limited to twelve (12) feet, provided however, if the facilities contain an accessory structure to be used for management and security purposes, the height of the dwelling shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
B.  The minimum front building setback from an abutting street shall be fifty (50) feet, plus one-half (½) the right-of-way for a major street designated on the major street plan, or thirty-five (35) feet plus one-half (½) the right-of-way for a non-major street designated on the major street plan. The minimum building setback for all other boundaries shall be ten (10) feet, provided however, the Board of Adjustment may allow less building setback in these two (2) instances if the wall of the building is also to be used to meet the screening requirement, but in no event shall such setback be less than five (5) feet. 
C.  Building walls on the exterior of the development shall consist of masonry construction using brick, stone, stucco or concrete tilt-up panels. Metal or standard (smooth) concrete block exterior walls are not permitted on such exterior. 
D.  The floor area ration (FAR) shall not exceed five-tenths (0.5). 
E.  Access doors to storage units shall not be visible at ground level from an abutting O or R district and shall not be visible from an abutting public street. 
F.  No hazardous, toxic, or explosive materials are permitted to be stored in such facilities. 
G.  Open air storage is prohibited in the OL District. Open air storage is prohibited on the perimeter of the lot in an OM District but is permitted on the interior of the lot if the storage is not visible at ground level from an abutting O or R district or any public street. 
H.  The development site shall have frontage on and access to an arterial street unless provided by the Board of Adjustment. 
I.  Only one (1) ground sign shall be permitted. Location, size, and height of such sign shall be approved by the Board of Adjustment, provided however, the sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and thirty-two (32) square feet of display surface area or two-tenths ( 2/10 ) of a square foot of display surface area per lineal foot of street frontage (whichever is greater) and illumination of the sign, if any, shall be by constant light. 
J.  A screening fence or masonry wall at least eight (8) feet in height is required along the lot line or lot lines in common with an R district. The wall of the buildings as described in subsection C may be used with Board of Adjustment approval to comply with this screening requirement and in such case open spaces between perimeter buildings shall be screened with an eight (8) foot masonry wall.  
Sec. 918. - Use Unit 18—Drive-in restaurants. 
918.1.  Description. Eating establishments providing curb service or offering food or drink for on premise consumption of food or drink within the parked motor vehicle or outside the principal structure. 
918.2.  Included uses. Drive-in restaurants. 
918.3.  Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 18, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the butting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Drive-in restaurants 	1 per 200 square feet of floor area. 	1 per 5,000—25,000 square feet, of floor areas plus 1 per additional 25,000 square feet of floor area 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 920. - Use Unit 20—Commercial recreation: Intensive. 
920.1.  Description. Commercial recreation facilities, the principal activities of which are usually open air, located in undeveloped outlying sections of the City. 
920.2.  Included uses. Amusement activities NEC, arena, drag strip, drive-in theatre, fairgrounds, go-cart track, golf driving range, miniature auto track, outdoor recreation NEC, race tracks (auto, dog, horse), rodeo grounds, and stadiums NEC and commercial camp ground. 
920.3.  Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 20, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
920.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Golf driving 	1 per tee 	N/A 
Drive-in theatre 	N/A 	N/A 
Uses providing spectator seating such as stadiums, arenas, and rodeo grounds 	1 per 3 seats 	1 per 5,000—25,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area 
Other uses 	1 per 600 square feet, of site area 	1 per 5,000—25,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 921. - Use Unit 21—Business signs and outdoor advertising. 
921.1.  Description. Business signs, outdoor advertising signs. 
921.2.  General location requirements. 
A.  Street setback. No sign or portion thereof shall be permitted in the right-of-way of any street or are designated in the Sapulpa Master Street Plan as a future street under any circumstances except authorized traffic signals, signs or devices. (See Sapulpa Comprehensive Plan for copy of master street plan.) 
B.  Intersection setback. No sign shall be located less than thirty-five (35) feet from the intersection of the pavement of two (2) streets or from the intersection of street pavement and a railroad track. The point of intersection shall be measured from the edge of the paving. 
C.  Traffic signal clearance. No sign shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct or obscure or in any manner interfere with any traffic signal light or public warning sign. 
D.  Obstruction of view. Signs when located in such a manger so as to prevent any motorists from obtaining a clear view of approaching vehicles for a distance of five hundred (500) feet along a public right-of-way are prohibited. 
E.  No business or outdoor advertising sign shall be located within fifty (50) feet of an R district if visible from such district. 
F.  Illumination, if any shall be by constant light. 
G.  Any on-premises ground sign shall maintain a minimum separation of fifty (50) feet from any other ground sign on the same frontage. 
H.  Any off-premises ground sign shall maintain a minimum separation of five hundred (500) feet from any other off-premises ground sign and also from any on-premises ground sign on the same frontage, providing that the on-premises ground sign was located first. 
921.3.  General use conditions. 
A.  For the purpose of display surface are calculation, where a lot abuts more than one (1) public street, that street frontage which is the larger shall be used. 
B.  Only one (1) side of a double-faced sign shall be included in the computation of display surface area. 
C.  The following signs shall not be included in the computation of display surface area: 
1.  Nameplates, attached to the face of the wall and not exceeding two (2) square feet in surface area. 
2.  Temporary real estate and construction signs. 
3.  Signs which are not visible from a public street. 
4.  Signs painted on glass surfaces of windows or doors and pertaining to the business conducted therein which are in place for sixty (60) days or less. After sixty (60) days, such signs shall be restricted to the display surface area limitations for this district in which located. 
5.  Tablets built into the wall of a building or other structure and used for inscriptions or as memorial tablets or for similar purposes. 
6.  Signs of warning, directive, or instructional nature erected by a public agency, franchised transportation company, or governmental agency. 
7.  Legal notices and street numbers. 
8.  Election campaign signs, if erected not more than forty-five (45) days prior to an election and removed within seven (7) days following an election. 
9.  Signs located within buildings. 
10.  Signs not exceeding three (3) square feet of display surface area of a warning, directive, or instructional nature, including entrance, exit, and restroom signs. 
11.  Signs which are attached labels of a commodity offered for sale. 
921.4.  AG District use conditions. 
A.  Signs as principal use are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Business signs and outdoor advertising on a lot abutting designated state and federal highways must conform to all state and federal regulations. 
2.  The minimum display surface area of ground signs and outdoor advertising shall be limited to an aggregate of one (1) square foot of display area per each lineal foot of street frontage, provided that no single sign shall exceed three hundred (300) square feet. 
3.  A ground sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height, measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected, unless in addition to the minimum setback prescribed in subsection 821.3.A, the sign is setback one (1) foot for each foot of height exceeding thirty (30) feet provided the sign shall not exceed fifty (50) feet regardless of setback. 
B.  Signs as accessory use are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  One (1) bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area nor fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. 
2.  One (1) identification sign may be erected on each street frontage of a permitted non-residential use. The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area, nor fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. 
3.  During the period of construction, a temporary sign advertising the construction of improvements on the premises may be erected on each perimeter street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in surface area, nor fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. All such signs must be removed upon completion of construction or revocation of the building permit except; if the temporary sign is for a subdivision under construction, then the sign must be removed prior to building permits being issued on more than seventy-five (75) percent of the lots in the subdivision. 
4.  A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a lot. The sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in surface area, nor fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light in an RM or RD district. In an RS or RE district the sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in surface area, or more than six (6) feet in height and shall not be illuminated in any way. 
921.5.  Office district use conditions. 
A.  Signs as principal uses are not allowed in office districts. 
B.  Signs as accessory uses are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  In the OL and OM districts, one (1) business sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area may be erected on each street frontage of a lot. Ground signs shall not exceed the height of the building in which the principal use is located within twenty (20) feet, whichever is lower. No business signs shall be located within fifty (50) feet of an R district if visible from such district. Illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. 
2.  During the period of construction, a temporary sign advertising the construction of improvements on the premises may be located on each major street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed one hundred sixty (160) square feet in surface area nor fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. 
3.  A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a lot. The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area nor fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. 
921.6.  Signs in the Central Business District zoning category. 
CBD zoning category—Use conditions. 
A.  Location requirements. 
1.  Portable ground signs will be permitted in the existing or proposed ROW, but no sign shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from the curb, and thirty-five (35) feet from the intersection of the pavement of two (2) streets or from the intersection of street pavement and a railroad track. 
2.  Projecting roof and canopy signs will be permitted to overhang the existing or proposed ROW, provided that said sign shall maintain a clear height of ten (10) feet above the sidewalk and all such signs shall not extent closer than eighteen (18) inches behind the curb line. 
B.  Height requirements. 
1.  A ground sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height, measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected, unless in addition to the minimum setback prescribed in subsection 921.3.A, the sign is setback one (1) foot for each foot of height exceeding thirty (30) feet. No sign shall exceed fifty (50) feet in height regardless of setback. 
2.  A roof sign shall not extent more than twelve (12) feet above the mean roof level of the structure to which it is affixed. 
3.  A projecting sign shall not extent more than nine (9) feet above the mean roof level of the structure to which it is affixed. 
C.  Display surface area requirements. 
1.  The maximum display surface area of ground signs in a commercial or industrial district shall be limited to an aggregate of one (1) square foot of display are per each lineal foot of street frontage, provided that no single sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
2.  Wall and canopy signs shall not exceed an aggregate display surface area of three (3) square feet per each lineal foot of the building wall to which the sign or signs are affixed. 
921.7.  Commercial and industrial district use conditions. 
A.  Height requirements. 
1.  A ground sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height, measured from the mean curb level of the lot upon which it is erected, unless in addition to the minimum setback prescribed in subsection 921.3.A, the sign is setback one (1) foot for each foot of height exceeding thirty (30) feet. No sign shall exceed fifty (50) feet in height regardless of setback. 
2.  A roof sign shall not extend more than twelve (12) feet above the mean roof level of the structure to which it is affixed. 
3.  A projecting sign shall not extend more than nine (9) feet above the mean roof level of the structure to which it is affixed. 
B.  Display surface area requirements. 
1.  The maximum display surface are of ground signs in a commercial or industrial district shall be limited to an aggregate of one (1) square foot of display area per each lineal foot of street frontage, provided that no single sign shall exceed three hundred (300) square feet. 
921.8.  Use conditions—Political campaign signs. Political campaign signs are allowed in any zoning district. No political campaign sign shall be erected more than forty-five (45) days prior to any election, nor shall any sign be permitted to remain on any property more than seven (7) days following an election; no political campaign signs shall be permitted on public property and they shall be permitted on private property only with the consent of the property owner; the display surface area of each political campaign sign located in R or O zoning districts shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in surface area; only one side of a double faced sign shall be computed in the computation of display area. 
921.9.  Use conditions—Temporary signs. 
A.  Temporary signs are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Temporary signs shall conform to all requirements for business signs and outdoor advertising signs. The stipulations in this section shall not be construed to require temporary signs to have connections to surfaces, tie downs or foundations when provisions are made by temporary means of configuration of the structure to provide stability for the expected duration of the installation and approved by the building inspector. 
2.  Permits for a temporary sign shall be good for a period of sixty (60) days, not to exceed one (1) permit in a six (6) month period on a given site. 
3.  Temporary signs shall be located only on privately owned property advertising products or services on the property where the sign is located. 
4.  That the height maximum on temporary signs, including any trailers is six (6) feet and the maximum sign face area shall not be greater than thirty-two (32) square feet. 
5.  That the temporary sign designation does not apply to business identification signs on company vehicles used in daily operation of the business. Vehicles with signs cannot be parked and used as advertisements. 
6.  Temporary signs which require electrical service shall adhere to the national electric code. 
921.10.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. Not applicable.  
Sec. 922. - Use Unit 22—Warehousing and wholesaling. 
922.1.  Description. Warehousing, wholesaling, and trucking often located adjacent to the central business district, in industrial parks served by rail and highway transportation, and part areas. 
922.2.  Included uses. Warehouses NEC, wholesale establishments NEC, storage NEC, trucking establishments, and truck rentals. 
922.3.  Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 22, when located on a lot which is abutting the boundary of an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the line or lines in common with the R district. 
922.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
All uses 	1 per 5,000 square feet of floor area 	1 per 5,000—25,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 923. - Use Unit 23—Land intensive industrial uses. 
923.1.  Description. Uses which is very land intensive and because of their potential adverse influence on adjacent properties, require site review and therefore, require BOA approval in all cases. 
923.2.  Included uses. Mining, quarrying, or extraction of coal, ores, stone, sand, or gravel; oil and gas drilling; processing of mineral products such as crushing, washing and grading of coal, ore stone, sand, or gravel; manufacture of portland cement, concrete or asphaltic concrete, at the source of supply of crushed rock, sand, or gravel, for utilization off the premises; salvage yards for automobiles, building materials, scrap metal, junk, paper or for other kinds of salvage; storage of dismantled autos in any form; paper or pulp manufacturing by sulphide process; sanitary landfill; hazardous waste disposal. 
923.3.  Use conditions. The Board of Adjustment, in granting a Use Unit 23 by special exception, shall consider potential environmental influences, such as dust and vibration, and shall establish in the particular instance appropriate protective conditions, such as setbacks, screening, and method of operation as will mitigate the adverse effect on appropriate land uses. 
923.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
All uses 	1.5 per on-site Employee 	N/A 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 924. - Use Unit 24—Light manufacturing and industry. 
924.1.  Description. Light manufacturing and industrial uses having slight or no objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat, smoke, noise, or vibration. 
924.2.  Included uses. Bottling plant, building contract construction service and storage cesspool cleaning, concrete construction service, grain elevators, heavy construction contracting service, heating construction contracting service, masonry, oil well drilling and cleaning, roofing, sand operations, sheet metal, stone work, water well drilling and cleaning, and welding shop. 
924.3.  Use conditions. Uses included in Use Unit 24, which are located within three hundred (300) feet of an R district, shall be conducted within enclosed buildings. 
The uses included use Unit 24, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
924.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
Research and development facilities 	1 per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 per 5,000—40,000 square feet plus 1 per 40,000—100,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
All other uses 	1 per 800 square feet of floor area 	1 per 2,000—40,000 square feet plus 1 per 40,000—100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 925. - Use Unit 25—Moderate manufacturing and industry. 
925.1.  Description. Manufacturing and industrial uses having moderately objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat, smoke, noise, or vibration. 
925.2.  Included uses. Aluminum works or foundry, asphalt and tile manufacturing, bleaching powder manufacturing, boiler works, brick and tile manufacturing, cellophane manufacturing, celluloid manufacturing, coke manufacturing, concrete ready mix, dyestuff manufacturing, linoleum manufacturing, oil cloth manufacturing, pickle, sausage and sauerkraut manufacturing, rayon manufacturing, rolling mills, sugar refining, shoddy manufacturing, starch glucose and dextrin manufacturing, tar roofing manufacturing, vinegar manufacturing, wool scouring and hair manufacturing. 
925.3.  Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 25, which are located within three hundred (300) feet of an R district, shall be conducted within enclosed buildings. 
The uses included in Use Unit 25, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the adjacent R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
925.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
All uses 	1 per 800 square feet of floor area 	1 per 2,000-40,000 square feet plus 1 per 40,000—100,000 square feet plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 926. - Use Unit 26—Heavy manufacturing and industry. 
926.1.  Description. Manufacturing and industrial uses having substantial objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat, smoke, noise, or vibration. Refining, petroleum and other crude materials. 
926.2.  Included uses. Manufacturing or industrial uses not elsewhere classified, but which are allowed by state and local law. 
926.3.  Use conditions. None. 
926.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
All uses 	1 per 800 square feet of floor area 	1 per 2,000-40,000 square feet plus 1 per 40,000—100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
 
See Chapter 10 for required minimum and dimensions and design criteria.  
Sec. 927. - Use Unit 27—Research and development. 
927.1.  Description. Facilities for scientific research, development and testing, which are customarily located on large, landscaped sites and the operation of which does not produce objectionable environmental effects. 
927.2.  Included uses. Enclosed scientific research, testing and development. 
927.3.  Use conditions. The uses included in Use Unit 27, when located in an IR District shall be conducted within enclosed buildings. 
The uses included in Use Unit 27, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district. 
927.4.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
	Parking Spaces 	Loading Berths 
All uses 	1 per 800 square feet of floor area 	1 per 5,000-40,000 square feet of floor area, plus 1 per 40,000 to 100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area 
  
Chapter 10 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING 
 
Sec. 1000. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of this section to assure that adequate off-street parking is provided with the construction, alteration, remodeling, or change of use of any building or change in the use of land.  
Sec. 1010. - Applicability of requirements. 
The off-street parking and off-street loading facilities, whether they are principal uses, accessory uses, or a minimum requirement for the initiation, enlargement, or change of use, shall meet the requirements of this chapter as follows: 
A.  For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date of this Code, parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by the applicable use unit. 
B.  When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use. 
C.  Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking and/or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the building or structure was erected prior to the effective date of this Code, additional parking and/or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use, if the latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of this Code. 
D.  Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities in existence on the effective date of this Code and located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or use under the provisions of this Code. 
E.  Any existing building or use that is enlarged, structurally altered, or remodeled to the extent of increasing or changing the use by more than fifty (50) percent as it existed at the effective date of this Code shall be accompanied by off-street parking for the entire building or use in accordance with the off-street parking regulations set forth in this section. When enlargement, structural alteration, or remodeling is to the extent that the use is not increased or changed by more than fifty (50) percent, additional off-street parking shall only be required for the increased or changed floor area or use.  
Sec. 1020. - General requirements. 
A.  Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall not occupy required livability space. Space allocated to any required off-street loading berth shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities. Space allocated to any required off-street parking shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements of any off-street loading facilities. 
B.  Within the front and exterior side yards in the RM Districts, except RM-T, not more than one (1) vehicle shall be parked for each six hundred (600) square feet of area contained in the front or exterior side yards. 
C.  Required off-street parking spaces and required off-street loading berths shall not be used for the storage, sales, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials, or supplies. 
D.  Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot, tract, parcel, or premises as the use being served or on other property of the same or less restrictive zoning classification that the owner of the premises being serviced has a continuing right to use for parking. When the required off-street parking spaces are not located on the same lot, tract, parcel, or premises being served, the distance from the parking lot to an entrance to the building or use shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet in distance, measured along the shortest available pedestrian route with public access. 
E.  Required enclosed off-street parking and loading areas shall meet the bulk and area requirements of the use district in which located, except that enclosed off-street parking and loading areas which are required shall not be included in the computation of permitted floor area. 
F.  The capacity of an off-street parking area shall be the number of parking spaces having required dimensions (see Tables 2 and 3) located thereon in such a manner that each space can be entered without passing through another space. 
G.  Required off-street parking in commercial, office, industrial and multi-family developments other than townhouses, zones shall be so arranged that no maneuvering incidental to parking movements takes place on the public street. 
H.  The number of off-street parking spaces required for each building or use shall be determined by reference to the appropriate Use Unit (1—27) within which the proposed use is classified. Where several different property uses will share a joint parking area, the parking requirements shall be computed based upon the overall development. For any use not listed, or where the listed regulations are not applicable in the judgment of the staff, the parking requirements shall be determined by staff. Computations of required parking spaces by staff shall be final. 
I.  Lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, if an, shall be by constant light and shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from properties within an R District which do not contain uses for which the parking is being provided. 
J.  Off-street parking areas, including driveways used for ingress and egress, shall be surfaced with a dust free all-weather material. Surfacing shall be completed prior to the initiation of the use. 
K.  Driveways for ingress and egress to off-street parking and loading areas shall have a maximum width of twenty-five (25) feet measured at the property line, driveways in R districts shall have five (5) foot radius curb returns, driveways in O, C or I districts shall have a maximum burb return radius of fifteen (15) feet.  
Sec. 1030. - Setbacks and screening requirements for off-street parking and loading areas. 
A.  Off-street loading areas shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of any abutting property which is within an R district unless it is wholly within an enclosed building or screened on all sides abutting the R district by a screening wall or fence. 
B.  Unenclosed off-street parking areas which are principal uses shall be screened by the erection of a screening wall or fence on the lot line or lines in common with an R district. Unenclosed off-street parking areas, containing six (6) or more spaces, which are accessory to uses not required to provide screening on the lot line or lines in common with an RE or RS district provided that if the parking area is located more than fifty (50) feet from the RE or RS lot line or lines the screening requirements shall not apply. 
C.  Unenclosed off-street parking and loading areas shall be setback from abutting streets as set forth in Table 1. 
Table 1 
Off-Street Parking and Loading Area Setbacks from Centerline of Abutting Streets* 
	Parking Area 
1—5 Spaces 	Parking Area 
6+ Spaces 	Loading Area 
In a R District 			
Accessory to a dwelling 	28 feet 	35 feet 	N/A 
Accessory to another use 	40 feet 	50 feet 	50 feet 
Not in an R district, but adjacent to an area designated as R in the Sapulpa Comprehensive Plan 	40 feet 	50 feet 	50 feet 
 
*If the right-of-way width designated on the major street plan exceeds fifty (50) feet, add one-half (½) of the amount by which the designated right-of-way exceeds fifty (50) feet.  
Sec. 1040. - Design standards for off-street parking areas. 
The design and dimensions of off-street parking areas shall be in accordance with the provisions of the following tables of minimum dimensions: 
Figure 1
Minimum Required Dimensions for 90º Parking
 
Figure 2
Minimum Required Dimensions for Angle Parking*
 
Off-street parking spaces shall be clearly marked according to the standard stall layout as shown in Figures 1 or 2 below. Parking spaces abutting an adjoining property line or street right-of-way shall be provided with wheel guards or bumper guards so beyond the property line, when wheel guards are used, they shall be centered at least two and one-half (2.5) feet from the property line for ninety (90) degree parking, and two and three-tenths (2.3) feet for sixty (60) degree parking, and two (2) feet for forty-five (45) degree parking. 
Pedestrian access to buildings shall be provided from right-of-way and parking areas by means of a pathway leading to at least one public entrance. Such pathway hall be clear of any and all obstructions and any parking spaces shall be designed so as not to permit any portion of a vehicle to obstruct the sidewalk. Where curbs exist along such pathways, as between a parking lot surface and sidewalks surface, inclined curb approaches or curb cuts having a gradient of not more than one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet and width of not less than four (4) feet shall be provided to access by wheelchair. 
Figure 3
Standard Stall Layout and Striping
 
A parking lot servicing each entrance pathway shall have a number of level parking spaces, as set forth in the following table, identified by above-grade signs as being reserved for the physically handicapped persons; provided that a maximum of two (2) handicapped spaces shall be required for industrial uses in industrial districts. Each parking space so reserved shall not be less than twelve (12) feet in width. 
Table 2 
Parking Spaces for the Handicapped 
Total Spaces in Lot 	Required No. of Reserved Spaces 
0 to 25 	1 
26 to 50 	2 
51 to 75 	3 
76 to 100 	4 
101 to 150 	5 
151 to 200 	6 
201 to 300 	7 
301 to 400 	8 
401 to 500 	9 
501 to 1,000 	10 
Over 1,000 	10 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000 
 
Parking spaces for he physically handicapped shall be located as close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways and entrances. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be located so that such persons are not compelled to wheel of to walk behind parked cars to reach entrances, ramps walkways and elevators.  
Sec. 1050. - Design standards for off-street loading areas. 
A.  Off-street loading regulations. The intent of this section is to ensure that an adequate off-street loading area is provided with the construction, alteration, or change of use of any business building or structure, or with any change in land use. 
1.  The owner and the occupier of any property upon which a business is located shall provide loading and unloading as determined by reference to the appropriate Use Unit (1—27) within which the proposed use is classified. 
2.  Any person desiring a building permit for the construction, alteration, or change of use of the land or any business building or structure shall submit a site plan to the building official designating the number, dimensions and locations of all loading areas and all proposed avenues of ingress and egress to the property from adjacent public thoroughfares. The building official shall not issue such permit if it is determined that the proposed loading and unloading facilities will present a direct or indirect hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
B.  Minimum required design criteria for off-street loading spaces. 
1.  Unless otherwise specified, a required off-street loading berth shall be at least ten (10) feet in width, thirty (30) feet in length, exclusive of aisles, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet. 
2.  Required off-street loading berths shall be provided access to and from a public street or alley by an access drive of at least fifteen (15) feet in width designed to permit convenient access to the berth by semi-trailer trucks. 
3.  Off-street loading areas, including driveways used for ingress and egress, shall be surfaced with a dust free all-weather material. 
4.  Lighting used to illuminate an off-street loading area, if any, shall be by constant light and shall be so arranged as to direct the light way from properties within an R district which do not contain uses for which the loading area is being provided.  
Sec. 1060. - Site plan review. 
Any person establishing an off-street parking facility or applying for a building permit for construction, reconstruction, or alteration of the use of any building, other than a single-family residence shall submit to the planning staff a site plan for review as per Sections 660.2 and 660.3 which are also applicable here.  
Chapter 11 - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
Sec. 1100. - General. 
Within the districts established by the Code or amendments that may later be adopted there exist uses, structures, and lots which were lawful before this Code was adopted or amended by which would be prohibited under the terms of this Code of future amendment to this Code, these uses, structures and lots, herein referred to as "nonconformities," may continue as regulated by this chapter. A use lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this Code, or amendment thereto, which does not comply with a parking, loading, screening, bulk and area, accessory sign, or enclosure requirement or requirements, but which is otherwise unlawful, shall not constitute a nonconforming use within the meaning of Sections 1110 and 1120.  
Sec. 1110. - Nonconforming uses of unimproved land. 
When at the effective date of this Code or amendment thereto a lawful use of land exists, which would not be permitted by the terms of this Code or amendment thereto, and the only structures employed in connection with such use are all accessory or incidental to such use and in the aggregate do not cover more than ten (10) percent of the lot area devoted to the nonconforming use of unimproved land and shall terminate as follows: 
A.  If the replacement costs of the accessory structures (other than fences) is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the nonconforming use shall terminate within five (5) years from the effective date of this Code or from the date the use became nonconforming, whichever is later. 
B.  If the replacement cost of the accessory structures (other than fences) is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, the nonconforming use shall be terminated on the basis of amortization of the replacement cost of the accessory structures at the rate of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year from the effective date of this Code or from the date the use became nonconforming, whichever is later. 
Pending termination, the nonconforming use of land may be continued provided: 
A.  No such nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use or enlarged or increased to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of this Code or amendment thereof. 
B.  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of this Code or amendment thereof. 
C.  No additional structure (other than fences) shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
D.  In any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than ninety (90) days (except when government action impedes access to or use of the premises), any subsequent use of such land shall conform in all respects to the regulations of the district in which located.  
Sec. 1120. - Nonconforming use of buildings or buildings and land in combination. 
When at the effective date of this Code or amendment thereto, there exists a lawful use of a building, or use of a principal building and land, or use of land and accessory structures, such structures covering more than ten (10) percent of the lot area, and such use would not be permitted by the terms of this Code or amendment thereto, such use shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No building devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended, except in changing the use of the building to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
B.  A nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be extended to the remaining portions of the building if such portions were manifestly arranged and designed for such use but such use shall not be extended to occupy any land outside the building. 
C.  A nonconforming se of a building, or building and land in combination, if superseded by a permitted use shall not thereafter be resumed. 
D.  A nonconforming use of a building or building and land in combination, if discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months or for twelve (12) months during any eighteen (18) month period (except when governmental action impedes access to or the use of the premises), shall not thereafter be resumed. 
E.  Where nonconforming use status applies to a building and land in combination, termination of the use of the building within the meaning of [subsection] D above shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the use of the land. 
F.  A nonconforming use of a building or of a building and land in combination when located within a residential district shall not be changed unless changed to a use permitted in the district in which located. A nonconforming use of a building or of a building and land in combination, when located within a district other than a residential district, may, as a special exception, be changed upon approval of the Board of Adjustment after finding that the proposed use will not result in any increase of incompatibility with the present and future use of proximate properties. The change of a use to another use contained within the same use unit shall not constitute a "change of use" within the meaning of this section. 
G.  Should the structure containing a nonconforming use be damaged or partially destroyed to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent but less then seventy-five (75) percent of its current replacement cost at the time of damage, the restoration of the structure shall be subject to the Board of Adjustment's findings, after adherence to the procedural requirements for a special exception, that the contemplated restoration is necessary for the continuance of the nonconforming use, and will not result in any increase of incompatibility with the present and future use of proximate properties, should the structure containing a nonconforming use be damaged or destroyed to the extent of more than seventy-five (75) percent of its replacement cost at the time of damage, the nonconforming use shall not thereafter continue or be resumed.  
Sec. 1130. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Signs lawfully existing on the effective date of this Code but which would be prohibited by its terms, shall be removed, or made to conform if possible, on or before January 1, 1995. In additions, said sign shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1.  The sign shall be maintained in good repair and visual appearance. 
2.  Should the sign be damaged or partially destroyed to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its current replacement cost at the time of damage, the sign shall be removed, or made to conform if possible. 
3.  If the sign is not used for advertising purposes for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the sign shall be deemed abandoned and shall be removed. 
B.  Sign legally erected within an AG district after the effective date of this Code and becomes nonconforming upon a rezoning to an R or O district and is not accessory to an on-site principal use, the sign shall be removed within six (6) months from the effective date of the rezoning; other nonconforming signs if located in an R district and not accessory to an on-site principal use, shall be removed within six (6) months from the date the sign became nonconforming.  
Sec. 1140. - Nonconforming lots. 
A.  Single lots. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of the Code, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Code. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
B.  Adjoining lots. If two (2) or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption or amendment of this Code and such lots individually are too small to meet the yard, width or area requirements of the district in which they are located, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size and the lot or lots in one (1) ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this Code. 
C.  In districts other than residential districts, any use permitted by right in the applicable district may be located on any lot of official record at the effective date of this Code, irrespective of its area or width, provided the other requirements of the use district are complied with.  
Sec. 1150. - Structural nonconformities. 
A structure, lawfully existing at the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this Code, but which would be prohibited by the terms of this Code by reason of restrictions on floor area, density, intensity, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any manner which increases its nonconformity, but any structure may be altered to decrease its nonconformity, provided that the addition of a mezzanine or similar alteration which does not increase the cubic content of the structure shall not constitute any "increase in nonconformity". 
B.  Should such structure be damaged or partially destroyed by any means to the extent to more than fifty (50) percent of its current preplacement cost at the time of damage, the restoration as a nonconforming structure shall be subject to the Board of Adjustment's findings, after adherence to the procedural requirements for a special exception, that its restoration to a conforming structure cannot reasonable be make in view of the nature and extent of the nonconformity and the nature and extent of damages. 
C.  Should such structure be moved for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the district in which located.  
Sec. 1160. - Repairs. 
A.  On any building containing a nonconforming use or any nonconforming structure, ordinary repairs and maintenance may be made provided that the cubic content of the building is not increased, and structural nonconformity is not increased. 
B.  If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and a final order of vacation or demolition is entered by any duly authorized official by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be used, restored, or repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the provisions of the district in which located.  
Chapter 12 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 1200. - Duty of Building Inspector and other officials. 
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce this Code. If the Building Inspector shall find that any of the provisions of this Code are being violated, he shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such violations, indication the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, and shall take such other action to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions as is authorized by law. 
All departments, officials, and employees of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall comply with the provisions of the Code and shall issue no permits or licenses for any use, purpose excavation, construction, structure, building, or sign in conflict with the provisions of this Code.  
Sec. 1210. - Zoning clearance permit. 
1210.1.  Zoning clearance permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, move add to, or structurally alter any building or structure, or use of change the use of any building or land or to permit the aforementioned actions, until a zoning clearance permit has been issued by the Building Inspector. 
1210.2.  Application for zoning clearance permit. An application for a zoning clearance permit shall be accompanied by a legal description of the lot, and plans in duplicate, drawn to scale in black line or blueprint, showing the actual shape and dimension of the lot; the location, size and height of any existing building or structure and the location, size and height of any buildings or structures to be erected or altered; the existing and intended use of each building or structure and portion of the lot; the number of dwellings the building is intended to accommodate if any; and such other information with regards to lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of the Code. 
1210.3.  Building Inspector to act within three (3) days. The building inspector shall act upon each application for a zoning clearance permit within three (3) business days after it is filed in compliance with the provisions herein. He shall return one (1) copy of the plans and issue a zoning clearance permit or notify the applicant, in writing, of his refusal to issue a permit setting forth the reasons therefore. 
1210.4.  Fees for zoning clearance permits. No zoning clearance permit shall be issued until a fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall have been paid provided that upon the payment of ten dollars ($10.00) a group zoning clearance permit may be issued covering five (5) or more residential lots in the same subdivision.  
Sec. 1220. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this Code or failing to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, and each day's violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma or its authorized officials from taking other action, authorized by law, to remedy violations, it shall be punished as provided by Section 1-8 of the city code of the City of Sapulpa.  
Sec. 1230. - Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans, and permits. 
Zoning permits, variances, special exceptions uses issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorized only the uses, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of the Code, and punishable as provided by Section 1220.  
Chapter 13 - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
 
Sec. 1300. - Establishment of the Board of Adjustment. 
There is hereby established a Board of Adjustment of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, with the power sand duties hereinafter set forth, the Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, each appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the City Commission of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. At least two (2) of these members shall be appointed from the membership of the Planning Commission. Each member shall serve without pay for a term of three (3) years and vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term of any member in the manner set forth for appointments to a full term. 
A Board member upon witted charges and after public hearing may be removed by the appointing council for any one (1) of the following causes: 
A.  Failure to attend three (3) consecutive regular or special meetings, or failure to attend two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the regular or special meetings held during a six (6) month period; 
B.  Actions and conduct unbecoming to a public official of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma; and 
C.  Repeated acts and conduct detrimental to the peace, health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Sapulpa. 
The Board shall organize, elect its chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary, and adopt rules necessary to conduct of its affairs.  
Sec. 1310. - Powers of the Board. 
The Board shall have the power to hear appeals from the determinations made by an administrative official in enforcing the Code, to grant special exceptions, to grant variances, and to make interpretations of the zoning map and text, in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards hereinafter set forth except as otherwise provided herein.  
Sec. 1320. - Proceedings of the Board. 
Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the vice-chairman, or acting chairman may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings, deliberations, and voting of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, vote, indication such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment and shall be a public record. In all matters, the Board shall decide within ninety (90) days after the filing of any application for relief. The quorum, notice, filing and substantive requirements of the Board shall be as set forth in the following sections concerning the Board's exercise of particular power.  
Sec. 1330. - Notice of public hearing. 
The Board of Adjustment shall give notice and conduct a public hearing before acting on any appeal from a determination of the building inspector, Sapulpa Preservation Commission or Code Enforcement Supervisor or before granting any special exception, or variance or exception. 
Ten (10) days' notice of public hearing shall be given as follows: 
A.  For special exception, variance or appeal from a determination of an administrative official. 
1.  By publication in a newspaper of general circulation; and 
2.  By mailing written notice to all owners of property within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. 
B.  For minor variance or exception by mailing written notice to all owners of abutting property of the subject property. Nothing herein shall preclude the Board of Adjustment from requiring the giving of public notice of hearings to all owners of property within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property for consideration of a minor variance or exception. 
The notice shall contain: 
A.  The legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location of the property. 
B.  The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the relief sought. 
C.  The date, time and place of the hearing. 
The applicant shall furnish a certified list, prepared by an abstract company with the names and addresses of all owners of property within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property, of in the case of a minor variance or exception, the owners of abutting property of the subject property.  
Sec. 1340. - Appeals from the Building Inspector, City Planner, Sapulpa Preservation Commission, and Code Enforcement Supervisor. 
1340.1.  General. An appeal to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureaus of the City affected, where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building inspector, Sapulpa Preservation Commission or code enforcement supervisor in the enforcement of the Code. 
1340.2.  Notice of appeal. An appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days from the determination complained of by filing with the building inspector, City Planner, code enforcement supervisor or Sapulpa Preservation Commission and with the Secretary of the Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector, code enforcement supervisor or Sapulpa Preservation Commission upon receipt of notice, shall transmit to the Secretary of the Board and the City Clerk certified copies of all the papers constituting the record of said matter. Upon receipt of the record, the Secretary shall cause an investigation to be make upon the appeal and shall set the matter for public hearing. 
1340.3.  Board of Adjustment Action. The Board shall hold the public hearing. The Board may reverse or affirm, or wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be make, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The Board shall make its decision within thirty (30) days after the final hearing, and the decision shall be in writing and filed of record in the office of the City Clerk. 
The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Building Inspector, City Planner, Sapulpa Preservation Commission and Code Enforcement Supervisor. A decision of the Board shall not become final until the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the date such decision is made, unless the Board shall find the immediate taking of said decision is necessary for the preservation of property or personal rights and shall so certify on the record. 
1340.4.  Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless that building inspector from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, in such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by the Board or by the Court of proper jurisdiction on due and sufficient cause shown.  
Sec. 1350. - Interpretation. 
The Board shall interpret the text of the Code or the official zoning map upon an appeal from a determination of the building inspector after compliance with the procedural standards of Section 1340. 
Where a question arises as to the zoning district classification of a particular use, the Board of Adjustment, upon written request of the building inspector, may find and determine the classification of the use in question and may, prior to such determination, order the giving of notice and hold a public hearing.  
Sec. 1360. - Variances. 
1360.1.  General. The Board of Adjustment, upon application, and after notice (when notice is required) and public hearing, and subject to the procedural and substantive standards hereinafter set forth, may grant such variance from the terms of the Code as will not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the spirit, purposes and intent of this Code, or the comprehensive plan, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography, or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, condition, or circumstance peculiar to a particular property, the literal enforcement of the Code will result in unnecessary hardship. The Board shall not permit by variance a principal use not otherwise permitted in the applicable district, it being the expressed spirit and intent of the Coded that a change of the permitted principal uses shall be made by ordinance amendment of the Zoning Code or Official Zoning Map. 
1360.2.  Application. A request for a variance shall be initiated by the filing of an application with the City Clerk and shall be set for public hearing by the Secretary in accordance with the rules established by the Board. 
1360.3.  Board of Adjustment action. The Board shall hold the public hearing and, upon the concurring vote of three (3) members, may grant a variance after finding: 
That by reasons of extraordinary or exceptional conditions or circumstances which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved, the literal enforcement of the terms of the Code would result in unnecessary hardship. 
That such extraordinary or exceptional conditions or circumstances do not apply generally to other property in the same use district. 
That the variance to be granted will not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes, spirit and intent of the Code, or the comprehensive plan. 
Provided that the Board is granting a variance shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, and may require such evidence and guarantee or bond as it may deem necessary to enforce compliance with the conditions attached. 
1360.4.  Time limitation on variances. A variance which has not been utilized within one (1) year from the date of the order granting the variance shall thereafter be void. For the purpose of this provision, utilization shall mean actual use of the issuance of a building permit, when applicable, provided construction is diligently carried to completion.  
Sec. 1370. - Special exceptions. 
1370.1.  General. The Board of Adjustment, upon application, and after notice (when notice is required) and public hearing, subject to the procedural and substantive standards hereinafter set forth, may grant the following special exceptions: 
A.  Special exception uses are designated and regulated within the permitted use provisions of the zoning districts. 
B.  The change of a nonconforming use as provided in Section 1120.F, Chapter 11, Nonconformities. 
C.  The restoration of a partially destroyed structure containing a nonconforming use as provided in Section 1120.G, Chapter 11, Nonconformities. 
D.  The restoration of a partially destroyed nonconforming structure as provided in Section 1150, Chapter 11, Nonconformities. 
E.  The modification of a screening requirement, as provided in Section 250, Chapter 2, District Provisions: General. 
F.  Off-street parking use of property located within a residential district, when the property is abutting an office, commercial or industrial district. 
1370.2.  Application. A request for a special exception shall be initiated by the filing of an application with the City Clerk and shall be set for public hearing by the Secretary in accordance with the rules established by the Board. 
1370.3.  Board of Adjustment action. The Board of Adjustment shall hold the public hearing and, upon the concurring vote of three (3) members, may grant the special exception after finding that the special exception will be in harmony with the spirit and intent of the Code, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. Provided that the Board in granting the special exception shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, and may require such evidence and guarantee or bonds as it may deem necessary to enforce compliance with the conditions attached. 
1370.4.  Time limitation on special exceptions. A special exception which has not been utilized within one (1) year from the date of the order granting same shall thereafter be void. For the purpose of this provision, utilization shall mean actual use of the issuance of a building permit, when applicable, provided construction is diligently carried to completion.  
Sec. 1380. - Appeals to the district court. 
1380.1.  Procedure. An appeal from any action, ruling, decision, judgement, or order of the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person or persons aggrieved, or any taxpayer or officer, department, board, or bureau of the city to the District Court, by filing with the City Clerk and with the Secretary of the Board within ten (10) days from the date of such action, a notice of appeal, which notice shall specify the grounds of such appeal. No bond or deposit for cost shall be required for such appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal, the City Clerk shall transmit to the Court Clerk of the County the original or certified copies of all the paper constituting, the record in the case, together with the order decision, or ruling of the Board. Said case shall be heard and tried de novo in the District Court of Creek County, Oklahoma. An appeal shall lie from the action of the District Court as in all other civil actions. All issues in any proceedings under this section shall have preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. Neither costs nor attorney fees shall be allowed against the Board unless it shall appear to the Court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith, or with malice in making the decision being appealed. 
1380.2.  Stay of proceedings. An appeal to the District Court stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the chairman of the Board certifies to the Court Clerk, after notice shall have been filed, that by reasons of fact stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life of property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restarting order granted by the District Court.  
Chapter 14 - AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 1400. - General. 
The regulations, restrictions, prohibitions, and limitations imposed and the districts created by chapters 1—15 may from time to time be amended, supplemented changed, modified or repealed by ordinance, but no change shall be made until the Planning Commission, after notice and public hearing, files with the City a report and recommendation on the proposed change. In addition to the procedural provisions hereinafter set out, the Planning Commission shall adopt procedural rules for the conduct of zoning public hearings.  
Sec. 1410. - Policy on zoning map amendments. 
It shall be the policy of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma that in the consideration of proposed amendments to this Code that: Amendments will be adopted to recognize changes in the comprehensive plan, to correct error, or to recognize changed or changing conditions in a particular area or in the jurisdictional area generally.  
Sec. 1420. - Zoning text amendments. 
The Planning Commission, upon its own motion, may, or at the direction of the City Commission shall, hold a public hearing, giving notice thereof, of a proposed text amendment. After holding the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall within fifteen (15) days transmit its report and recommendation to the City Commission.  
Sec. 1430. - Zoning map amendments. 
1430.1.  Initiated by application. 
A.  An amendment to the zoning map shall be initiated by the filing of an application with the City Clerk an application shall be in such form and content as the Planning Commission may by resolution establish and shall be accompanied by the payment of a thirty-five dollars ($35.00) fee. Cost of notice and posting or signs shall be billed to the applicant. 
B.  An application shall be filed with the Planning Commission and shall set for public hearing according to their deadline schedule. 
1430.2.  Initiated by the Planning Commission. In any instance, the Planning Commission, upon its own motion may, or at the request of the City Commission shall hold a public hearing giving notice thereof, of a proposed map amendment after holding the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall within fifteen (15) days transmit its report and recommendation to the City Commission. 
1430.3.  Notice required. The Planning Commission shall give twenty (20) days' notice of a public hearing on the proposed map amendment by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. In addition, twenty (20) days' notice of public hearing shall be given by posting the property sought to be rezoned, and by mailing notice to all owners of property within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the property. The notice shall contain: 
A.  Date, time, and place of public hearing. 
B.  Legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location of the property. 
C.  Present zoning district classification of the property and the proposed zoning district classification, provided: 
1.  Notice of a proposed RM-2 rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and the City Commission to consider and act upon RMT, RM-2, RM-1, RD, RS-3, RS-2, RS-1, and RE, or combinations thereof in the disposition of the application, and in like manner, notice of any R District, including RM, shall confer jurisdiction to consider and less dense R District, except RMH. 
2.  Notice of a proposed CG rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Commission to consider and act upon CG, CS, OM, and OL or combination thereof in the disposition of the application, and in like manner, notice of any C District shall confer jurisdiction to consider and less intense C District or and O District, and notice of any O District shall confer jurisdiction to consider and less intense O District. 
3.  Notice of proposed IH rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Commission to consider and act upon IH, IM, IL, or combination thereof in the disposition of the application, and in like manner, notice of any I District shall confer jurisdiction to consider any less intense I District. 
4.  Specific notice of a proposed AG or RMH district shall be required to confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Commission to consider such AG or RMH District. 
1430.4.  Planning Commission and action on zoning map amendments. After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission shall vote to: 
A.  Recommend to the City Commission that the application be approved as submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modification or, 
B.  Recommend to the City Commission that the application be denied. 
An application recommended for approval, or approval subject to modification, shall be transmitted, with the report and recommendations of the Planning Commission, to the City Commission within fifteen (15) days from the date of Planning Commission action. 
An application recommended for denial, shall not be considered further unless the applicant within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Planning Commission action, files a written request with the City Auditor for a hearing by the City Commission. The request for hearing shall be accompanied by the payment of a fifteen dollars ($15.00) fee. Upon notice of such request, the Planning Commission shall forthwith transmit the application, its report and recommendation to the City Commission. 
In the event the Planning Commission arrives at a tie vote, the application shall be transmitted, with a report and notation of the tie vote, to the City Commission within fifteen (15) days from the date of Planning Commission action. 
1430.5.  City Commission action on zoning map amendments. The City Commission shall hold a hearing on each application regularly transmitted, and on each application transmitted pursuant to a written request for further hearing and shall approve the application as submitted or as amended to approve the application subject to modification, or deny the application, in case of a protest against such zoning change filed at least three (3) days prior to said public hearing by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or by the owners of fifty (50) percent or more of the area of the lots immediately abutting any side of the territory included in such proposed change, or separated therefrom only by an alley or street less than three hundred (300) feet wide, such amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fifths ( 3/5 ) of all the members of the City Commission.  
Chapter 15 - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 1500. - Definitions. 
Abutting: In the context of a screening or enclosure requirement, abutting shall mean contiguous or separated therefrom only by a non-arterial street. In other instances, abutting shall mean contiguous (sharing a common border; touching). 
Accessory uses or structure: A use of structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
All-weather material: A material capable, during ordinary use, of withstanding without substantial deterioration, normal weather conditions. 
Alley: A permanent public way providing a secondary means or access for service and emergency vehicles, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Bar: See "Tavern." 
Board of Adjustment: The Board of Adjustment of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
Building: A structure which is permanently affixed to the land, and has one or more floors and a roof, and is bounded by either another building with a common party wall, open air, or the lot lines of a lot. 
Building height: The vertical distance measured from the average ground elevation at the building wall to the highest horizontal point of the structure, provided that height exceptions listed under Section 220 shall apply. 
Building setback: The horizontal distance, from the point of measurement, such as the centerline of an abutting street or the boundary line of an abutting zoning district to the nearest building wall. 
Care home: Premises used for the housing and caring for the aged or infirmed, and includes convalescent (a person who is recovering from and illness or operation) homes, homes for the aged and nursing homes. 
Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the interment of human remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
Certificate of occupancy: An official certificate issued by the City through the enforcing official which indicated conformance with the zoning regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued. 
Child care center: Any place, home, or institution which cares for six (6) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years, apart from their parents, guardians, or custodians for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, that the term "child center" shall not include or apply to bona fide (genuine; real) schools, custody fixed by a court, children related by blood or marriage within the third degree of the custodial person, or churches and other religious or public institutions caring for children within an institutional building. 
City Commission: The governing and legislative body of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma. 
City Manager: The chief administrative officer of the City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma or his designee. 
Copy area: The net geometric area enclosed by the smallest rectangles encompassing the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characters, and delineations, contained in the sign. 
Cluster housing development: A residential development containing attached or detached unites on a limited portion of land with the remaining land areas consolidated into common open space areas. 
Community group home: A community-based residential facility for independent living that provides room and board, personal care, habilitation services in a family environment as a single housekeeping unit of six (6) to twelve (12) resident mentally retarded and/or physically limited persons with at least one (1) but not more than three (3) resident staff persons. Personal care and habilitation services excludes on-site institutional type educational training, medical or nursing care. 
Curb level: The mean level of the established curb at the frontage of a lot. Where no curb has been established, the City Engineer shall establish such curb level or its equivalent for the purposes of this Code. 
Day Care: See "Child care." 
Detention/correctional facility: A facility for the detention, confinement, treatment and/or rehabilitation or persons arrested or convicted for the violation or civil or criminal law. Such facilities include an adult detention center, juvenile delinquency center, pre-release center, correctional community treatment center, jail and prison. 
Dwelling, single-family: A building, other than a manufactured home containing one (1) dwelling unit designed for occupancy by not more than one (1) family, and certified as complying with the building code of this jurisdiction whether constructed on or off site. 
Dwelling, duplex: A building containing two (2) dwelling units designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families. Included are all forms of manufactured duplex dwellings but excluding mobile homes. 
Dwelling, manufactured: A structure designed and intended for human occupancy on a year-round or temporary of seasonal basis which has undergone at least partial prefabrication or preassembled sub-elements such as roof trusses, floor trusses, plumbing trees, or wiring harness. Included are the following sub-classes: 
Pre-fabricated: A manufactured dwelling involving no preassembly but all components have been cut and fabricated and then assembled on-site; 
Panelized: A manufactured dwelling partially preassembled into roof, wall, floor, and ceiling components (which may range from exposed wood to having all finishing completed which are assembled on-site, and constructed to national building code standards; 
Sectionalized or modular: A manufactured dwelling partially preassembled into two (2) or more sections, none of which are habitable individually, permanently joined together and, utilized customary residential siding and roofing materials, built to national building code standards and are either: 
Wood frame units designed to be transported by flat-bed truck and installed on conventional permanent foundations, or 
Chassis/under-carriage units designed to be towed or structurally capable of being towed on wheels and installed on permanent foundations after all hitches, running gear and chassis have been removed; 
Mobile home or trailer home: A manufactured dwelling other than recreational vehicle either: 
Fully preassembled into one (1) unit or one (1) expandable/telescoping unit of more than thirty-five (35) feet in length and is fully habitable upon arrival at a site except for minor and incidental installation activities and utility connections and is installed on either temporary or permanent foundations, or 
A dwelling manufactured in two (2) or more units but either fails to utilized customary, residential roofing and siding materials or retains chassis or other equipment related to being towed or is not placed on a conventional permanent foundation. 
Dwelling multi-family: A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. Included are all forms of manufactured multi-family dwelling, but excluding mobile homes. 
Elderly/retirement housing: A residential complex containing multi-family dwellings designed for and principally occupied by senior citizens. Such facilities may include a congregated meals program in a common dining area, but excluding institutional care such as medical or nursing care and distinguished from life care retirement centers as elsewhere defined. 
Emergency and protective shelter: A residential facility which provides room and boards for a temporary (thirty (30) days or less) period, protection, counseling, and pre-placement screening for abused displaced, or transient children or adults. 
Family: One (1) or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood, marriage, or other domestic bonds, no such family shall contain over three (3) persons, but further provided that domestic servants may be housed on the premises without being designated as a family. Individuals not related by blood, marriage, or adoption occupying a single dwelling unit for on-site institutional education, training, supervision, medical or nursing care shall not be considered a family as defined herein. Further provided a family, as defined herein, does not included a foster home or a neighborhood group home as elsewhere defined. 
Family day care Home: Any home which cares for five (5) or less children under the age of sixteen (16) years, for regular periods of time for compensation. This shall include the family day care parents own preschool children under the age of two (2) years of age living at home. 
Floodplain: The land area adjoining a watercourse or drain way which would be inundated by the floodwater of the one hundred (100) year frequency flood, based on full urbanization of the watershed, as predicted by the City Engineer, or as predicted by the U.S. Corps of Engineers and confirmed by the City Engineer. 
Floodway fringe: Those portions of the floodplain which are not reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of the one hundred (100) year frequency flood as predicted by the City Engineer, or as predicted by the U.S. Corps of Engineers and confirmed by the City Engineer. 
Floor area, gross: The total floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level. 
Floor area, net: Is the area actually occupied not including accessory unoccupied areas such as corridors, stairs, closets, thickness or walls, columns, toilet room, mechanical area or other features. 
Floor area ratio: The floor area of a building or buildings on a lot divided by the lot area. 
Foster home: A dwelling used in whole or in part as living quarters for a household including one (1) or more minor children placed by a licensed child placement agency who are not members or the family occupying said dwelling but, are under their supervision, further, provided that a maximum of five (5) children are allowed to reside in the home including any natural children living in the home, if any children in the home are age two (2) or younger, if no children are under two (2) years, the maximum number of children residing in the home is six (6). 
Frontage: The lineal measurement of a lot boundary which abuts a public street or the lineal measurement of the building setback line when the boundary of the lot abuts a cubed non-major street or cul-de-sac. 
Habitable floor: Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, heating, cooking or recreation or a combination thereof. 
Halfway house: A building used in whole or in part as a treatment center and dwelling quarters for persons unrelated by blood or marriage, who are undergoing care or rehabilitation for alcoholism or other forms or drug abuse. 
Height building: See "Building height." 
Height sign: The vertical distance measured from the curb level to the highest point of the sign. 
Home occupation: Any occupation or activity conducted within a dwelling unit which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the premises for dwelling purposes. 
Hundred year-frequency Flood: A flood having an average frequency of occurrence one (1) in one hundred (100) years, although the flood may occur in any year, based on statistical analyses of stream flow records available for the watershed and analyses or rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general region of the watershed, as predicted by the City Engineer, or as predicted by the U.S. Corps of Engineers and confirmed by the City Engineer. 
Kennel: The use of land or building for the purpose of selling, breeding boarding or training cates or dogs or both, excluding uses such as pet shops in which all activities are carried on within an entirely enclosed building. Enclosed shall mean: With exterior walls built from floor to ceiling with a solid material such as rock, brick, wood, metal or glass, no fencing or other wire like materials shall be used as a part of the exterior walls or the building. 
Land area: The area of a lot plus one-half (½) or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less, or the right-of-way of an abutting street of which the lot has access. 
Life care retirement center: A residential facility containing dwellings designed for a principally occupied by senior citizens in a planned retirement community which includes a residential complex, an activity or community center, and a medical or nursing facility which is licensed by the State of Oklahoma as an Intermediate Care Facility or a skilled Nursing Center. 
Livability space: The open space of a lot which is not allocated to or used for off-street parking or loading areas or for paved access to the off-street parking or loading area. 
Loading berth, off-street: A space of at least ten (10) feet in width and thirty (30) feet in length and having a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet, designed and located on a lot for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
Lot: A lot or record, said lot which is part of an addition, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk or a parcel of land the deed of which is recorded in the office of the County Clerk. 
Lot area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 
Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk, of the County in which the lot is located or a parcel of land, the deed of which is recorded in the office of the County Clerk or the County in which the parcel is located. 
Lot line: Any boundary of a lot. 
Lot line, front: The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street. Where the lot abuts more than one (1) street, the owner may select the front lot line. 
Lot line, rear: The boundary of a lot which is not distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line. 
Lot line, side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
Lot width: The average horizontal; distance between the side lot lines. 
Major: A street designated on the major street plan as a primary major or secondary major. 
Major street plan: "The City of Sapulpa, Oklahoma Major Street Plan," as adopted by the Town Board of Trustees Oklahoma by Ordinance Number 49 on October 15, 1973 and revised by resolution on the 6th day of July, 1981 or as it may hereafter be amended by ordinance or resolution. 
Mini-storage: A building containing small partitioned storage spaces, which are separately and individually rented or leased, for the storage of personal goods of merchandise, but excluding commercial warehousing as described in Use Unit 22. 
Mobile home: See dwelling, manufactured. 
NA: Not applicable. 
Nameplate: A sign, attached flush against a building, identifying the name of the building or the name of an occupant thereof. 
Nightclub: A place of entertainment open at night usually serving food and liquor, having a floorshow, and providing music and space for dancing. 
NEC: Not elsewhere classified. 
Neighborhood group home: A home for independent living with support personnel that provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment as a single-housekeeping unit for not more than five (5) residents mentally retarded and/or physically limited persons with at least one (1) but not more than two (2) resident staff persons. Personal care and habilitation services excludes on-site institutional type educational training, medical or nursing care. 
Nursing home: A residential health care facility licensed and regulated by the State of Oklahoma which provides lodging, personal care and supervision for aged, chronically ill, physically infirm, or convalescent patients. 
Parking duration: The length of time an individual vehicle remains in a given parking space, duration is a function of the driver's trip, purpose and increases with increasing city size. 
Parking space, off-street: A space on a lot intended and reserved for the parking of an automobile. Such space to be of at least nine and one-half (9.5) feet in width by nineteen (19) feet in length, together with a driveway connecting the space with a street or alley and permitting safe ingress or egress of an automobile. 
Planning Commission: The Sapulpa Metropolitan Area Planning Commission. 
Planned unit development: A discretionary type of development for a tract of land under single ownership or control, based upon approved development plan permitting flexibility of principal land uses, lot sizes, and accessory uses not otherwise available under conventional development standards. 
Private club: An establishment having the chief activity of service and is not operated as a business or for profit, and which hold and maintain an income tax exempt status. Includes charitable, eleemosynary, educational and recreational establishments. 
Recreational vehicle: A vehicular structure portable or self-propelled designed as a temporary dwelling for travel use or recreational use not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in length. 
Residential treatment center: A community-based residential facility providing diagnostic or therapeutic services and long-term room and board in a highly structured environment for its residents for alcoholism and drug abuse, mental illness or behavioral disorders. 
Restaurant, carry out or drive thru: A restaurant when the principle intent is that food will be picked up by the customer or delivered by the restaurant for consumption off the premises. 
Restaurant, drive-in: A restaurant when the principle intent is that customers remain in their cars on the premises for consumption of their food. 
Rooming and boarding house: A facility where congregate meals and lodging are provided for its residents exclusive of a supervised living or residential care facility as elsewhere defined, and exclusive of a hotel or motel. 
Salvage yard: The outdoor storage of something extracted (as from rubbish) as valuable or useful, including, but not limited to: Automobiles, building materials, scrap metal, and junk. 
Sanitary landfill: Any place subject to and in substantial compliance with standards developed by the Oklahoma State Board of Health at which solid waste is dumped, abandoned or accepted for permanent disposal by shredding, compaction, baling and/or landfill. 
Satellite receiving dish: Any parabolic antennae positioned so that is receives signals from a satellite in a geo synchronous orbit. 
Setback: A horizontal distance determining the location of a building with respect to a street, use district boundary line, or another use. Where the term "setback" is used in conjunction with a modifying work or words such as "parking area" the setback shall in its application include, but not be limited to, buildings. 
Sign: Any fabricated display structure including its support, consisting of any letter, figure, character, mark, poster pointer, marquee advertisement, design, picture, stripe, trademark, reading matter, or illuminating device, constructed, attached, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise and displayed in any manner for recognized advertising purposes. 
Sign, bulletin board: A changeable message board used to announce onsite activities. 
Sign, business: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted on the premises. 
Sign, canopy: A sign wholly supported by a canopy projecting from a building or an extended roof or pitched roof and which does not extend above the mean height level of the roof of the building. 
Sign, construction: A temporary sign erected during the period of construction advertising the construction of improvements on the property. 
Sign, ground: A sign which is attached to or is a part of a self-supporting structure, other than a building or portion of a building. 
Sign, identification: A sign which states only the name of a residential development, mobile home park, multi-family development or non-residential development. 
Sign, outdoor advertising: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment, sold or offered elsewhere than the premises and only incidentally on the premises, if at all. 
Sign, portable: A sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or a building. 
Sign, projecting: A sign affixed to a building and which extends horizontally more than twelve (12) inches from the sign supporting portion of the building. 
Sign, real estate: A temporary sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises. 
Sign, Roof: A sign which is affixed to a roof, extended roof, pitched roof or canopy and which extends above the mean height of the roof. 
Sign, wall: A sign affixed to a building wall which does not project horizontally more than twelve (12) inches from the wall nor extend above the height of the wall. 
Special exception: A use or a design element of a use which is not permitted by right in a particular district because of potential adverse effects, but which if controlled in the particular instance as to its relationship to the neighborhood and to the general welfare, may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment, where specifically authorized by the Code, and in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of the Code. 
Street wall: The wall or part of the building nearest to the street line. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something have a fixed location on the ground, and includes building, walks, fences, and signs. 
Tavern: An establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold to be consumed on the premises. 
Temporary construction facility: Site built or pre-manufactured structure to be used for supervising on-site construction, not to include residential or "night watchman" use without approval of the Board of Adjustment. 
Townhouse development: A row of at least three (3) attached dwelling units each separated by a party wall on individual lots and designated for separate ownership of the individual dwelling units with no separate dwelling unit constructed above another dwelling. 
Trailer park: See "Mobile home park or recreational vehicle." 
Trash dump: Any place where solid waste and/or trash is dumped, abandoned or accepted for disposal that is not in substantial compliance with standards developed by the Oklahoma State Board of Health. 
Transitional living center: A community-based residential facility that provides short-term (one hundred twenty (120) days or less) room and board in a supervised living environment utilizing counseling and rehabilitation services for persons with a history of juvenile delinquency, behavioral disorders, mental illness alcoholism or drug abuse. 
Variance: A relaxation of a restriction of the Code, granted by the Board of Adjustment, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography, or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, condition or circumstance or a particular property, the literal enforcement of the Code restriction would result in unnecessary hardship. 
Veterinarian clinic: A building used exclusively for the care and treatment of animals, including incidental overnight boarding of animals within the enclosed building, but excluding outside animal runs or boarding services. 
Wind energy conversion system: (WECS, wind turbine, wind generator, windmill, and wind machine) — A machine that converts the kinetic energy in the wind into a usable form of electrical or mechanical energy. The WECS includes all parts of a system except the tower and the transmission equipment. 
Yard: An open unoccupied space on a lot between a building and a lot line. 
Yard, front: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot lines between the side lot lines. 
Yard, rear: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines. 
Yard, required: The minimum permitted distance of open unoccupied space between a building and a lot line. 
Yard, side: A yard extending along a side lot line between the required front yard and the required rear yard.  
Chapter 16 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 1600. - Description. 
Planned unit development is an alternative to conventional development where the particular tract is under common ownership or control, and a detailed plan (outline development plan) for the development of the tract as a unit is proposed and submitted for public review. The supplemental zoning district PUD must be approved by the City Commission as a prerequisite to the planned unit development.  
Sec. 1610. - Purposes. 
The purposes of the Planned Unit Development are to: 
A.  Permit the innovative land development while maintaining appropriate limitation on the character and intensity of use and assuring compatibility with adjoining the proximate properties; 
B.  Permit flexibility within the development to better utilize the unique physical features of the particular site; 
C.  Provide and preserve meaningful open space; and 
D.  Achieve a continuity of function and design within the development.  
Sec. 1620. - General provisions. 
Planned unit development is permitted on tracts having the supplemental district designation PUD. In every instance, the PUD is to be reviewed as to the proposed location and character of the uses and the unified treatment of the development of the tract. The regulations of the general zoning district or districts remain applicable except as specifically modified pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. No modification of use or bulk and area requirements of the applicable general use district or incorporating the provisions and requirements of the chapter is submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission and the City Council and filed of record in the office of the County Clerk of the county in which the property is located. No land shall be classified in the PUD designation unless it is in an area with an approved and adopted master plan which recommends development of the land which is the subject of the application.  
Sec. 1630. - Uses permitted in planned unit development. 
1630.1.  Principal uses. The development may consist of one (1) or more of the uses permitted by right or exception within the general zoning district or districts within which the planned unit development is located, provided; (a) that if any part of the planned unit development is located within a residential district, the permitted uses may additionally include one (1) or more of the dwelling types contained in Use Unit 6, Single-Family Dwelling, Use Unit 7, Duplex Dwelling, Use Unit 8, Multi-Family Dwelling; (b) that Use Unit 9, Mobile Home Dwelling, is a permitted use only within Planned Unit Development which are located in whole or in part in an RMH District. The permitted uses may be reallocated within the development irrespective of the general zoning district boundaries. 
1630.2.  Accessory uses. Accessory uses customarily incident to the principal uses within a PUD are permitted. 
A.  Accessory commercial. In addition to accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal residential use, accessory commercial facilities may be included within the residential portion of a PUD in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Accessory commercial signs shall be limited to one (1) nameplate of not more than sixteen (16) square feet for each establishment. Nameplates shall be attached flat against a building wall and shall not be animated, flashing, or have other than indirect illumination. Window signs shall not be permitted. 
2.  The accessory commercial uses shall be internally oriented, designed primarily for the service, convenience, and benefit of the residents of the PUD, and shall be designed and located in such a manner as to be compatible with the residential use of the PUD and of adjacent properties. 
3.  Business signs accessory to principle office, commercial or industrial uses shall not exceed the general code provisions of the City of Sapulpa Zoning Code; Section 921, Use Unit 21; providing the authority may impose such additional restrictions as are necessary to maximize compatibility with adjacent land use.  
Sec. 1640. - Bulk and area requirements. 
1640.1.  Intensity of use. It is the intent of this Code that the aggregate intensity of use within the planned unit development remain substantially the same as that which would be permitted if the area were developed conventionally, but that within the development, the intensity may be reallocated irrespective of the general zoning district boundaries. 
A.  Residential intensity. The residential intensity shall not exceed a maximum number of dwelling units computed as follows: 
Maximum number of permitted dwelling units = gross area* of property located within a residential district. 
Divided by: 
Minimum land area per dwelling unit permitted in the applicable use district. 
The minimum land area per dwelling unit, for the purpose of the above described computation, shall be the lease restrictive minimum land area per dwelling unit permitted in the applicable district as set forth in Section 430.1 and Section 430.2. Each six hundred (600) square feet of a quasi-dwelling, such as a care home, shall constitute a dwelling unit. If the PUD is within two (2) or more residential districts, the permitted density shall be the sum of the permitted dwelling units computed separately for the gross area within each district. For a PUD located totally within a residential district or districts, the gross area for the purposes of the above described computation shall be reduced by the area or areas designated for any principal use other than dwelling, quasi-dwellings, residential open space and recreation areas. 
B.  Nonresidential intensity. The nonresidential intensity shall not exceed a maximum permitted floor area computed as follows: 
Maximum permitted floor area = Gross area* of property located within a nonresidential district multiplied (x) by the floor area ratio permitted either by right or exception within the bulk and area requirements of the applicable use district, except where a floor area ratio is not specified, a floor area ratio of .75 shall apply. 
The intensity of use of a PUD located within two (2) or more zoning districts of the following differing general classifications: 
Residential; 
Office; 
Commercial; 
Industrial; 
Shall be separately calculated and allocated within the planned unit development by said general classification. 
*For the purpose of intensity computations, gross area shall mean the lot area plus one-half (½)of the right-of-way of any abutting street to which the lot has access. 
1640.2.  Lot width and lot area minimums. Within a PUD, a minimum lot size requirement of eight hundred (800) square feet shall apply to lots utilized for dwelling purposes. A minimum lot width requirement of twenty (20) feet shall apply to lots utilized for dwelling purposes. 
1640.3.  Livability space. Within a PUD livability space shall be provided in an aggregate amount of not less than the amount of livability space required by the applicable use district (Section 430.1) for conventional development of a comparable number of dwelling units. Required livability space shall be provided on the lot containing the dwelling unit or units on which computed, or in common areas. Common liability space shall be designed and located so as to be accessible to the dwelling units it is intended to serve. Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of common livability space as will insure its continuity and conservation shall be incorporated in the subdivision plat, in compliance with the provisions of Section 1670.5. 
1640.4.  Building height and yards. Within a PUD, the Planning Commission shall prescribe building height limitations and minimum yards, which shall be incorporated within the subdivision plat in compliance with the provisions of Section 1670.5. 
1640.5.  Setbacks from abutting public streets. Within a PUD every structure shall be set back from the centerline of an abutting public street a horizontal distance of not less than one-half (½) of the right-of-way designated on the major street and highway plan, or twenty-five (25) feet if said street is not designated on the major street and highway plan.  
Sec. 1650. - Removed per Ordinance No. 2364.  
Sec. 1660. - Off-street parking and loading. 
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as specified in the applicable use units and in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 10, Off-Street Parking and loading; provided, however, that Sections 1020.B and 1030 shall not apply. Required spaces may be provided on the lot containing the uses for which it is intended to serve or in common areas. Common parking area shall be designed and located so as to be accessible to the uses it is intended to serve. Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of common parking space as will insure its continuity and conservation shall be incorporated in the subdivision plat, in compliance with the provisions of Section 1670.5.  
Sec. 1670. - Administration of planned unit development. 
1670.1.  General. Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or combination thereof, owning or possessing a property right or interest in or to a tract of land may make application for the supplemental district designation PUD. Such application shall be accompanied by an outline development plan processed in the manner set forth in Sections 1670.2, 1670.3, and 1670.4. 
An application for the supplemental district designation PUD may be processed simultaneously with an application for an amendment to the general zoning district and make contingent upon approval of said application. 
1670.2.  Application and outline development plan. An application for a planned unit development shall be filed with the Planning Commission. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the established fee schedule. Such fee shall not include advertising and sign costs which shall be billed to the applicant. The application shall be in such form and content as the Planning Commission may by resolution establish, provided that three (3) copies of an outline development plan shall accompany the filing of the application; the outline development plan shall consist of maps and text which contains: 
A.  A site plan and preliminary plat reflecting: 
1.  Proposed location of uses, including off-street parking, open spaces and public uses; 
2.  Development standards for location, height, setback and size of buildings and other structures; 
3.  Public and private vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
4.  The approximate intensity of residential uses expressed in number of dwelling units and the approximate intensity of nonresidential uses expressed in floor area, allocation to each identifiable segment of the planned unit development; 
5.  Proposed screening and landscaping; 
6.  Proposed location, height and size of any ground sign; 
7.  Sufficient surrounding are to demonstrate the relationship of the PUD to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed. 
B.  Existing topographic character of the land including identification of flood plain areas, treed areas, both existing and proposed. 
C.  An Explanation of the character of the PUD. 
D.  The expected schedule of development. 
E.  Conformance to the City subdivision regulations and engineering design standards. 
1670.3.  Public hearing and Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission, upon the filing of an application for the supplemental district designation PUD shall set the matter for public hearing and give twenty (20) days' notice of public hearing by posting a sign or signs on the property sought to be rezoned. (See Section 1630.3 for contents of notice.) Within sixty (60) days after the filing of an application, the Planning Commission shall conduct the public hearing and shall determine: 
A.  Whether the PUD is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Whether the PUD harmonized with the existing an expected development of surrounding areas. 
C.  Whether the PUD is a unified treatment of the development possibilities of the project site. 
D.  Whether the PUD is consistent with the stated purposes and standards of this chapter. 
The Planning Commission shall forward its recommendation, the application, and the outline development plan to the Board of City Commissioners for further hearing as provided in Section 1670.4. 
1670.4.  City Council action. Upon receipt of the application, outline development plan, and Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council shall hold a hearing, review the outline development plan and approve, disapprove, modify, or return the outline development plan to the Planning Commission for further consideration. Upon approval, the Zoning Map shall be amended to reflect the supplemental designation PUD, and the amended to reflect the supplemental designation PUD, and the applicant shall be authorized to process a subdivision plat incorporating the provisions of the outline development plan. 
1670.5.  Planned unit development subdivision plat. A planned unit development subdivision plat shall be filed with the Planning Commission and shall be processed in accordance with the subdivision regulations, and, in addition to the requirements of the subdivision regulations, shall include: 
A.  Details as to the location of uses and street arrangement. 
B.  Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space as will reasonably insure its continuity and conservation. Open space may be dedicated to a private association or to the public, provided that a dedication to the public shall not be accepted without the approval of the City Council. 
C.  Such covenants as will reasonably insure the continued compliance with the approved outline development plan. The Planning Commission may require covenants which provide for detailed site plan review and approval by said Commission prior to the issuance of any building permits within the PUD. In order that the public interest may be protected, the City of Sapulpa shall be made beneficiary of covenants pertaining to such matters as location of uses, height of structures, setbacks, screening, and access. Such covenants shall provide that the City of Sapulpa may enforce compliance therewith, and shall further provide that the Planning Commission and the filing of record of a written amendment to the covenants, endorsed by the Planning Commission. 
1670.6.  Issuance of building permits. After the filing of an approved PUD subdivision plat and notice thereof to the Building Inspector, no building permits shall be issued on lands within the PUD except in accordance with the approved plat. A building permit for a freestanding or separate commercial structure within a PUD containing no commercial zoning shall not be issued until building permits have been issued for at least one-half (½) of the number of dwelling units on which the authorization of the commercial use is based. 
1670.7.  Amendments. Minor changes in the PUD may be authorized by the Planning Commission, which may direct the processing of an amended subdivision plat, incorporating such changes, so long as a substantial compliance is maintained with the outline development plan and the purposes and standards of the PUD provisions hereof. Changes which would represent a significant departure from the outline development plat shall require compliance with the notice and procedural requirements of an original planned unit development. 
1670.8.  Abandonment. Abandonment of a planned unit development shall require the City Council's approval, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, of an application for amendment to the zoning map repealing the supplemental designation of PUD. Upon final action authorizing the abandonment of the planned unit development, no building permit shall be issued except in accordance with the restrictions and limitations of the general zoning district or districts.  
Chapter 17 - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 1700. - Purpose. 
The purposes of the landscape requirements are: 
A.  To promote the beautification of the City of Sapulpa and to enhance the quality of life; 
B.  To promote reasonable preservation and replenishment of valued trees and vegetation; 
C.  To aid in establishing an ecological balance by contributing to air purification, oxygen regeneration, ground water recharge and storm water runoff retardation; 
D.  To achieve a meaningful urban forest, while permitting economically feasible urban development to occur.  
Sec. 1701. - Applicability and exemptions. 
The landscape herein established shall be applicable to all land for which a building permit is sought; provided, however, that the landscape requirements shall not be applicable to the following: 
A.  Individual single-family or duplex lots where only one such structure is to be constructed on the lot; or barns and similar types of structures on AG (Agriculture) zoned property; 
B.  Restoration of buildings constructed prior to the adoption date of this Code which are damaged by fire, flood or other catastrophe; 
C.  Interior remodeling; or 
D.  Construction of a structure, other than a building, which does not increase the developed area of a lot more than thirty (30) square feet.  
Sec. 1702. - Landscape requirements. 
A.  Frontage and perimeter requirements. 
1.  Not less than fifteen (15) percent of the street yard shall be established and maintained as landscaped area. 
2.  Within the lot, a landscaped area shall be established and maintained which is not less than seven and one-half (7.5) feet in width and which extends along the entirety of the abutting street right-of-way. For lots abutting arterial streets a landscaped area shall be established which is not less than ten (10) feet in width. 
3.  Within a lot used for office, commercial, industrial, or multi-family residential purposes, off street parking shall be separated from an abutting residential district or residential development area (as in a PUD) by a landscaped area of not less than ten (10) feet in width. 
4.  Required building setbacks shall be landscaped with street yard standards. 
5.  Street yard landscaped areas shall be included in the minimum computation of Section 1702.A.1. 
6.  New single-family or duplex residential additions abutting arterial streets shall provide a landscaped buffer of not less than ten (10) feet in width. Setbacks from the arterial, which are larger than ten (10) feet, will be provided at each side of the project entry, drive at its intersection with an arterial. 
7.  For lots abutting state highway rights-of-way, a landscaped area shall be established which is not less than fifteen (15) feet in width and which extends along the entirety of the abutting arterial. 
8.  Landscaping shall not be required in vehicular access points and shall not be allowed to obstruct site triangles. 
B.  Parking area requirements within surface off-street parking areas, landscaped areas shall be established and maintained as follows: 
1.  For lots two and one-half (2.5) acres or less in size, no parking space shall be located more than fifty (50) feet from a landscaped area which contains at least thirty (30) square feet having a minimum width or diameter of five (5) feet. A landscaped area must contain at least one (1) tree. 
2.  For lots greater than two and one-half (2.5) acres in size, no parking space shall be located more than seventy-five (75) feet from a landscaped area which contains at least one hundred (100) square feet having a minimum width or diameter of seven (7) feet. A landscaped area must contain at least one (1) tree; however, all landscape areas two hundred (200) square feet or more on size shall contain at least two (2) trees. 
C.  Tree requirements. Trees, as defined herein, shall be selected from those listed in Appendix C [of the Sapulpa City Code]. Additional tree requirements include the following: 
1.  Within the street yard, trees shall be preserved, planted and maintained, or replaced as follows: 
a.  One (1) tree for each one thousand (1,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of street yard. 
b.  Each existing tree in the required street yard which is at least six (6) inches in caliper, and which is removed for the development of the parking area, shall be replaced at a two to one (2:1) ratio within the required street yard. In other words, two (2) replacement trees shall be counted as one (1) tree purposes of compliance with street yard planting requirements. 
2.  One (1) tree for each ten (10) parking spaces shall be required for surface parking areas, located outside the street yard, in all zoning districts except CBD. Each required landscape area shall require at least one (1) tree. 
3.  If surface parking areas, located in the CBD zoning district and designed for twenty (20) or more spaces, have parking areas within twenty-five (25) feet of a public street right-of-way, then trees shall be preserved, planted and maintained, or replaced as follows: 
a.  One (1) tree for each thirty-five (35) lineal feet of parking area located along and parallel to the street boundary; and 
b.  Required trees shall be located within ten (10) feet of the public street right-of-way. 
4.  An existing or planted tree which is at least six (6) inches in caliper shall be considered as two (2) trees for the purpose of determining compliance with the requirements of subsection 1702.C.1, provided that there is no alteration of the soil grade under the existing tree's drip line. 
5.  Planted trees shall be planted in pervious area not less than three (3) feet in diameter. 
6.  Minimum tree sizes at the time of planting shall be as follows: 
a.  Ornamental trees shall not be less than six (6) feet in height and one (1) inch in caliper; 
b.  Conifers and evergreen trees, such as pine, spruce or cedar, shall be not less than five (5) feet in height; and 
c.  Canopy trees shall not be less than eight (8) feet in height and two (2) inches in caliper. 
7.  Surface parking areas designed for ten (10) or more and located within twenty-five (25) feet of state highway rights-of-way trees shall have trees planted, preserved and/or replaced as follows: 
a.  One (1) tree for each lineal foot of parking area which is located along and parallel to the street boundary; and 
b.  Each existing tree in the required street yard which is less than six (6) inches in caliper and which is removed for development of the parking area shall be replaced at a three to one (3:1) ratio within the required street yard. In other words, three (3) trees shall count as one (1) for the purpose of compliance with street yard planting requirements. 
8.  Landscaped buffers separating new single-family or duplex residential additions from arterial streets shall be treated as follows: 
a.  A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted for each fifty (50) feet of lineal street frontage. 
b.  Tree sizes shall conform to the standards outlined in this section. 
c.  Each existing tree which is removed or caused to be removed by the developer of the addition during grading or utility placement and which is larger than six (6) inches in caliper when measured at three (3) feet above the ground, shall be replaced at a two to one (2:1) ratio with trees sized as designated in this section. The new trees shall be located within the ten (10) foot landscaping buffer area adjacent to the arterial street or the expanded entry area setbacks. Two (2) replacement trees count as one (1) tree toward the satisfaction of the one (1) per fifty (50) linear foot requirement in Section 1702.C.8.a. 
d.  Preservation or planting of trees, larger than six (6) inches in caliper, within the required landscaped areas shall be considered as two (2) for the purpose of determining compliance with the requirements of subsection 1702.C.8.a, provided there is no alteration of the soil under the existing tree's drip line. 
D.  Miscellaneous requirements. 
1.  Artificial vegetation of any type will not satisfy the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  Required landscaping will be irrigated by one (1) of the following methods: 
a.  An underground sprinkler system; 
b.  A drip system; or 
c.  A hose attachment within one hundred (100) feet of all landscaped areas. 
3.  All landscaped areas which are adjacent to pavement shall be protected with curbs or equivalent barriers. 
4.  Landscaping shall not obstruct traffic visibility. 
5.  Required landscaping shall be maintained in alive and healthy condition and shall be replaced as necessary to comply herewith. In addition, landscape area will be neatly trimmed and mowed and free of weeds. 
6.  Required landscaped areas shall be maintained free of debris and litter. 
E.  Incentive credits. To encourage preservation of existing mature trees and/or planting of larger trees, each square foot of landscaped area which is permeable and within the drip line of a tree of at least six (6) inches in caliper shall constitute one and one-half (1.5) square feet of landscaped area for the purpose of meeting the fifteen (15) percent street yard landscaping requirement. The following conditions shall apply: 
1.  Overlapping drip line areas shall be counted only once. 
2.  At least one-half ( 1/2; ) of the drip line shall be permeable. 
3.  The original grade of the drip line shall not be changed. 
4.  The one-fifth ( 1/5 ) square foot credit shall not constitute more than twenty-five (25) percent of the landscape requirement. 
F.  Parking credits. All nonresidential development, requesting a building permit prior to the adoption date of this Code shall be given one (1) acre or less in size, the following parking credit: 
The required number of off street parking spaces shall be reduced by one (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of street yard which is required to be landscaped by subsection 1702.A.1.  
Sec. 1703. - Administration. 
A.  Landscape plan. An application for a building permit for uses requiring landscaping, as set forth in Section 1701, shall include a landscape plan which provides the following: 
1.  The date, scale, north arrow, project name and name of owner. 
2.  The location of the property lines and dimensions of the tract. 
3.  The approximate center line of existing water courses; the approximate location of significant drainage features; the location and size of existing and proposed utility easements and overhead utility lines on or adjacent to the lot; and the existing and proposed sidewalks on or adjacent to the lot. 
4.  The location, size and type (trees, shrub, ground cover, or grass) of proposed landscaping and the location and size of the proposed landscaping areas. 
5.  Planting details and/or specifications. 
6.  The method of protecting damage to the existing trees which are to be retained during construction. 
7.  The proposed irrigation system, including a drawing of the nature and the location of the system. 
8.  The schedule of installation of required landscaping and appurtenances shall occur prior to the hookup of utilities. The planning staff may grant approval of hook up prior to the completion of tree installation, based upon a specific tree planting schedule, not to exceed a temporary occupancy permit time limit. 
B.  Certification of installation. Prior to utility hook up, the owner, an architect or a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oklahoma shall certify in writing to the City that the installation of the landscaping and appurtenances has been accomplished in accordance with the approved landscape plan. In the event that the Urban Development Staff has granted approval for hook up of utilities prior to the completion of tree planting, the owner, an architect, landscape architect or a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oklahoma shall provide written certification that all trees have been installed in accordance with the approved plan. Such certification shall be provided prior to issuance of the occupancy permit or within the time frame approved in the specific tree planting schedule and shall not exceed the time allowed in the temporary occupancy permit. If certification is not received within this time frame, it will be considered a violation of the zoning code and the developer will be subject to fines until certification has been received. 
C.  Administrative review. After receipt of the landscaping plan, the urban development staff shall: 
1.  Approve the landscaping plan as complying with the requirements of this chapter; or 
2.  Approve the landscape plan with conditions which bring it into compliance with the requirement of this chapter; or 
3.  Reject the landscape plan as filing to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Alternative compliance. If the City Planner rejects the landscape plan, the application may request, after payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee, that the Board of Adjustment review the plan and determine that the plans as presented implements the intent of the chapter although it does not meet the technical requirements of this chapter. However, in the case of such an appeal, public notice shall be given to abutting property owners and a notice published in the paper. 
E.  Right-of-way use agreements required. 
1.  Any construction subject to this chapter that is adjacent to or will affect the City owned right-of-way must have an approved right-of-way use agreement prior to the beginning of construction. 
2.  The right-of-way use agreement shall be in the form as approved by the City.  
Chapter 18 - SPECIFIC USE PERMIT 
 
Sec. 1800. - General purpose. 
The City Council may, after a public hearing and recommendation by the Sapulpa Metropolitan Area Planning Commission and after conducting a public hearing as is required in accordance with the provisions of this section, authorize for specific parcels of land, the issuance of a specific use permit. 
The use listed in the specific use list are so clarified because of the size of the land they require or the specialized nature of the use, or they may more intensely dominate the area in which they are located, or their effects on the general public are broader in scope than other types of uses permitted in the district. 
The designation of a specific use permit as possible on the specific use list does not constitute an authorization or an assurance that such use will be permitted. Rather, each specific use permit application shall be valued as to its probable effect on the adjacent property and community welfare and may not be approved or denied as the findings indicate appropriate.  
Sec. 1801. - Conditions of approval. 
A.  Application. Prior to submission of a request for a specific use permit, the Urban Development Director may require one (1) or more pre-application conferences with the potential applicant. In considering and determining its recommendation to the City Council relative to any application for a specific use permit, the Planning Commission may require that the applicant furnish preliminary site plans and data concerning the operation, location, function, and characteristics of any use of land or building proposed. 
B.  Planning Commission requirements. The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council the requirement of certain safeguards and conditions concerning setbacks, ingress and egress, off-street parking and loading arrangements and location or construction of buildings and uses and operation. If the Planning Commission fails to review and make a recommendation within forty-five (45) days from the date the application is accepted for processing, the City Council can take action on the application. 
C.  City Council requirements. The City Council, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with the intent of this Code and the Sapulpa Comprehensive Plan, may deny a specific request or require such development standards and operational conditions and safeguards as are indicated to be important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property and the community as a whole and be compatible with the natural environment and the planned capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use. This may include the requirement of having the property platted and/or the requirement of dedication of sufficient right-of-way or easement as necessary to further the public good. The City Council may impose conditions including, but not limited to, permitted uses, lot sizes, setbacks, height limits, required facilities, buffers, open space areas, lighting, noise levels, signage, landscaping, parking and loading, compatibility, and land use density as may be indicated depending upon the proposed use and its potential effect on adjacent areas or the community. 
D.  Site plans. A site plan (plot plan) setting forth the conditions specified may be required of the applicant and such plan when accepted shall be made a part of the permit issued for the specific use. 
E.  Time limits for implementation. If for any reason the approved specific use ceases operation for a period of two (2) years, then the approval of said specific use shall be considered void and will require another public hearing review by the Planning Commission and City Council. This shall also apply to any approved specific use that does not begin operation within one (1) year of approval. This voiding of approval shall not apply if orderly progress toward completion of construction is taking place. Uses existing before the adoption of the specific use permit ordinance including non-conforming uses and their incidental and accessory uses must receive a specific use permit before any expansion of the use is permitted.  
Sec. 1802. - Specific use permit list. 
Specific uses. The following uses are allowed in all zoning districts by specific use permit process approved by the City Council: 
Accessory dwelling units — ADU (guest cottages, in-law quarters); 
Airport; 
Automobile sales—New or used; 
Automobile salvage yard; 
Bars, taverns, night clubs; 
Bed and breakfast inn — Including Air BNB (Short term rental)*; 
Bus station; 
Cemetery; 
Churches; 
College or university; 
Commercial theme parks; 
Convalescent homes; 
Convict Pre-release center; 
Commercial resort facilities (minimum acreage requirement of forty (40) acres); 
Crematory; 
Cultural or heritage centers, public or private attractions; 
Day care center; 
Detention center juvenile—Adult; 
Electric generation plant and/or substation; 
Fire protection facility; 
Fire station; 
Flea market (indoor or outdoor); 
Golf course; 
Golf driving range; 
Governmental services; 
Gun club; 
Halfway house; 
Heliport; 
Hospital; 
Industrial uses: Use Units 24, 25, 26 (minimum acreage requirement forty (40) acres); 
Juvenile delinquency center; 
Kennel; 
Library; 
Mausoleum; 
Marijuana commercial growth facility**; 
Marijuana processor/packager/storage facility**; 
Marijuana retail dispensary/establishment**; 
Mini-storage; 
Museum; 
Nursing homes; 
Offices: Use Unit 11 when located on a forty (40) acre or greater tract; 
Other residential uses: 
Tiny home (structure less than nine hundred (900) square feet; 
Transitional living center; 
Homeless shelter; 
Multi-family in multi-story structure; 
Post office; 
Private schools, with comprehensive education curriculum; 
Public schools; 
Recreational vehicle park; 
Recycling center; 
Refuse transfer station; 
Retail nursery; 
Rifle and skeet range; 
Sanitary landfill; 
Sewer disposal facility; 
Sexually oriented businesses; 
Sober living facility; 
Trade schools; 
Transmitting tower (excluding amateur radio tower); 
Water treatment facility and/or water storage facility; 
Use Unit 20 (outdoor recreational facilities); 
Use Unit 23 (mining and mineral processing). 
*Short term rental (STR) uses: 
1.  Two (2) types of short-term rentals. 
a.  Type 1: Owner occupied (single-family residence or duplex). 
b.  Type 2: Not owner occupied (single-family residence or duplex). 
2.  STR can only be rented for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
3.  Only one (1) rental contract at a time is allowed. Maximum of two (2) guests per bedroom; no more than eight (8) guests at one time. Hosts required to leave a welcome packet for guests that includes appropriate contact information and instructions on City services. 
4.  STR locations cannot be used for special events, parties, or receptions. 
5.  Property owner must obtain a City Business License in addition to obtaining an STR License. 
6.  An application fee will be assessed annually in accordance with the Master Fee Schedule and shall expire on April 30 of each year. Renewals shall be reviewed every year. 
7.  STR licensees will be required to pay a fee of five and one-half (5.5) percent of the listing price, including any fees for reservations, and any other applicable fees associated with their STR. 
8.  There is not a requirement of an in-person inspection but the licensee must certify that under penalty of perjury that their STR has a fire extinguisher, CO detector, smoke alarm, and liability insurance to cover bodily and property damage. 
9.  License number is required to be placed in advertisements. 
10.  STR must have public access to the location, adequate off-street parking, and be in compliance with all City Codes. 
11.  An accessory dwelling unit may be used for STR by a property owner who is living in the primary structure on the property. Only one (1) STR license will be allowed per property. 
** 
1.  Each commercial medical marijuana facility shall be operated from the permitted premises on the permitted property. No commercial medical marijuana facility shall be permitted to operate from a moveable, mobile or transitory location, except for a permitted and licensed secure transporter when engaged in the lawful transport of marijuana. 
2.  Commercial operators will need to submit their security plan with their application for a specific use permit, and shall include the following: 
a.  Security surveillance cameras installed to monitor all entrances, along with the interior and exterior of the permitted premises; 
b.  Alarm systems which are professionally monitored and operated twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week; 
c.  A locking safe permanently affixed to the permitted premises that shall store all marijuana and cash remaining in the facility overnight; 
d.  All marijuana in whatever form stored at the permitted premises shall be kept in a secure manner and shall not be visible from outside the permitted premises, nor shall it be grown, processed, exchanged, displayed or dispensed outside of the permitted premises; and 
e.  All the security recordings shall be preserved for at least seven (7) days by the permit holder and made available to any law enforcement upon request for inspection. 
3.  Operating hours. No retail dispensary/establishment shall operate between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
4.  No commercial medical marijuana facility shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another medical marijuana facility; unless and except the medical marijuana facility is located within the Central Business District then no commercial medical marijuana facility shall be located within three hundred feet (300) of another commercial medical marijuana facility. 
5.  Sign restrictions. No pictures, photographs, drawings or other depictions of marijuana or marijuana paraphernalia shall appear on the outside of any permitted premises nor be visible outside of the permitted premises on the permitted property. The words "marijuana," "cannabis" and any other words used or intended to convey the presence or availability of marijuana shall not appear on the outside of the permitted premises nor be visible outside of the permitted premises on the permitted property. 
6.  All activities of commercial medical marijuana facilities, including without limitation, distribution, growth, cultivation, or the sale of marijuana, and all other related activity under the permit holder's license or permit must occur indoors. The facility's operation and design shall minimize any impact to adjacent uses, including the control of any odor by maintaining and operating an air filtration system so that no odor is detectable outside the permitted premises. 
7.  A patient may not grow his or her own marijuana at a commercial medical marijuana facility. 
8.  All necessary building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical permits must be obtained for any part of the permitted premises. 
9.  The permit holder, owner and operator of the facility shall use lawful methods in controlling waste or by-products from any activities allowed under the license or permit. 
10.  The City Council may impose such reasonable terms and conditions on a commercial medical marijuana facility specific use permit as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to obtain compliance with the requirements of applicable law.  
Sec. 1803. - Use conditions. 
A.  Compliance with district and use unit requirement. Specific uses permitted shall comply with the most restrictive yard and height requirements of the district in which located and in addition shall comply with the requirements as specified in Use Unit 2 or identified use unit for a particular use of the City of Sapulpa Zoning Code, except as may be modified by City Council as provided in Section 1801.C. 
B.  No oil or gas related wells drilled after granting of specific use permit. 
1.  No permit for the drilling of any oil or gas related well shall be allowed in an AG or IM zoned area if a specific use permit affecting the area has been previously approved by the Sapulpa City Council unless the previous specific use permit was oil or gas well related. 
2.  Drilling operations for oil and gas require additional permits as specified under Sections 5-1101 through 5-1102 of the Sapulpa City Code. Conditions established under the required City Code application shall be in addition to the land use requirements established through the Specific Use Permit process.  
Sec. 1804. - Administration. 
A.  Filing of a petition for specific use permit. An application for a specific use permit shall be filed with the Planning Commission by the owner(s) of the property concerned, by the duly authorized representative thereof; by the holder of an option to purchase the affected real estate or by the purchaser in a contract to purchase realty. Such petition shall be on a standard form furnished by the Commission. All petitions for a specific use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed area showing the location of buildings, parking, and other pertinent data concerning the operation of the proposed use. 
B.  Fees for permit. An application fee and a processing fee shall be required with the specific use permit application in accordance with the Master Fee Schedule. All costs associated with required postings in newspaper having general circulation within the community will be billed to the applicant. 
C.  Notice of hearing (ref: 11 O.S. § 43-104(A) and (B). 
1.  Notice of the public hearing to consider a specific use permit shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days before the public hearing held by the Planning Commission by mailing written-notice by staff to the Planning Commission to all owners of property within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. The notice shall contain: 
a.  The date, time and place of the public hearing. 
b.  The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the specific use permit. 
c.  The legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location in the municipality. 
2.  In addition to the notice required in subsection 1 of this section, if the specific use permit requests the use of treatment facilities, multiple family facilities, transitional living facilities, halfway houses and any housing or facility that may be used for medical or nonmedical detoxification as these terms are defined pursuant to Section 3-403 of Title 43A of the Oklahoma Statutes, the entity proposing the change in district regulation, restriction or boundary shall mail a written notice within thirty (30) days of the hearing to all real property owners within one-quarter (¼) of a mile where the area to be affected is located and shall be responsible for all costs incurred in mailing this notice. 
D.  Appeals. An applicant may appeal a recommendation of denial by the Planning Commission to the City Council by providing written notice of its intent to appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the date of recommended denial by the Planning Commission. The City Council may reverse the recommendation of the Planning Commission by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the members of City Council. 
